                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DODGING THE TAXMAN:
               FIRM MISREPORTING AND LIMITS TO TAX ENFORCEMENT

                                            Paul Carrillo
                                           Dina Pomeranz
                                           Monica Singhal

                                        Working Paper 20624
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20624


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014


We thank Lorenzo Casaburi, Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, James Hines, Lawrence
Katz, Asim Khwaja, Henrik Kleven, Michael Koelle, Wojciech Kopczuk, Michael Kremer, Ben Olken,
Andrei Shleifer, Joel Slemrod, Johannes Spinnewijn, and participants at the conferences of the American
Economic Association, BREAD, Max Planck Institute, National Tax Association, NBER, NEUDC,
PACDEV, Swiss Economists Abroad, Tax Systems Conference (Oxford and Michigan OTPR), WADES
and in seminars at Brandeis, Columbia, Harvard, Indiana, LSE & UCL, Lugano, Oxford, PUC Chile,
Warwick, Williams and the Centro de Estudios Fiscales for helpful comments and discussions. We
thank Sajjad Goli, Andrea Lopez Luzuriaga, Parag Mahajan, Marco Martinez del Angel, and Lucas
Zavala for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to the staff of the Centro de Estudios Fiscales
and the Departamento de Control of the Ecuadorian Tax Authority for outstanding collaboration and
to the Harvard Weatherhead Center, Harvard Taubman Center, and Harvard Business School for research
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20624.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Paul Carrillo, Dina Pomeranz, and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting and Limits to Tax Enforcement
Paul Carrillo, Dina Pomeranz, and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 20624
October 2014
JEL No. H25,H26,O23,O38

                                              ABSTRACT

Reducing tax evasion is a key priority for many governments, particularly in developing countries.
A growing literature has argued that the ability to verify taxpayer self-reports against reports from
third parties is critical for modern tax enforcement and the growth of state capacity. However, there
may be limits to the effectiveness of third-party information if taxpayers can make offsetting adjustments
on less verifiable margins. We present a simple framework to demonstrate the conditions under which
this will occur and provide strong empirical evidence for such behavior by exploiting a natural experiment
in Ecuador. We find that when firms are notified by the tax authority about detected revenue discrepancies
on previously filed corporate income tax returns, they increase reported revenues, matching the third-party
estimate when provided. Firms also increase reported costs by 96 cents for every dollar of revenue
adjustment, resulting in minor increases in total tax collection.


Paul Carrillo                                        Monica Singhal
George Washington University                         Harvard Kennedy School
2115 G St. N.W. Suite 364                            Harvard University
Washington, DC 20052                                 79 JFK Street
pcarrill@gwu.edu                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                     and NBER
Dina Pomeranz                                        monica_singhal@harvard.edu
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 213
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
dpomeranz@hbs.edu
1       Introduction

Tax evasion limits the development of fiscal capacity (Besley and Persson, 2013), distorts
the allocation of resources in the economy (Skinner and Slemrod, 1985), and can result in
a reliance on economically inefficient tax instruments (Gordon and Li, 2009; Best et al.,
forthcoming). A recent literature has shifted emphasis from the traditional idea of tax
enforcement through auditing (Allingham and Sandmo, 1972) toward a focus on “third-
party information”: the ability to verify taxpayer reports against other sources, such as
an employer report of salary or the report of a firm’s trading partners (e.g., Kopczuk and
Slemrod, 2006; Kleven et al., 2010; Pomeranz, 2013). Third-party information is central
to modern tax collection in developed countries (Kleven et al., 2009), and the global
revolution in information technology has made third-party verification easier than ever
before.1 Improvements in third-party information would appear to have the potential to
transform tax collection, particularly in developing economies.
     In this paper, we show a fundamental limit to the effectiveness of third-party in-
formation in improving revenue collection: the ability of taxpayers to make offsetting
adjustments on less verifiable margins of the tax return. We demonstrate that this be-
havior can be expected under conditions common in many developing countries, where
capacity on other dimensions of the information and enforcement environment are weak.
We then provide strong empirical evidence of such adjustments in the context of a natu-
ral experiment in Ecuador, in which the tax authority notified firms about discrepancies
between their declared revenues and revenue reports from third-party sources. Firms
increase reported revenues in response to the notifications but offset almost the entire
adjustment with increases in reported costs, resulting in only minor increases in total tax
collection.
     We begin with a simple conceptual framework to motivate our empirical analysis. In
this model, which builds on Kleven et al. (2009),2 firms can reduce tax liability by under-
reporting true profits. If the audit probability is a decreasing function of the reported
profit rate, firms will have an incentive to “appear small” by under-reporting revenues
and potentially under-reporting costs. Third-party revenue reporting creates a floor on
reported revenues but will cause firms to offset some of the resulting higher tax liability by
    1
     Recent years have seen widespread adoption of electronic tax filing and computerization of tax records
(OECD, 2011). Of the World Bank projects with a major tax or customs administration component in
the 1990s, over 75% included computerization of taxes and customs (World Bank, 2012).
   2
     NBER Working Paper version.


                                                    2
increasing reported costs. If enforcement capacity on non-third-party reported margins
is weak, as is the case in many developing countries, these offsetting adjustments can be
large.
     We analyze responses to third-party reporting empirically in the context of the cor-
porate income tax in Ecuador. In 2011 and 2012, the tax authority (Servicio de Rentas
Internas, SRI) notified a sample of almost 8,000 firms about discrepancies on previously
filed corporate income tax returns between their self-reported revenue and information
about their revenue from third-party sources. Firms were asked to submit an amended
tax return to address the discrepancy. These notifications represent the first time such
third-party information was used for tax enforcement in Ecuador in any systematic, large
scale way. The discrepancy notifications studied here are representative of how third-
party reporting is generally used in practice: the tax authority notifies taxpayers about
discrepancies and requests that they amend.3
     We first document widespread misreporting of both revenues and costs relative to
third-party information in the cross-sectional universe of all formal firms (60,000 per year).
Firms’ self-reported revenues are lower than third-party reports in 24% of firm filings,
suggesting substantial scope for improvements in revenue collection through enforcement
based on third-party information. We observe little bunching at the third-party amount,
consistent with the fact that there was almost no use of third-party reporting by the
SRI prior to the notifications. We also find direct evidence that at least some firms
under-report their costs. 23% of all firm filings and 5% of filings by firms with positive
tax liability report costs that are below third-party reported costs. Since third-party
reporting of costs is highly incomplete, these estimates provide lower bounds on cost
under-reporting. As discussed below, such under-reporting has important implications
for tax enforcement more broadly.
     We next examine the effect of the discrepancy notifications. Consistent with the idea
that lack of credible enforcement capacity can directly limit the effect of information re-
porting, we find that a substantial share of firms simply fail to file a requested amendment.
Our main results focus on firms that do file amended returns, but we still observe strongly
statistically significant responses (mechanically attenuated) of both reported revenues and
costs in the full sample of all notified firms.
   3
    Ultimately, expectations about such enforcement will be reflected in taxpayers’ original reports; we
discuss this further in Section 5.3.




                                                   3
     Among amending firms, the discrepancy notifications induce large increases in re-
ported revenues. When firms are given a specific third-party revenue amount by the tax
authority, 35% of all firms that file an amendment revise reported revenues to match the
indicated amount exactly. Firms that adjust reported revenues do so by 93 cents on av-
erage for every dollar of notified revenue discrepancy. This relationship holds throughout
the distribution, including for discrepancies in the hundreds of thousands of dollars. When
firms are told that there is a discrepancy but are not provided with a specific amount,
revenue adjustments are substantially lower (only 36 cents for every dollar of discrepancy
on average). This provides strong evidence that firms are misreporting both before and
after the notifications.
     However, the effects of these increases in reported revenues on tax payments are
severely limited because firms offset the majority of increases in reported revenues with
increases in reported costs. For every dollar of revenue adjustment, firms increase reported
costs by 96 cents. These effects again hold throughout the distribution. Changes in
reported profits were therefore relatively minor, implying that that third-party reporting
had little effect on pre-existing levels of evasion (profit under-reporting). Cost offsets are
similar regardless of whether or not firms know the exact revenue discrepancy, and we see
no correlation between pre-notification reported profit rates and implied profit rates on
the amended portion of the return. Taken together, these findings indicate that firms are
deliberately targeting their reported cost adjustments to their revenue adjustments. We
also see evidence that firms choose cost adjustments on line items that are difficult for
the tax authority to verify. For example, the most frequent cost adjustment is to “Other
Administrative Costs.” As a result of these offsetting cost adjustments, tax collection is
an order of magnitude less than it would have been had firms only adjusted revenues.
     Our paper contributes to the literature along several dimensions. First, we demon-
strate important limits to tax enforcement through third-party reporting, the primary
mechanism through which modern governments are able to collect taxes in practice.
Third-party reporting has primarily been studied in highly developed countries, in which
information reporting is relatively complete and the capacity of the tax authority is high
(Slemrod, 2008; Long and Swingden, 1990; Kleven et al., 2010; Gillitzer and Skov, 2013).4
   4
    An exception is Best (2014) who shows that salary reporting by firms limits income tax evasion in
Pakistan. See also related work by Kumler et al. (2013) and Naritomi (2013) who examine how changing
the incentives of consumers and workers can affect firm compliance and Pomeranz (2013) on how third-
party reporting may facilitate tax enforcement in the VAT. Sanchez (2014) studies the effects of messages
regarding incorrect computations of advance tax payments in the context of Ecuador.


                                                   4
A natural question is whether this form of tax enforcement can be equally effective in
developing countries. This is a critical question, since tax evasion is one of the primary
challenges faced by developing country governments and recent advances in information
technology suggest the potential for dramatic improvements in revenue collection through
the use of third-party information.
      Since we have data for periods in which third-party information was available but
not used by the tax authority for enforcement, we can document and quantify the extent
of misreporting by firms as well as directly examine their behavioral responses to the
introduction of this form of tax enforcement. We provide clear causal evidence that the
benefits of third-party reporting can be undermined when other aspects of the institutional
environment are weak, since taxpayers make offsetting adjustments on margins that are
difficult to verify. An advantage of our setting is that all notifications refer to previously
filed returns, so firms cannot adjust real behavior. We can therefore cleanly isolate the
observed responses as pure changes in reporting, something that is typically challenging
when examining the effects of tax or other policy changes. Our results show that this
method of tax enforcement – on its own – may have limited efficacy in low capacity
settings: there are likely to be important complementarities between tax enforcement
through third-party reporting and investments in “traditional” auditing and enforcement
capabilities.5 Our findings – both the observed cross-sectional patterns of misreporting
and firm responses to the notifications – can be reconciled in a parsimonious model of
firm tax evasion.

     Second, our paper contributes more generally to a relatively new empirical literature
on public finance in developing economies using administrative tax data (see Besley and
Persson, 2013, for a recent review). Our findings are complementary with an emerging
set of studies that demonstrate that optimal tax policy may differ across developed and
developing countries as a result of differences in information and enforcement constraints
(e.g., Gordon and Li, 2009; Best et al., forthcoming). Specifically, these results suggest
that governments should set the tax base taking into account the degree of third-party
information on the base as a whole. Our results also add to a very limited empirical
literature examining the role of technology in improving developing country public sector
performance (see, e.g., Lewis-Faupel et al., 2014; Muralidharan et al., 2014).
   5
     Our framework also predicts such behavior in the small segments of developed country economies
that face similar institutional constraints, which is consistent with subsequent findings in Slemrod et al.
(2014). See also Klepper and Daniel (1989) who examine cross-sectional patterns of misreporting across
types of line items in the United States.


                                                    5
     Third, our results relate to the literature on multitasking. In the classic multitask-
ing problem (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1991), increasing monitoring on one margin will
cause agents to adjust not only on the monitored margin but also on other, unmonitored
margins. This paper provides the first evidence showing how individual taxpayers adjust
their costs when monitoring of their revenues increases. These findings are complementary
with Yang (2008), who shows that increased enforcement on one method of customs duty
avoidance in the Philippines prompts importers to shift to an alternative duty-avoidance
method.
      Finally, we are able to study the micro-economics of firm tax misreporting using
administrative data. One key novel finding is that some firms under-report their true
costs, a result that is consistent with our conceptual framework but runs counter to
a natural intuition that evading firms would always inflate their reported costs.6 Our
framework provides a micro-foundation for the idea that firms may understate overall
economic activity to “fly under the radar”of tax or other regulatory authorities (Almunia
and Lopez-Rodriguez, 2013). Under-reporting of costs also has important implications.
If firms do not have incentives to fully declare costs, the self-enforcement mechanism in
the value added tax (VAT) can be undermined (see, e.g., Keen and Smith, 2006). Cost
under-reporting could also encourage some firms to remain in the informal sector: formal
firms may be willing to trade with informal supplier firms even if these firms cannot
provide valid receipts to deduct input costs, a limitation that would otherwise create a
disincentive to informality (De Paula and Scheinkman, 2010).

     Our results highlight the importance of other aspects of the enforcement environment
in determining the effectiveness of third-party reporting. When third-party reporting is
highly incomplete and enforcement capacity is weak, as is the case in many developing
economies, the effect of third-party reporting on revenue can be dramatically limited as
taxpayers respond by adjusting reports on less verifiable margins of the tax return. From
a policy perspective, our results indicate that third-party reporting alone is unlikely to
provide an easy and immediate solution to the problem of improving fiscal capacity in
low-income economies. This does not necessarily mean that countries should not invest
in information technologies that support third-party reporting. As we discuss in the
concluding section of the paper, third-party reporting could be a powerful tool for tax
collection as the scope of transactions covered by third-party reporting expands and the
   6
    This result is consistent with Kopczuk (2012), who shows that the introduction of a flat tax in Poland
lead to increases in both declared revenues and declared costs.



                                                    6
ability to monitor and enforce compliance on non-third-party reported margins increases.
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a conceptual
framework for examining the effects of third-party reporting on firm tax evasion. Section 3
describes the Ecuadorian tax system and outlines our empirical predictions. Section 4
discusses the data and methods. Section 5 presents the results and Section 6 concludes.



2     Conceptual Framework

2.1    Third-Party Reporting in the Allingham-Sandmo Frame-
       work

In this section, we develop an illustrative model of the effects of third-party reporting
on firm tax evasion to guide our empirical analysis. We begin with a brief review of the
standard Allingham and Sandmo (1972) framework and Kleven, Kreiner and Saez (2009)
(henceforth KKS), who embed third-party reporting into this framework.
     In the Allingham-Sandmo model, which is an application of the Becker (1968) model
of crime to the context of tax evasion, taxpayers have true income, W , and choose their
                          c. They pay tax on their declared income at rate τ . Evasion is
level of reported income, W
detected with probability p, in which case they must pay the owed tax as well as a penalty
(at rate θ) on the evaded tax (Yitzhaki, 1974). Taxpayers then maximize expected utility,
with the first order condition of the following maximization problem implicitly defining
c∗ .
W


                                     c ) + pU (W − τ W − θτ (W − W
                EU = (1 − p)U (W − τ W                           c))

     A limitation of the Allingham-Sandmo model is that it is difficult to reconcile low
observed audit rates and penalties with the generally low levels of tax evasion on many
forms of income. KKS (2009) address this concern by allowing W to be comprised of two
components: WT , which is third-party reported, and WS , which is self-reported. Taxpay-
ers choose the reported values of these income components: W  d         c
                                                                T and WS . The detection
                                                                       d
probability on third-party reported income is 1, so taxpayers will set W T = WT . However,

in this baseline framework, third-party reporting will be irrelevant to tax collection: tax-
                           c, and W
payers optimize over total W       c ∗ remains unchanged. Therefore, taxpayers will fully


                                             7
                    d
offset increases in W                        c
                      T with adjustments to WS . Additional constraints – for example, on
                                                              cS – are needed to break this
the detection probability function or on the level or sign of W
irrelevance result.


2.2     The Case of Firms

We now build on this framework to model the effect of third-party reporting on tax evasion
in the firm context. Firms have revenues and costs and pay a flat tax on reported profits,
defined as reported revenues minus reported costs. Both revenues and costs are potentially
comprised of third-party and self-reported components. We will assume throughout that
                                           b ≥ 0. We therefore have:
true profit π ≥ 0 and self-reported profit π

                                           b = reported revenues
                   R = RT + RS = revenues, R
                                        b = reported costs
                   C = CT + CS = costs, C
                                           b− C
                                         b=R
                    π = R − C = profits, π    b = reported profits

                          b
                 T ax = τ π


     Note that there is an important inherent asymmetry in the effect of third-party
reporting between revenues and costs. Firms can reduce their tax liability by under-
reporting revenues and/or over-reporting costs. If third-party reporting is partial, it
provides a lower bound on true values. If firms declare R   b < RT , it is clear that they
are under-reporting revenues. However, if firms declare C  b > CT , this could be due to
over-reporting of costs or due to legitimate costs that were not third-party reported. We
return to the implications of this asymmetry below.


2.3     Firm Responses to Third-Party Reporting

2.3.1   General Case

In a generalized version of the Allingham-Sandmo model, the detection probability is a
function of variables observed by the tax authority (firm reports and third-party reports).
The penalty conditional on detecting misreporting is a function of the tax rate, firm




                                            8
reports, and true revenues and costs.7
       Firms solve the following maximization problem:

             b C,
 EU = (1 − p(R, b RT , CT ))U (π − τ π      b C,
                                     b) + p(R, b RT , CT )U (π − τ π − θ(τ, R,
                                                                            b C,
                                                                               b R, C))


     We take RT and CT as given for the firm. This assumption is appropriate to our
empirical context, in which firms have no opportunity to take actions to change existing
third-party reports at the time the notifications are sent.
     If revenues and costs enter the detection probability function and the penalty func-
tion only in terms of reported profits, (Rb − C),
                                               b firms can again fully offset all effects of
RT by changes to C. b An increase in RT will cause firms to increase R,    b but they can
simultaneously increase C,b returning to their original optimal level of reported profits
with no effect on the detection probability or penalty. In this case, third-party report-
                                                                                 b), or tax
ing of revenue will have no effect on pre-existing levels of tax evasion, τ (π − π
collection. Note that, due to the asymmetry reason discussed above, having third-party
information on costs does not prevent this full offset. Since third-party reporting creates
a floor on reported costs (not a ceiling), firms can increase their reported costs without
the tax authority being able to determine whether or not these costs are legitimate.8
    As we show below, full offsets may not occur if the detection probability or penalty
functions treat revenues and costs differentially. Nevertheless, the key result that firms
may respond to third-party information by adjusting reporting on margins for which third-
party information is less binding will continue to hold. This indicates an important link
between third-party reporting and traditional auditing, since the effectiveness of third-
party reporting will ultimately be determined by the tax authority’s ability to enforce
non-third-party reported margins.
   7
     We model firms as risk averse. This is a realistic assumption for many developing countries, where a
large share of firms are sole proprietorships or owned by a single family and corresponds more generally
to a context in which firms dislike volatility on profits. This assumption also allows ease of comparison to
the standard Allingham-Sandmo framework. Here, we consider the optimization problem of an individual
firm. Please see Pomeranz (2013) for further discussion of cross-firm spillovers in enforcement.
   8
     This asymmetry provides a micro-foundation for why costs may be easier to misreport than rev-
enues (Best et al., forthcoming).




                                                     9
2.3.2    Specifying the Detection Probability

We now consider a specific case of the detection probability function. We begin with a
baseline case in which the tax authority has no third-party information about the firm
but can observe whether firms’ self-reports seem “internally consistent.” The detection
                                                                      b and C.
probability is therefore a function of firms’ self-reported variables R     b

     Specifically, we now assume that the tax authority has some information about the
true distribution of profit rates. If a firm reports $100 in profits on $1,000 in revenue,
that is more plausible than if the firm reports $100 in profits on $1,000,000 in revenue.
Correspondingly, we assume that the detection probability is p( πbR+ε          ′
                                                                    b ) where p < 0 and ε
is a small number greater than zero.9

     This specification of the detection probability function is appropriate for our empirical
context. In a number of field interviews we conducted, tax authority staff indicated that
the reported profit rate is one of the key characteristics they consider when determining
whether to audit. Many of the firm owners and tax accountants we interviewed also stated
that they pay close attention to the choice of their reported profit rate.
     As in Allingham-Sandmo, the penalty is a linear function of the evaded tax. The
firm optimization problem is now:

                             b+ε
                             π                      b+ε
                                                    π
             EU = (1 − p(                   b) + p(
                                 ))U (π − τ π                                 b))
                                                        )U (π − τ π − θτ (π − π
                               b
                               R                      b
                                                      R


Proposition 1. Since p′ < 0, firms will choose the lowest level of reported revenue con-
                                                             b∗ = π
sistent with their reported profits. Specifically, as ε → 0, R    b∗ . This then implies that
b∗ = 0.
C

Proof. Conditional on π b, the firm prefers to minimize p. R   b ≥ πb and p′ < 0 therefore
imply Rb = πb and p = p(1). Define π   b∗∗ =b
                                            π ∗ (p(1)). Now note that the firm can change
Rb while keeping π                       b and this does not affect expected utility at a
                 b fixed (by adjusting C),
                      b∗∗ = π
given p. This defines R      b∗∗ . The optimal choice of Cb is then zero.

     Intuitively, the firm will maximize its reported profit rate Rπbb in order to minimize
its detection probability and chooses the optimal level of reported profits π   b given this
   9
    The addition of ε differentiates among corner cases where π b = 0, so that declaring zero profits on
a large amount of revenue is more likely to trigger additional scrutiny than declaring zero profits on a
small amount of revenue.

                                                  10
minimized detection probability. Firms can get to their desired level of profits by adjusting
either reported revenues or reported costs, but under-reporting revenues gives the added
benefit of reducing the audit rate. They will therefore not even report their legitimate
costs. This result arises from the assumption that the tax authority has no information
about true revenues and costs (which we relax below) as well as the assumption of a
monotonic p function.10


The Effect of Third-Party Reporting We now introduce third-party information on
revenues. Following KKS (2009), we model third-party reported revenue (RT ) as having
a detection probability of 1.

Proposition 2. Define R  b∗ as the optimal firm choice in the absence of third party report-
             b∗ , third-party reporting will have no effect. If RT > R
ing. If RT ≤ R                                                       b∗ , then R
                                                                               b∗′ = RT .

                      b < RT , R
Proof. Since p = 1 if R        b′ ≥ RT . Suppose that the firm chooses R    b′ > RT implying
                                                              b∗′ . The firm can now reduce
                                     b∗′ , and reported costs C
an optimal level of reported profits π
b′ and increase C
R                b′ by some δ > 0. This results in the same level of reported profits but
a lower audit probability and therefore higher expected utility. Thus, R   b∗′ = RT

     We can now examine the response of π  b to RT . Define YN ≡ π − τ πb (after tax profits
in the non-detected state) and YA ≡ π − τ π − θτ (π − πb) (after tax profits in the detected
                                                         b, we have:
state). Taking the first order condition with respect to π



            b+ε ′
            π                        b+ε
                                     π                   1 ′ πb+ε
       p(       )U (YA )θτ − (1 − p(     ))U ′ (YN )τ −    p(     )(U (YN ) − U (YA ))
             RT                       RT                RT     RT


     The first and second terms capture the standard Allingham-Sandmo trade-off: higher
evasion results in higher utility in the non-detected state but lower utility in the detected
state. The third term captures the fact that reports by the firm change the detection
                                                                              ∂b
                                                                               π
probability. If p′ is close to zero, we would expect close to full offsets ( ∂R T
                                                                                  ≈ 0). Intuitively,
this corresponds to the detection probability function being fairly flat with respect to the
reported profit rate. This could be the case, for example, if audit capacity is weak.
  10
    This assumption could be modified so that a reported profit rate that is “too high” also appears
suspicious. Since our main focus is on the effects of third-party reporting, which creates a lower bound
on reported revenues, we retain the assumption of a monotonic p function for simplicity.


                                                  11
Cost Under-Reporting One of the implications of our framework is that firms may
under-report true costs: in the case above, C  b∗′ = RT − π            b∗′ ≶ C. Firms will
                                                             b∗′ , but C
adjust reported costs in response to an increase in third-party reporting of revenues, but
the new level of reported costs may be larger or smaller than true costs. Intuitively, the
detection probability function creates incentives for firms to appear smaller on paper than
they are in reality by potentially under-reporting both revenues and costs. We present
direct empirical evidence in Section 5 that some firms do indeed under-report costs.11


2.3.3     Limits to Enforcement

Note that the detection probability p is the probability that the firm is caught and pun-
ished. We have so far assumed that p equals 1 if firms’ self-reported revenues are lower
than third-party reports. However, if there are limits to enforcement, p would still rise
discontinuously at RT but be limited below 1. This could occur if the tax authority
faces constraints on its ability to enforce tax collection, even conditional on observing
misreporting (Aparicio et al., 2011).
     In this case, firms may optimally choose reported revenues that are below third-
party revenues, effectively taking the risk that the tax authority will either not observe
the discrepancy or not enforce its elimination. Nevertheless, if p rises discontinuously at
RT , firms will never choose reported revenues just below this level, instead bunching at
RT .
       We discuss the empirical predictions of the model in more detail in Section 3.3.
  11
     Somewhat counterintuitively, this suggests that the tax authority could benefit from higher reporting
                                                b < CT , forcing it to declare higher costs can result in higher
of costs. In particular, if a firm is reporting C
optimal reported profits for the firm for some parameter values.




                                                      12
3       Background and Empirical Predictions

3.1     Firm Taxation and Third-Party Information in Ecuador

3.1.1    Rates and Reporting Requirements

We now turn to our empirical setting: the corporate income tax in Ecuador. Ecuador’s
per capita GDP in 2011 was approximately 5,000 USD.12 Tax revenues are around 12%
of GDP, with indirect taxes comprising about half and corporate income tax making up
the majority of the remainder. Oil-related royalties are also an important component of
public revenues.
     All incorporated firms in Ecuador are required to file an annual corporate tax return
(Form F101). Pre-tax profits are defined as the difference between total revenues and total
costs. Firms must distribute 15% of pre-tax profits among their employees and during
the years of our study were taxed at a flat rate of 25% on the remainder. The 25% rate is
independent of firm size and was constant for over 20 years up to and including the years
that were affected by the intervention in this study.13 There are no tax refunds for losses,
but losses can be carried forward, with some limitations, for 5 years with a maximum
carry-over deduction amount of 25% of profits in any given year. The Ecuadorian fiscal
year corresponds to the calendar year and firms file the annual corporate tax return the
following April.
     All firms are also required to file a monthly value added tax (VAT) return (Form
F104). In order to deduct input costs, this return must include a purchase annex listing
the amount purchased from each supplier along with the supplier’s tax ID. A similar annex
for sales to client firms must be submitted by firms with annual sales above 200,000 USD
as well as by Large Taxpaying Units, public sector firms, financial institutions, credit card
companies, and firms requesting refunds of taxes withheld.


3.1.2    Third-Party Information and Cross Checks

The Ecuadorian tax authority (SRI) can check firms’ self-reports against several sources.
For example, it can use data from the purchase annexes to compare a firm’s self-reported
  12
    Ecuador dollarized its economy in 2000. All financial figures in this paper are expressed in USD.
  13
    There are certain special provisions that apply to oil companies and public sector companies. These
firms are included in our full sample analysis but were not subject to the policy interventions.


                                                  13
sales to the sum of all purchases reported from that firm by other firms. The SRI sup-
plements this information with credit card sales from credit card companies, exports
and imports recorded by the Ecuadorian Customs, and returns to financial investments
recorded by financial institutions. Since third-party reporting is incomplete, the resulting
estimates of firm revenues will generally provide a lower bound on true revenues.14
     The ability of the SRI to utilize this third-party information is relatively recent.
Digitized purchase and sales annex data have only been collected since 2007 and discrep-
ancies were initially computed only in special cases, such as in the process of auditing a
large company. The SRI began conducting large scale cross checks of taxpayers in 2011,
computing revenue discrepancies for previously filed corporate income tax returns.


3.2     Policy Intervention

Our results are based on a series of natural policy experiments in which the SRI noti-
fied selected firms about detected discrepancies between firms’ self-reported revenues and
third-party reported information. Notified firms were asked to file an amended return to
address the detected discrepancy. While the specific firm selection methodology is con-
fidential to the SRI, key factors included the magnitude of discrepancies and potential
tax adjustments. We discuss firm selection in the context of our empirical strategy in
Section 4.2 below.

     We examine three rounds of notifications corresponding to tax returns from 2008,
2009, and 2010. We refer to these as the 2008, 2009, and 2010 rounds respectively. The
notifications corresponding to the 2008 returns were sent in August-September 2011; the
notifications corresponding to the 2009 and 2010 returns were sent in March-April 2012.
Note that in all cases, notifications were sent for previously filed tax returns after all real
transactions for the relevant tax period had been completed. Therefore, any changes we
observe in response to the notifications are reporting rather than real economic responses.
      For the 2008 round, 3,136 firms were selected for notification. For the full original no-
tification (in Spanish) see Appendix A2. The relevant portion of the message is translated
below:


  14
    It is possible that there are errors or misreports on the annexes of firms’ transacting partners, but
given the incompleteness of third-party information, the resulting estimates of RT will still be underes-
timates of true revenues in most cases.

                                                   14
      “Dear Mr/Mrs [XXX], General Manager of Firm [XXX],
     After reviewing the databases which it possesses, the Tax Administration has identified
revenue amounts that are attributable to the firm that you represent, which are larger than
the amount reported on its 2008 corporate income tax return. [...] The Tax Administration
requests that you submit an amended return for the year 2008 via internet within 10
business days.”
    2,221 firms were selected for the 2009 round and 2,636 firms for the 2010 round. In
these rounds, the notifications also included the SRI’s calculation of firm revenue based
on third-party sources (Appendix A3). The relevant portion of the message is translated
below:
      “Dear Mr/Mrs [XXX], General Manager of Firm [XXX],
     After reviewing the databases which it possesses, the Tax Administration has identified
revenue amounts that are attributable to the firm that you represent, which are larger than
the amount reported on its 20XX corporate income tax return, as shown in the following
table:

                 Line Item of the          Value Calculated by       Value Declared
 Fiscal Year
               Corporate Income Tax      the Tax Administration     by the Taxpayer
    20XX        699. Total Revenue              $255,300                $190,500


   [...] The Tax Administration urges you to submit an amended return for the year
20XX via internet.”
     Notifications were sent by email to the address on record, which typically belongs to
the general manager or accountant of the firm. We observe firms’ initial filings as well as
any subsequent amendments made to their returns.


3.3     Empirical Predictions

We can think of the discrepancy notifications as effectively introducing RT for notified
firms. Recall that the key effect of third-party reporting is to create a threshold for
reported revenues below which there is a discontinuous increase in the probability that
misreporting is detected and penalized. Prior to the notifications, third-party information
was not used for enforcement purposes, except for selected audit cases. The detection
probability function faced by firms was thus equivalent to one in which the tax authority

                                            15
had no third-party reports (RT = 0).
      In the full cross-section of firms, the absence of enforcement based on RT implies that
we should see little to no bunching at RT but we may have optimal reported revenues both
below the third-party level and above. The framework also predicts that some firms may
under-report costs, setting C  b < C. While we do not observe real costs C, we can perform
a stricter test for cost under-reporting by examining whether firms report C    b < C T . CT
is likely to be substantially smaller than C, since only a small share of firms are required
to file sales annexes. This test will therefore provide a lower bound on the extent of cost
under-reporting.15

     We next turn to the predictions for the discrepancy notifications. All firms in the
policy intervention have R b < RT by definition, since the SRI sent notifications only to
firms that under-reported revenues relative to available third-party information. Our con-
text best corresponds to the “limits to enforcement” case in Section 2.3.3: firms could
only have been legally prosecuted for failure to submit an amended return if a written
notification had been delivered to them in person by a member of the SRI staff. This
is very expensive, and the email option for notifications was chosen due to resource con-
straints. If there are limits to enforcement, some firms may simply choose not to file an
amendment.
     Finally, among firms that do file an amendment, we should see bunching of reported
revenues at RT when RT is disclosed, i.e., in the 2009 and 2010 rounds. In the 2008
round, in which RT was not disclosed to firms, amended reported revenues may be above
or below the actual RT . In all rounds, we expect to see firms offsetting the increase in
reported revenue with an increase in reported costs. The magnitude of this effect will
depend on the gradient of the audit probability with respect to the reported profit rate:
large offsets would imply a relatively flat gradient.
  15
   It is possible that supplier firms misreport sales, on which the third-party cost variable is based.
However, since the incentive is for firms to under-report revenues, this will typically result in a lower CT .




                                                     16
4      Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1     Data

We combine several sources of administrative data. Information about self-reported rev-
enues and costs on original and amended tax returns is compiled from the corporate
income tax form F101. We observe values for all line items as well as the submission
date for each amended version of the return. Firms can submit amendments to the F101
without presenting any additional documentation.
     Revenue and cost discrepancies are calculated using third-party data. Specifically,
third-party reported revenue is the sum of exports, bank interest, and the maximum of
the sum of purchases from the firm reported by client firms and the sum of purchases
from the firm made using credit cards. Third-party reported costs are the sum of firms’
imports and sales reported by their suppliers. Purchases and sales reported by supplier
and client firms are calculated by the SRI using data from the F104 annexes described in
Section 3.

      The third-party revenue measure was hand checked by SRI staff for the sample of no-
tified firms, resulting in some adjustments. These adjusted measures of RT were provided
to firms in the 2009 and 2010 rounds and were calculated (but not provided to firms)
in the 2008 round. We use the adjusted third-party measure for evaluating responses
to the discrepancy notifications and the unadjusted measure for cross-sectional results.
In practice, the adjusted and unadjusted measures are highly correlated, and the policy
experiment results are robust to excluding firms for which adjustments were made.
     We define the universe of economically active firms in a given year as those which
filed an F101 and had non-zero revenues or costs, based on self-reported or third-party
reported information. In 2008, we do not have third-party reported information for firms
outside the notification sample and therefore restrict the sample to firms with non-zero
costs or revenues based on self-reported information for this year.16
      Table 1 shows summary statistics for the full universe of economically active firms
for fiscal years 2008-2010 (pooled). The sample includes 87,076 firms and almost 200,000
firm-year observations. The mean declared annual revenue is $1.58 million with a median
  16
    23% of firms in the 2009-10 sample had zero costs and revenues based on self-reports but positive
values based on third-party reports.



                                                 17
of $42,200. Declared costs have a mean of $1.48 million and a median of $41,600. Cor-
respondingly, there is a large range in tax liabilities. The mean is $23,000, the median
is zero, and the standard deviation is over $600,000.17 Firms’ self-reported revenues and
costs are higher than third-party reports on average. Note that since third-party infor-
mation is incomplete, this does not necessarily mean that firms are over-reporting these
values. In addition, as we discuss in detail below, a substantial share of firms report lower
revenues or costs than the third-party reports.

     Table 2 Panel A shows summary statistics for the firms that were selected for notifi-
cation in each round of the policy intervention (henceforth referred to as the “notification
sample”). All numbers reflect the last pre-notification filing for the corresponding tax
year. For all firms selected for notification, self-reported revenues are lower than third-
party reported revenues. Revenue discrepancies are large, both in absolute terms and as
a share of baseline self-reported revenue. The mean discrepancy is $307,000, $176,000
and $197,000 in 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively.18 To analyze the relative size of the
discrepancy, we examine the distribution of (RT − R)/( b R b + 1). The median is 0.63.

     There were 3,136 firms selected for the 2008 round, 2,221 for the 2009 round, and
2,636 for the 2010 round. Some firms were notified in more than one round. Our results are
robust to restricting the sample to firms that were only notified once, and all standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. Not all firms selected for notification actually
received them: approximately 7% of messages bounced due to invalid email addresses,
and it is quite likely that additional notifications were not received or read by the intended
recipients: email addresses may have been out of date or belonged to accountants or other
individuals that no longer work for the firm. We can therefore think of the notification
sample as an intent-to-treat sample.
     Panel B of Table 2 presents summary statistics for firms that submitted an amended
return after receiving the notification (henceforth referred to as the “amending sample”).
We count a firm as amending if it filed an amendment within three months after the
notification.19 The share of amending firms in the notification sample was 19% in the
  17
     The fact that the median firm reports zero tax liability is not unique to Ecuador. In the US, for
example, an average of 65% of firms reported no tax liability (U.S. Government Accountability Office,
2008). This figure reflects US held corporations that filed the 1120 or 1120A tax form between 1998 and
2005.
  18
     Conversations with SRI staff confirm that summary statistics for the 2008 round differ from the 2009
and 2010 rounds because the selection criteria for receiving a notification were changed somewhat for the
later years; summary statistics for the full sample are very similar across the three years.
  19
     In 2009 and 2010, we observe the firm-specific notification date. In 2008, as we discuss in Section 4.2,


                                                     18
2008 round, 11% in the 2009 round, and 16% in the 2010 round. Note that these figures
understate true response rates since, not all firms in the notification sample actually
received the notification. We cannot determine the share of firms that received and read
the notification and made an active decision not to amend. Nevertheless, the observation
that a substantial share of firms chose not to amend is consistent with the case of limits
to enforcement discussed above. If the probability that a firm is detected and punished is
bounded below one, even conditional on a discrepancy, some firms may rationally choose
not to amend, taking the chance that the tax authority lacks the enforcement capacity to
follow up and force them to rectify the discrepancy. This is plausible in the Ecuadorian
context. Amending firms are somewhat smaller in terms of overall self-reported economic
activity than the full notification sample, but median revenue discrepancies are quite
similar.
     Given the magnitude of revenue discrepancies, notifications had the potential for large
effects on total tax collection. For example, if all firms in the 2009 and 2010 rounds had
amended their returns to match the indicated third-party reported amount, aggregate
pre-tax revenue would have increased by approximately $391 and $522 million for the
2009 and 2010 fiscal years, respectively. If other line items were held constant, this would
imply a total increase in tax collection of approximately $194 million.20 Among just the
amending firms, implied increases in total tax collection are $39 million and $76 million
for 2009 and 2010 respectively. As we show below, actual tax revenue increases were
substantially smaller because firms offset their revenue adjustments with adjustments to
reported costs.


4.2     Empirical Strategy

We are able to estimate the causal effects of the notifications without an explicit control
group by comparing firms’ post-notification and pre-notification returns. The underlying
identifying assumption is that in the absence of the notification, firms would not have
amended their returns. In this case, firms’ own pre-notification reported values provide a
we impute the exact notification start date. We assume that the 2008 notifications were made over a
one-month period following the start date, as in 2009 and 2010, and therefore consider amendments
filed within a four-month window of the start date in 2008 to be as consistent as possible with the later
rounds. In practice, over half the firms that amended their return responded in less than one month and
our results are robust to choice of the post-notification window.
   20
      This is calculated as the tax rate (25%) multiplied by 85% of the additional declared revenue, since
15% of profits are meant to be distributed to workers.


                                                   19
valid counterfactual for post-notification reports.
     Indeed, the probability that firms spontaneously revise their returns for previous
years after such a long period absent a notification is very low. Figure 1 plots amendment
rates for the notification sample (right hand column) and for the rest of the full sample
(left hand column). The start of the notification period is indicated by zero on the x-
axis. Amendment rates are very close to zero for both samples prior to the notifications.
There is a stark increase in the amendment rate for the notified sample following the start
date, but no such increase in the non-notified sample. Moreover, as we show below, the
types of adjustments made by non-notified firms that happen to revise their returns are
entirely different from the amendments by notified firms. Correspondingly, the comparison
between the pre-notification and post-notification returns provides a causal estimate of
the discrepancy notification on firms’ reporting behavior.
      In the 2008 round, we know that notifications were sent in August and September of
2011 but we do not observe the firm-specific notification dates. Based on the timing of
the discontinuity in the amendment rate, we impute the start date for the 2008 round as
August 11, 2011. In the subsequent analysis, we use the firm-specific notification dates
for the 2009 and 2010 rounds and August 11, 2011 as the notification date for the 2008
round. The pre-notification reports are defined by the last F101 filing or amendment prior
to these dates. The post-notification reports are defined by the first observed amendment
(if any) after the notification during the post-notification windows defined in the preceding
section.
     Firms were selected for notification based in large part on their revenue discrepancies
and potential tax adjustment. The sample of firms selected for notifications is of course
not representative of the population of all firms in Ecuador. However, it is of particular
interest in the context of tax enforcement, since firms with large discrepancies are the
ones with the greatest potential for improved tax collection through third-party based
enforcement. Therefore, such enforcement strategies typically target this type of firm.



5    Results

Section 5.1 examines the pattern of revenue and cost discrepancies in the full sample in
2009 and 2010, the two years for which we have data on third-party reported revenues
and costs for all firms. Section 5.2 analyzes the impacts of the discrepancy notifications.

                                             20
5.1      Evidence from the Full Sample of Firms

5.1.1     Revenue Discrepancies

Figure 2, Panel A plots the difference between the log of self-reported revenue and the
log of third-party reported revenue for firms with non-zero third-party reported revenue.
We add 1 in all log specifications to deal with zero self-reports.
     As seen in Table 1, self-reported revenues are on average larger than third-party re-
ported revenues. At the same time, we also see 24% of filings with reported revenues
below third-party revenues. We observe a small degree of bunching around RT . However,
this bunching is not sharp: only 3.8% of filings have self-reported revenues that exactly
match the third-party estimate, and these are cases where RT is relatively small on aver-
age. As we will show, responses to the notifications result in bunching that is an order of
magnitude larger.


5.1.2     Cost Discrepancies

Figure 2, Panel B plots analogous differences in costs for firms with non-zero third-party
reported costs. We observe firms with declared costs both above and below the third-party
level and essentially no bunching at CT .21
     One of the predictions of our model is that firms may under-report costs, counter to
the intuition that firms should wish to over-report costs in order to reduce tax liability.
We can look at this issue by analyzing whether firms report costs below the third-party
                b < CT ). This will provide a lower bound on the extent of true cost under-
reported costs (C
reporting (Cb < C) because third-party reporting for costs are even more incomplete than
third-party reporting for revenue. We find that indeed, 23% of returns report costs that
are lower than third-party reported costs. Firms that declare zero tax liability may have
limited incentives to declare all costs, even though some degree of loss carryover is allowed.
However, we find that firms under-report costs even when declaring positive tax liability:
9% of returns that under-report costs have positive tax liability and 5% of all returns that
have positive tax liability exhibit cost under-reporting.
       The finding that firms under-report costs not only provides empirical support for our
  21
     If we examine the full sample, including filings for which we do not have third-party information, we
see somewhat stronger bunching at both RT and CT (Appendix Figure A1). This additional bunching
reflects cases in which both the self-report and the third-party report are zero.


                                                   21
conceptual framework but also has broader implications, for example for the effectiveness
of the VAT. A key benefit of the VAT is that it has self-enforcing properties as a result
of the conflicting incentives between buyers and sellers. Specifically, although sellers have
incentives to under-report the value of the transaction, buyers will want the transaction
to be reported fully in order to maximize their cost deductions. If, however, buyers are
not reporting all input costs, this self-enforcement mechanism can be undermined.


5.2     Response to Notifications

This section analyzes the responses to the discrepancy notifications. We examine how
firms adjust their reported revenues in response to the notifications and then consider
effects on reported costs and overall tax liabilities. Our main specifications focus on the
sample of amending firms. We also present results for the full notification sample. These
results are mechanically attenuated, since a firm in the notification sample that did not
file an amendment will have no change to its reported revenues and costs by definition,
but the estimates are still highly statistically significant.


5.2.1   Revenue Adjustments

As expected, we see strong bunching at the third-party revenue amount (RT ) in re-
sponse to the notifications when firms are provided with a specific value for RT (2009
and 2010 rounds). The first two graphs of Figure 3 show the difference between the log of
post-amendment self-reported revenue and the log of third-party reported revenue among
amending firms for the 2009 and 2010 rounds. There is very large bunching around zero,
indicating that firms are adjusting their revenues to match the provided estimate of RT .
Thirty-nine percent of firms in the 2009 round and 35% of firms in the 2010 round match
                 b′ = RT . This contrasts notably with the full sample results (Figure 2)
exactly, setting R
in which we see minimal sharp bunching (3.8%).
     Figure 4 shows these revenue responses in more detail, plotting the change in reported
revenue (revenue adjustment) against the pre-treatment revenue discrepancy. Panel A
shows results for amending firms. Approximately 15% of amending firms filed an amend-
ment but did not change reported revenues or any other major variables. These firms are
essentially analogous to non-amending firms. We therefore define the sample of adjusting
firms as firms which made any positive adjustment to revenue following the notifications


                                             22
(Panel B).
     The first two graphs of Figure 4, Panel B present the results for adjusting firms for
the 2009 and 2010 rounds. Firms tend to locate closely along the 45-degree line, matching
the third-party estimate. This shows that the observed bunching around zero in Figure 3
is not limited to small firms: even firms with very large revenue discrepancies match the
third-party amount in their amended returns.22 To the extent that there is incompleteness
or noise in the SRI’s measure of RT , these results indicate that firms match the estimate
provided to them.
     Next, we can test whether the bunching is a direct result of the information provided
in the notifications by comparing these findings to the 2008 round. For 2008, firms were
only told that their reported revenues were below third-party reported amounts but were
not given an actual value of RT . As expected, we observe much less bunching, and only
6% of firms match RT exactly (Figure 3). This exact matching in the 2008 round could
reflect some firms seeking out and obtaining additional information about their revenue
discrepancies from the SRI. Firms with larger revenue discrepancies make larger revenue
adjustments on average, but there is much higher variance than in the 2009 and 2010
rounds (Figure 4). In addition, the fitted line in Panel B lies clearly below the 45-degree
line: firms in the 2008 round adjust revenues by only 36 cents for every dollar of actual
revenue discrepancy estimated by the SRI.
     Comparing the 2008 round with the 2009 and 2010 rounds yields several implications.
First, it is clear that firms are adjusting their revenues specifically in response to the
information provided in the notifications rather than just the receipt of a notification
from the tax authority itself. Second, the results provide strong evidence of misreporting
both before and after the notifications. The 2008 adjustments indicate that firms have
substantial scope for upward revision in reported revenues. Since RT is a lower bound
on true revenues, this indicates that firms in all rounds are likely to be under-reporting
revenues even in the post-notification filings. Finally, the fact that firms make smaller
adjustments when not provided the specific amount of RT is consistent with the idea that
firms will optimally try to minimize reported revenues (R) b and also suggests that they
are underestimating the ability of the tax authority to collect third-party information.
       The results are not consistent with an alternative in which the notifications simply
  22
    The displayed data points are restricted to the range zero to one million, but the fitted line and
confidence interval reflect the unrestricted sample.



                                                 23
prompt firms to review their books and correct inadvertent omissions in reported revenues:
28% of firms in the notification sample and 38% of the adjusting sample reported zero
revenues on their initial returns. In Ecuador, as in some other countries, there are strong
incentives for registered firms to continue to file annual returns even if they truly had no
economic activity in a given year.23 Therefore, the filing of a return with zero reports does
not raise a red flag for the tax authority in and of itself. Since it is unlikely for firms to
“forget” that they had any economic activity, lazy reporting on initial filings alone cannot
explain the observed patterns of under-reporting and adjustment.
     Figures 3 and 4 display revenue discrepancies and adjustments in absolute terms
without making adjustments for firm size. Appendix Figure A2 shows results that adjust
for firm size by scaling both axes by baseline reported revenue. If anything, observed
matching is stronger.
     Table 3 presents the results in regression form along with robustness tests. Panel A
shows the response in reported revenue in the pooled 2009 and 2010 rounds. Standard
errors are clustered by firm, and all results are statistically significant at the 1% level.
The baseline regression coefficient corresponds to the fitted line in Figure 4, Panel B. This
coefficient is 0.927, indicating that adjusting firms increase their reported revenues by 93
cents for every dollar of indicated third-party revenue.
     This estimate is robust to a variety of specification adjustments. Restricting the
sample to firms notified in only one round, the coefficient is 1.016. The effects are not
driven by firms responding to large revenue discrepancies: the coefficients are almost
identical when we restrict the sample to firms with revenue discrepancies below $1,000,000
or below $250,000, confirming that the observed effects hold throughout the distribution.
A very small number of firms make negative revenue adjustments; including these firms
has a negligible effect on the estimated coefficient (0.926). Our baseline specification uses
the last F101 filing prior to the notifications as our baseline measure of reported revenue.
In some cases, the measure of baseline revenue provided to firms on the letters from the
SRI differs slightly. Using the letter measure in our calculation of revenue adjustments
again makes little difference to the results (0.932). Finally, as mentioned above, the
measure of RT provided to firms is derived from the third-party reported data but was
hand checked by SRI staff and adjusted in some cases. Our results are robust to excluding
cases where such adjustments were made (1.111).
  23
    Inactive firms face fines if they fail to submit tax returns until the firm is legally closed, a process
which is costly and can take several years.


                                                    24
5.2.2   Cost Adjustments

We now demonstrate that firms make substantial offsetting adjustments to these changes
in reported revenues by changing reported costs. Figure 5 plots the change in reported
costs against the change in reported revenue for adjusting firms. In all three rounds, firms
locate almost exactly along the 45-degree line, indicating that they closely match increases
in reported revenues with increases in reported costs. This behavior holds along the entire
distribution of changes in reported revenue, even when revenue adjustments are in the
hundreds of thousands of dollars. Over 15% of firms match their cost adjustments to their
revenue adjustments within $100, with about half of these matching exactly. Almost 30%
of firms match within $1,000. The median revenue discrepancy in the notification sample
is $50,000.
     Although we observe differences in revenue adjustments depending on whether or not
firms are provided a specific value of RT , cost adjustments match revenue adjustments
closely in all three rounds. This indicates that firms are choosing their level of reported
costs in a way that targets their optimized levels of reported revenues. Table 3 Panel B
presents corresponding regression analyses for the pooled 2008-2010 rounds. The baseline
regression coefficient corresponds to the fitted line in Figure 5. This coefficient is 0.962,
indicating that adjusting firms increase their reported costs by 96 cents on average for
every dollar of revenue adjustment. This result is stable across all of the same robustness
checks as in Panel A, described in Section 5.2.1, and robust to scaling adjustments by
baseline reported revenues (see Appendix Figure A3).

     These findings imply that the use of third-party information had little effect on tax
evasion (the gap between true and reported profits). A natural question is why the tax
authority would not immediately pursue these firms. While we do not have information
on actions taken against specific firms, conversations with SRI staff indicate that they
are indeed in the process of follow-up control efforts. However, such efforts suffer from
the exact problem third-party cross-checks are meant to mitigate. Following up with
firms would require in-person audits, which are time consuming and very costly. The
main advantage of third-party reporting is that, unlike audits, it is meant to provide a
simple, low-cost mechanism to enforce tax collection. The central challenge when third-
party reporting of costs is partial is that the tax authority cannot definitively distinguish
between legitimate additional reported costs and false costs without a full audit. This
inability to differentiate real from fake costs using firm reports alone is in fact what allows


                                              25
firms flexibility in adjusting their costs and puts limits on the power of enforcement based
solely on information from third-party reporting of revenue.
      While our results on cost under-reporting suggest that there is some scope for new
reporting of legitimate costs, we also find suggestive evidence that firms are including
fake costs in their amendments. In particular, firms disproportionately choose cost ad-
justments on line items that would be difficult for the tax authority to verify in the event
of a full audit. Ecuadorian firms are required to distinguish between production costs
(“costos”) and administrative costs (“gastos”), with many cost line items including both
a “costo”and “gasto”component. As confirmed by Ecuadorian tax officials, the provision
and value of many administrative costs, such as legal or consulting services, are more
difficult to verify than physical inputs to production.
     Within each line item category, adjustments to gastos are more frequent than adjust-
ments to costos. The most frequent cost adjustment is on “Other Administrative Costs,”
a line item that is particularly hard to verify because it may contain miscellaneous pur-
chases including transactions with the informal sector. Fifty percent of adjusting firms
report zero “Other Administrative Costs” before the amendment, while only 25 percent
report zero after the amendment. We find that the ratio of total gastos (summed across
adjusting firms) to total costs is higher on the amendments than on pre-notification re-
turns, and the ratio of “Other Administrative Costs” is 6.5% on the amended portion of
the return, compared to 3.8% on the initial filings. Taken together, these results suggest
that firms are systematically increasing reported costs on line items that are difficult for
the tax authority to verify relative to their pre-notification returns.
     To the extent that some additional costs are legitimate, firms could potentially be
responding to the notifications by bringing entire transactions (revenues together with
their associated costs) on the books (Kopczuk, 2012). We next look at whether such
behavior could fully explain the adjustments we observe in the data. As seen above,
many firms match their cost adjustments extremely closely to their revenue adjustments.
For example, over 15% of adjusting firms match their cost adjustments to their revenue
adjustments within $100, which would only be consistent with bringing zero profit trans-
actions on the books. In addition, if firms were responding to the notifications only by
bringing entire transactions on the books, we would expect to see a positive correlation
between firms’ reported profit rates prior to the notifications and the reported profit rate
on the amended portion of the return. We find no such correlation: among all adjusting
firms, the correlation coefficient between the pre-notification profit rate and profit rate on

                                             26
the amendment is -0.01. Among adjusters with positive pre-notification reported profits,
the correlation is actually negative. This indicates that firms seem to be choosing new
optimal levels of reported costs based on their new levels of reported revenue.


5.2.3   Effects on Tax Revenue

Given the results above, it is not surprising that overall effects on tax collection are
modest. Figure 6 plots a histogram of changes in the log of tax liability for adjusting
firms. We see a large spike around zero, consistent with firms having offset much of their
revenue adjustments with corresponding cost adjustments.
     Table 4 presents regressions of revenue adjustments, cost adjustments, and resulting
changes in tax liability on our indicator for post-notification for the amending sample
(Panel A) and the full notification sample (Panel B). The coefficient on ‘post’ indicates
the difference in declared amounts before and after the notifications. If a firm made no
amendment in the relevant post-notification window, its post-notification values are the
same as its pre-notification values. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level, and all
results are significant at the 1% level.
     Panel A shows that amending firms on average increased their reported revenues by
$86,000 and costs by $80,000, resulting in an average increase in tax liability of $1,900.
This increase in tax liability is an order of magnitude smaller than it would have been had
firms adjusted only revenues. We see similar patterns in the full notification sample (Panel
B). These effects are mechanically attenuated by the amendment rate, since non-amender
firms had zero adjustments by definition. However, even in this sample, the observed
effects are significant at the 1% level. Our estimates imply that the total incremental tax
collection attributable to the notifications was approximately $2 million.

     Finally, we return to our initial identifying assumption, which is that the pre-post
difference in firms’ reports can be taken as a causal effect of the notifications. Table 5
shows a placebo test in which we simulate treatment effects for non-notified firms, as-
suming that these firms had been notified on the first day of the notification period in
each year. Panel A includes all non-notified firms and Panel B includes non-notified firms
that happened to make an amendment during the relevant period. There are no signifi-
cant changes in revenues, costs, or tax liabilities, and the point estimates for revenue and
cost adjustments are of opposite sign. This provides strong support for our identifying
assumption.

                                             27
     Overall, our results provide strong evidence indicating the limits of third-party re-
porting. While the notifications did cause firms to adjust their reported revenues to
match third-party reported amounts, firms offset much of this adjustment by increases
in reported costs. These results cannot be driven by real economic responses, since all
transactions for the relevant tax returns were made well prior to the notifications. The
pattern of responses provides strong evidence of misreporting by firms, both before and
after the notifications.

     Our empirical findings – both the observed cross-sectional patterns and the responses
to the notifications – can be reconciled in our conceptual framework.24 Independently
of the underlying model, our results have important implications, which we believe are
broadly generalizable to many low income countries. First, there is substantial misreport-
ing of both firm revenues and costs, and evading firms may under-report true costs in
addition to revenues. Second, the effectiveness of third-party reporting depends on other
features of the enforcement environment. The notifications studied here are precisely the
type of policy any government would pursue in order to utilize third-party information for
enforcement: cross-check taxpayer reports, detect discrepancies, and request taxpayers to
revise their filings accordingly. However, the effect of such policies on revenue collection
may be constrained by other aspects of tax administration, such as low detection capac-
ity or low enforcement capacity conditional on detection. These limitations could result
from limited governmental resources, corruption, or weak legal environments, common
concerns in many developing economies.


5.3     Taxpayer Reports in Subsequent Tax Filings

The above analyses examine how firms respond to ex post notifications of detected dis-
crepancies. As taxpayers update their beliefs about the information available to the tax
authority, we would expect them to adjust their ex ante behavior for subsequent tax years.
Most individuals in the United States, for example, report their W2 income accurately
because they know that discrepancies will be detected and prosecuted with near certainty.
     In our context, we might expect notified firms to report both higher revenues and
costs on post-notification returns. An empirical challenge is constructing an appropri-
  24
    In the context of the model, the large cost offsets we observe are consistent with a low gradient of
the detection probability with respect to the reported profit rate. The failure of some firms to amend in
response to the notifications reflects the fact that the effective detection probability (the probability that
the firm is both caught and punished) is less than one, even conditional on a revenue discrepancy.

                                                     28
ate counterfactual for notified firms’ subsequent returns. Defining a control group using
propensity score matching is not suitable for this context: in cases in which firms with
large revenue discrepancies were excluded from being notified, this generally occurred for
a specific reason, such as an existing ongoing investigation by the SRI. We therefore do
not have an ideal control group for notified firms.
     The best we can do to shed some light on this question is to exploit a source of
variation from the design of the 2008 notifications. The SRI had initially selected a larger
group of firms for notification, but some firms in this sample were not notified due to
technology resource constraints. We can thus use the selected-but-not-notified firms as
a control group for notified firms. This control group is imperfect: the SRI staff used
discretion in prioritizing firms for notification within the selected sample. We therefore
stress that these results can provide only suggestive evidence about subsequent responses.
     The 2008 notifications were sent in the summer of 2011 and could potentially influence
both firms’ economic decisions in the latter portion of the year and reporting choices in
their 2011 tax return (due in April 2012). Hence, subsequent responses to the 2008
notifications will be captured by differences in the 2011 tax returns between treatment
and control groups. We restrict the sample to firms that were selected for notification for
the 2008 round only, resulting in 2,046 and 1,035 firms in treatment and control groups,
respectively.
     Appendix Figures A4 and A5 plot mean revenues and costs for treatment and control
groups for the 2008-2011 tax years. We see quite large differences in levels but pre-trends
are broadly similar. We observe a divergence in the 2011 tax year, with the treatment
group reporting both higher revenues and higher costs than the control group. However,
there are some increases, though smaller, in the 2010 tax year as well. Appendix Table A1
shows regressions of revenues, costs, and tax liability on an indicator for 2011 interacted
with an indicator for treatment with firm fixed effects. The treatment group indeed has
significantly higher reported revenues and costs than the control group. A placebo test
using reports for the 2010 tax year results in insignificant results; the point estimates are
approximately one-third the size of the 2011 effects (unreported).
     These results provide some suggestive evidence that firms do in fact adjust their
behavior subsequent to the notifications as we would expect. However, given the nature
of the source of variation, we cannot rule out the possibility of different underlying trends
between treatment and control groups. Gaining a better understanding of how taxpayers


                                             29
respond to updated perceptions about the information and enforcement capacity of the
tax authority would be an interesting avenue for future research.



6     Conclusion

This paper investigates the impact and potential limitations of tax enforcement based on
third-party information. When firms are notified by the tax authority about detected
revenue discrepancies, they amend their returns and increase reported revenues, closely
matching the amount indicated when it is provided. However, they offset much of this
higher declared revenue by an increase in declared costs, resulting in only small changes
in their reported profits, implied tax evasion, and corresponding corporate tax liabilities.
This is true even when adjustments are in the tens or hundreds of thousands of dollars.
This highlights the importance of taking possible offsetting adjustments into account when
examining the effectiveness of tax enforcement measures. We also document substantial
misreporting in the universe of firms in Ecuador, using third-party information on revenues
and costs. Notably, we find evidence that some firms under-report not only revenues but
also costs, even when they have positive tax liability. These empirical findings can be
reconciled in a simple model of third-party reporting in which the detection probability
depends on the firm’s reported profit rate.

     Our results have a number of implications for tax enforcement and public finance
in developing countries. First, these results indicate limits to the power of enforcement
policies based on third-party information when such information is partial. In particular,
the collection of third-party information may have different levels of effectiveness depend-
ing on the amount of information available on other margins: as in the O-ring theory of
economic development (Kremer, 1993), the weakest link may play a preponderant role for
tax collection. Third-party reporting is therefore likely to be most effective when there
are relatively few margins that are not third-party reported and when the tax authority
can audit these margins effectively. In many developing countries, however, third-party
reporting is highly incomplete and there are severe limits to the effectiveness of traditional
auditing. In these types of environments, third-party reporting may not be a silver bullet
in solving the problem of improving state fiscal capacity.
    Second, the fact that some firms appear to under-report their costs in addition to
under-reporting revenues has several important implications. Cost under-reporting can


                                             30
undermine certain types of compliance incentives. For example, one of the main attractive
features of the VAT is that it has self-enforcing properties if buyers want to fully declare
costs to maximize their input deductions. However, if buyers have incentives to under-
report true costs, opportunities for evasion and collusion in the VAT can arise. In addition,
one of the costs of informality – limited ability to trade with the formal sector – may
be reduced. When firms want to report all their input costs, they may avoid informal
suppliers who cannot provide a receipt (De Paula and Scheinkman, 2010). If firms are
not fully maximizing their reported costs, this barrier is diminished.
     Since cost under-reporting can undermine certain forms of cross-firm compliance
incentives, enforcement that increases cost reporting can lead to positive spillovers.25 If
firms were required to accompany additional cost deductions with information about the
providers of these input costs, enforcement based on third-party reported information can
in turn generate more such information. Gaining a better understanding of the extent of
such spillover effects is an important avenue for future research.
     Third, our findings suggest ways in which governments should take limits to infor-
mation and enforcement capacity into account when designing tax policy. In particular,
the optimal tax base will depend on the degree of available third-party information on the
base as a whole. For example, if firms are able to offset reported revenues with reported
costs, it may be optimal to limit allowable cost deductions to those that are easy to verify.
Our empirical findings are complementary with Best et al. (forthcoming), who show that
governments may prefer productively-inefficient turnover taxes to profit taxes when costs
are easier to evade.
     Finally, our results suggest that enforcement strategies based on third-party reported
information are complementary to the effectiveness of the tax authority’s traditional au-
diting resources. While the immediate impact of enforcement strategies based on third-
party information may be reduced through offsetting behavior, misreporting is channeled
onto a smaller number of margins. This allows tax authorities to focus their (scarce)
auditing resources on the margins that are more difficult to monitor through third-party
information, rather than having to manually audit all margins. As the scope of trans-
actions covered by third-party information grows, manual auditing can be focused on an
increasingly narrow set of hard-to-monitor transactions. However, given the “weakest
link” dynamic, it remains crucial to audit transactions that are hardest to monitor by
 25
      Such spillovers are consistent with the findings in Pomeranz (2013).



                                                    31
third-party information. Despite the growth of computer-based monitoring methods us-
ing cross-checks of third-party information, strengthening the auditing and enforcement
capacity of developing country governments therefore still remains of crucial importance
for effective tax collection.




                                          32
References
Allingham, Michael G. and Agnar Sandmo, “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
  Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics, 1972, 1 (3-4), 323–338.

Almunia, Miguel and David Lopez-Rodriguez, “Firms’ Responses to Tax Enforcement
  Strategies: Evidence from Spain,” Working Paper, University of Warwick, 2013.

Aparicio, Gabriela, Paul E. Carrillo, and M. Shahe Emran, “Taxes, Prisons, and CFOs:
 The Effects of Increased Punishment on Corporate Tax Compliance in Ecuador,” Working
 Paper, The George Washington University, Institute for International Economic Policy, 2011.

Becker, Gary S., “Crime and Punishment:An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 1968, 76, 169–217.

Besley, Tim and Torsten Persson, “Taxation and Development,” in A. J. Auerbach,
 R. Chetty, M. S. Feldstein, and E. Saez, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 5,
 2013.

Best, Michael C., “Salary Misreporting and the Role of Firms in Workers Responses to Taxes:
 Evidence From Pakistan,” Working Paper, London School of Economics, 2014.

  , Anne Brockmeyer, Henrick J. Kleven, Johannes Spinnewijn, and Mazhar
  Waseem, “Production vs Efficiency With Limited Tax Capacity: Theory and Evidence from
  Pakistan,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

De Paula, Aureo and Jose A. Scheinkman, “Value-Added Taxes, Chain Effects, and
 Informality,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (4), 195–221.

Gillitzer, Christian and Peer E. Skov, “Evidence on Unclaimed Charitable Contributions
  from the Introduction of Third-Party Information Reporting in Denmark,” Working Paper,
  Economic Policy Research Unit (EPRU), University of Copenhagen, 2013.

Gordon, Roger H. and Wei Li, “Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and
 a Possible Explanation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2009, 93 (7-8), 855–866.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
 Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
 1991, 7, 24.

Keen, Michael and Stephen Smith, “VAT Fraud and Evasion: What Do We Know and
 What Can Be Done?,” National Tax Journal, 2006, 59 (4).

Klepper, Steven and Nagin Daniel, “The Anatomy of Tax Evasion,” Journal of Law,
  Economics, and Organization, 1989, 5 (1), 1–24.

Kleven, Henrik J., Claus T. Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez, “Why Can Modern Govern-
  ments Tax So Much? An Agency Model of Firms As Fiscal Intermediaries,” NBER Working
  Paper No. 15218, 2009.


                                            33
  , Martin Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Soren L. Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez,
  “Un-willing or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark,”
  Econometrica, 2010, 79 (3), 651–692.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, “Polish Business Flat Tax and its Effect on Reported Incomes: a Pareto
 Improving Tax Reform?,” Working Paper, Columbia University, 2012.

   and Joel Slemrod, “Putting Firms into Optimal Tax Theory,” The American Economic
  Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2006, 96 (2), 130–134.

Kremer, Michael, “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 551–575.

Kumler, Todd J., Eric A. Verhoogen, and Judith Frı́as, “Enlisting Employees in Im-
 proving Payroll-Tax Compliance: Evidence from Mexico,” NBER Working Paper No. 19385,
 2013.

Lewis-Faupel, Sean C., Yusuf Neggers, Ben Olken, and Rohini Pande, “Can Electronic
  Procurement Improve Infrastructure Provision? Evidence from Public Works in India and
  Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper No. 20344, 2014.

Long, Susan B. and Judyth A. Swingden, “The Role of Third-Party Information Reporting
  and Compliance,” in “Research Conference Report, How Do We Affect Taxpayer Behavior?,
  Internal Revenue Service Document 7302 (3-91),” Washington, D.C., 1990.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar, “Building State Ca-
 pacity: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India,” NBER Working Paper No. 19999,
 2014.

Naritomi, Joana, “Consumers as Tax Auditors,” Working Paper, London School of Economics,
 2013.

OECD, “Tax Administration in OECD and Selected Non-OECD countries: Comparitive Infor-
 mation Series 2010,” Center for Tax Policy and Administration, Organization for Economic
 Cooperation and Development, 2011.

Pomeranz, Dina, “No Taxation Without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in
  the Value Added Tax,” NBER Working Paper No. 19199, 2013.

Sanchez, Gonzalo E., “The Impact of Low-Cost Intervention on Tax Compliance: Regression
  Discontinuity Evidence,” Working Paper, Texas A & M University, 2014.

Skinner, Jonathan and Joel Slemrod, “An Economic Perspective on Tax Evasion,” National
  Tax Journal, 1985, pp. 345–353.

Slemrod, Joel, “Does It Matter Who Writes the Check to the Government? The Economics
  of Tax Remittance,” National Tax Journal, 2008, 61 (2), 75–251.

  , Brett Collins, Jeffrey Hoopes, Daniel Reck, and Michael Sebastiani, “Does Credit-


                                           34
  Card Information Reporting Improve Small-Business Tax Compliance,” Working Paper, 2014.

U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Tax Administration: Comparison of the Re-
  ported Tax Liabilities of Foreign-and U.S.-Controlled Corporations, 1998-2005,” Report to
  Congressional Requesters GAO-08-957 2008.

World Bank, “Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for Greater Development
 Impact : World Bank Group strategy for ICT,” 2012.

Yang, Dean, “Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context of Customs
  Reform in the Philippines,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (1), 1–14.

Yitzhaki, Shlomo, “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 1974, 3 (2), 201–202.




                                            35
Tables and Figures

                                  Table 1
                 Descriptive Statistics, All Firms, 2008-2010


        Revenue ($000)                                            1,576
                                                                 (42,169)
                                                                   [46]

        Costs ($000)                                              1,475
                                                                 (41,560)
                                                                   [46]

        Tax liability ($000)                                        23
                                                                  (626)
                                                                   [0]

        For 2009-2010 only
              Reported revenue − third-party revenue ($000)        536
                                                                 (13,505)
                                                                    [5]

              Reported costs − third-party costs ($000)            678
                                                                 (26,861)
                                                                   [24]

              % of firms with positive third-party revenue         72%
              % of firms with positive third-party costs           90%

        Observations                                             192,882
        Number of firms                                          87,076
          Notes: Group means are reported along with standard deviations in
          parentheses and medians in brackets. All monetary figures in USD.




                                       36
                                        Table 2
              Descriptive Statistics By Year, Notified and Amending Firms


                                                                                  Fiscal Year
                                                                  2008                2009               2010

Panel A: Notified Firms
      Revenue ($000)                                              1,542                 624                592
                                                                 (6,118)             (1,260)            (1,237)
                                                                  [136]                [120]              [103]
      Costs ($000)                                                1,439                 583              552.0
                                                                 (5,398)             (1,170)            (1,153)
                                                                  [129]                [113]               [96]
      Tax liability ($000)                                          26                  11                  10
                                                                  (171)               (31.0)             (27.6)
                                                                    [1]                 [1]                 [1]
      Reported revenue − third-party revenue ($000)                -307                -176               -197
                                                                 (1,741)              (312)              (388)
                                                                  [-42]                [-64]              [-66]

      Observations                                                3,136               2,221              2,636

      Number of firms with                                          −                  159                163
      invalid email addresses

Panel B: Amending Firms
      Revenue ($000)                                              1,402                 370                417
                                                                 (4,367)              (944)              (959)
                                                                  [179]                 [56]               [34]
      Costs ($000)                                                1,331                 352                397
                                                                 (4,172)              (887)              (923)
                                                                  [163]                 [62]               [33]
      Tax liability ($000)                                          18                    5                  5
                                                                   (70)                (17)               (13)
                                                                    [1]                  [0]                [0]
      Reported revenue − third-party revenue ($000)                -217                -151               -173
                                                                  (806)               (299)              (333)
                                                                  [-40]                [-55]              [-63]

      Observations                                                 596                 249                421

Start of notification period                                 August 11, 2011    March 26, 2012      March 26, 2012
End of notification period                                         −            April 20, 2012      April 20, 2012
  Notes: Group means are reported along with standard deviations in parentheses and medians in brackets. Notified
  firms are defined as those to whom the SRI sent an email notification (including those for whom the email bounced
  back). Amending firms are defined as those who filed an amended return in the post-notification window (see text for
  details). All monetary figures in USD.




                                                        37
                                    Table 3
            Treatment Effects and Robustness Tests for Adjusting Firms:
                            Revenue and Cost Matching


Specification:                                                Coefficient     (SE)       N       R2
Panel A: Regressing Revenue Adjustment on
Revenue Discrepancy (2009-2010)
Baseline (Corresponds to Figure 4B)                            0.927***      (0.105)    570    0.728
Robustness Tests
       Only firms notified in no more than one round           1.016***      (0.094)    410    0.798
       Censoring to revenue discrepancies < $1,000,000         0.900***      (0.112)    556    0.623
       Censoring to revenue discrepancies < $250,000           0.917***      (0.052)    495    0.657
       Including negative revenue adjustments                  0.926***      (0.105)    580    0.285
                                      b
       SRI letter measure of baseline R                        0.932***      (0.098)    571    0.744
       Using only unadjusted variation in RT                   1.111***      (0.151)    249    0.811
Panel B: Regressing Cost Adjustment on
Revenue Adjustment (2008-2010)
Baseline (Corresponds to Figure 5)                             0.962***      (0.016)    979    0.982
Robustness Tests
       Only firms notified in no more than one round           0.960***      (0.017)    737    0.983
       Censoring to revenue adjustments < $1,000,000           0.975***      (0.029)    960    0.882
       Censoring to revenue adjustments < $250,000             0.897***      (0.042)    886    0.677
       Including negative revenue adjustments                  0.974***      (0.015)   1,016   0.988
                                      b
       SRI letter measure of baseline R                        0.942***      (0.022)   1,054   0.962
  Notes: Panel A shows linear regressions of revenue adjustments on revenue discrepancies for adjusting
  firms in 2009 and 2010. Panel B shows linear regressions of cost adjustments on revenue adjustments
  for adjusting firms in 2008-2010. All monetary figures in USD. Standard errors clustered by firm in
  parentheses. Level of significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.




                                              38
                                Table 4
Treatment Effects on Overall Revenues, Costs, and Tax Liabilities, 2008-2010


                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
                                         Revenue         Costs         Tax
                                                                     Liability
      Panel A: Amending Firms
      Post                              86,203***      80,155***     1,857***
                                         (15,346)       (15,037)       (222)
      Constant                          871,286***    827,971***    11,237***
                                          (7,673)        (7,518)       (111)
      Firm FE                               Yes            Yes          Yes
      R2                                   0.996          0.995        0.996
      Observations                         2,532          2,532        2,532
      Number of firms                      1,175          1,175        1,175
      Panel B: Notified Firms
      Post                              13,653***      12,695***     294***
                                          (2,363)       (2,310)        (35)
      Constant                          973,367***    908,564***    16,224***
                                          (1,181)       (1,155)        (17)
      Firm FE                               Yes           Yes          Yes
      R2                                   0.998         0.998        0.998
      Observations                        15,986        15,986       15,986
      Number of firms                      6,532         6,532        6,532
        Notes: Dependent variables are in levels. All monetary figures in USD.
        Standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses. Level of significance:
        ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.




                                        39
                                 Table 5
 Placebo Tests: Simulated Treatment Effects for Non-Notified Firms, 2008-2010


                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                       Revenue           Costs           Tax
                                                                                       Liability
Panel A: All Non-Notified Firms
Post                                                    1,820            -1,524          546
                                                       (1,616)          (2,417)         (598)
Constant                                            1,488,306***     1,393,331***     22,099***
                                                        (811)           (1,214)         (299)
Firm FE                                                  Yes              Yes            Yes
R2                                                      0.848            0.836          0.856
Observations                                           400,128          400,128        401,482
Number of firms                                        90,264           90,264         90,264
Panel B: Amending Non-Notified Firms
Post                                                   304,909          -225,026        86,403
                                                      (308,155)        (461,319)      (114,806)
Constant                                            9,535,873***     9,370,717***     36,668***
                                                      (158,031)        (236,578)       (58,876)
Firm FE                                                  Yes               Yes            Yes
R2                                                      1.000             0.999         0.513
Observations                                            2,611             2,611         2,611
Number of firms                                         1,230             1,230          1,230
 Notes: Linear regressions for non-notified firms, supposing that they had been notified on the
 first day of the notification period for each year. Panel A displays all non-notified firms, Panel
 B non-notified firms that happened to amend during the relevant period. All monetary figures
 in USD. Standard errors clustered by firm in parentheses. Level of significance: ***p < 0.01,
 **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.




                                              40
                                                                    Figure 1
                                                                  Amendment Rates


                                                                        2008
                            Amendment Rate for Non−Notified Firms                   Amendment Rate for Notified Firms
                  6
                  4
        Percent
                  2
                  0




                                                                        2009
                  6
                  4
        Percent
                  2
                  0




                                                                        2010
                  6
        Percent
                  4
                  2
                  0




                      −50            0                    50            100   −50        0                      50      100
                                  Days After First Notification                        Days After First Notification

                                                                                                                              ®




Notes: The left Column plots amendment rates for the universe of non-notified firms before and after
the start of the intervention. The right Column does the same for notified firms. Start date imputed for
2008 (see text for details).




                                                                         41
                                     Figure 2
   Revenue and Cost Discrepancies, All Firms with Positive Third-Party Information


                                         Panel A: Revenue Discrepancies for Firms
                                            with Positive Third Party Revenues
                                10
                                8
                          Percent
                                6
                                4
                                2
                                0




                                                     log(own revenue+1) −
                                                   log(third party revenue+1)

                                           Panel B: Cost Discrepancies for Firms
                                              with Positive Third Party Costs
                                    10
                                    8
                          Percent
                                    6
                                    4
                                    2
                                    0




                                          −.5                  0                .5
                                                      log(own costs+1) −
                                                    log(third party costs+1)




Notes: Results are shown for the sample of 59,937 active firms for which there are positive third-party
revenues in Panel A and the sample of 74,519 active firms for which there are positive third-party costs
in Panel B. Both panels show data for 2009-2010, the years for which complete third-party information is
available. Results are similar if histograms are separated by year. Bins are of size 0.01, and the top and
bottom 1% of the sample are omitted when calculating bin heights for computational purposes. 3.8% of
reports match revenues exactly; 0.1% match costs exactly.




                                                              42
                                                                          Figure 3
                                                           Revenue Adjustments among Amending Firms



                      60                 2009                                    2010                                                     2008




                                                                                                                      60
                      40




                                                                                                                      40
            Percent




                                                                                                            Percent
                      20




                                                                                                                      20
43




                      0




                                                                                                                      0
                            -.5               0               .5 -.5                   0               .5                   -.5               0               .5
                           log(own post-amendment revenue+1)         log(own post-amendment revenue+1)                     log(own post-amendment revenue+1)
                               - log(SRI estimated revenue+1)           - log(SRI estimated revenue+1)                         - log(SRI estimated revenue+1)




     Notes: Bins are of size 0.01, and the top and bottom 1% of the sample are omitted when calculating bin heights for computational purposes.
     39% of firms match exactly in 2009; 35% matched exactly in 2010; 6% matched exactly in 2008.
                                                                                                                      Figure 4
                                                                                                                   Revenue Matching


                                                                                Panel A: Amending Firms
                                                     2009                                   2010                                                                                             2008
                               800 1000




                                                                                                   800 1000




                                                                                                                                                                       800 1000
          Revenue Adjustment




                                                                             Revenue Adjustment




                                                                                                                                                 Revenue Adjustment
                               600




                                                                                                   600




                                                                                                                                                                       600
                               400




                                                                                                   400




                                                                                                                                                                       400
                               200




                                                                                                   200




                                                                                                                                                                       200
                               0




                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                          0   200   400   600   800   1000                                    0   200   400   600   800   1000                                    0   200   400   600   800   1000
44




                                              Revenue Discrepancy                                                 Revenue Discrepancy                                                 Revenue Discrepancy


                                                                                     Panel B: Adjusting Firms
                                                     2009                                         2010                                                                                       2008
                               800 1000




                                                                                                  800 1000




                                                                                                                                                                      800 1000
          Revenue Adjustment




                                                                             Revenue Adjustment




                                                                                                                                                 Revenue Adjustment
                               600




                                                                                                  600




                                                                                                                                                                      600
                               400




                                                                                                  400




                                                                                                                                                                      400
                               200




                                                                                                  200




                                                                                                                                                                      200
                               0




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                          0   200   400   600   800   1000                                    0   200   400   600   800   1000                                    0   200   400   600   800   1000
                                              Revenue Discrepancy                                                 Revenue Discrepancy                                                 Revenue Discrepancy



     Notes: The dashed line indicates a 45-degree line. Also shown is a fitted line, and a 95% confidence interval for the fitted line. Axes are restricted
     to show zero to one million but the fitted line and confidence interval reflect the unrestricted sample. Axes are in thousands of USD. Slopes are
     as follows: 0.916 for the 2009 round, 0.930 for the 2010 round, and 0.355 for the 2008 round.
                                                                                                        Figure 5
                                                                                                       Cost Matching


                              1000              2009                                                        2010                                                        2008




                                                                                          1000




                                                                                                                                                      1000
                              800




                                                                                          800




                                                                                                                                                      800
            Cost Adjustment




                                                                        Cost Adjustment




                                                                                                                                    Cost Adjustment
                              600




                                                                                          600




                                                                                                                                                      600
                              400




                                                                                          400




                                                                                                                                                      400
                              200




                                                                                          200




                                                                                                                                                      200
                              0




                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     0   200   400   600   800   1000                            0   200   400   600   800   1000                            0   200   400   600   800   1000
                                         Revenue Adjustment                                          Revenue Adjustment                                          Revenue Adjustment
45




     Notes: The dashed line indicates a 45-degree line. Also shown is a fitted line, and a 95% confidence interval for the fitted line. Axes are restricted
     to show zero to one million but the fitted line and confidence interval reflect the unrestricted sample. Axes are in thousands of USD. Slopes are
     as follows: 1.028 for the 2009 round, 0.993 for the 2010 round, and 0.942 for the 2008 round.
                                                                              Figure 6
                                                                Changes in Taxes Among Adjusting Firms


                    40
                    30                    2008                                      2009                                      2010
          Percent
                    20
                    10
46




                    0




                         −.5                0                   .5 −.5                0                   .5 −.5                0                   .5
                               Change in log(tax liability+1)            Change in log(tax liability+1)            Change in log(tax liability+1)




     Notes: Histograms of the change in log(tax liability +1) between pre- and post-notification for amending firms that made a positive revenue
     adjustment. Bins are of size 0.01, and the bottom 1% of the sample is omitted when calculating bin heights for computational reasons.
Appendix
Appendix A1: Additional Tables and Figures

                                   Table A1
                      Treatment Effects in Subsequent Filings


                                       (1)                (2)              (3)
                                     Revenue             Costs             Tax
                                                                        Liability
            Treated × Post   539,247***               468,812**        10,326***
                              (120,942)               (118,065)         (3,697)
            Post             225,061***              225,252***          2,723*
                               (56,766)                (59,756)         (1,600)
            Constant        1,859,045***            1,733,198***       30,237***
                               (17,656)                (16,918)           (549)
            Firm FE               Yes                     Yes              Yes
              2
            R                    0.955                   0.950            0.864
            Observations        11,675                  11,675           11,675
            Number of firms      3,081                   3,081            3,081
              Notes: Linear regressions for firms selected to be notified in the
              2008 round. Treated firms are those that were actually notified;
              control firms are those that were not notified due to time constraints.
              All monetary figures in USD. Standard errors clustered by firm in
              parentheses. Level of significance: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p <
              0.1.




                                             47
                                          Figure A1
                          Revenue and Cost Discrepancies, All Firms
                       (Includes Filings with Zero Third-Party Reports)

                                                Panel A: Revenue Discrepancies
                                     30
                                     20
                           Percent
                                     10
                                     0




                                                       log(own revenue+1) −
                                                     log(third party revenue+1)

                                                 Panel B: Cost Discrepancies
                                     30
                                     20
                           Percent
                                     10
                                     0




                                          −.5                    0                .5
                                                        log(own costs+1) −
                                                      log(third party costs+1)




Notes: Results are shown for the entire sample of 82,774 active firms. Both panels show data for 2009-
2010, since third-party costs are not available for 2008. Results are similar if histograms are separated by
year. Bins are of size 0.01, and the top and bottom 1% of the sample are omitted when calculating bin
heights for computational reasons. 21.0% of reports match revenues exactly; 2.5% match costs exactly.




                                                               48
                                                                                Figure A2
                                                           Revenue Matching, Scaled by Baseline Reported Revenues

                                                                                     Panel A: Amending Firms
                                 200
                                                  2009                                          2010                                                                    2008




                                                                                            200




                                                                                                                                                       200
            Revenue Adjustment




                                                                       Revenue Adjustment




                                                                                                                                  Revenue Adjustment
                                 150




                                                                                            150




                                                                                                                                                       150
                                 100




                                                                                            100




                                                                                                                                                       100
                                 50




                                                                                            50




                                                                                                                                                       50
                                 0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                       0     50    100   150     200                              0     50    100   150     200                              0     50    100   150     200
                                           Revenue Discrepancy                                        Revenue Discrepancy                                        Revenue Discrepancy
49




                                                                                            Panel B: Adjusting Firms
                                                  2009                                                 2010                                                             2008
                                 200




                                                                                            200




                                                                                                                                                       200
            Revenue Adjustment




                                                                       Revenue Adjustment




                                                                                                                                  Revenue Adjustment
                                 150




                                                                                            150




                                                                                                                                                       150
                                 100




                                                                                            100




                                                                                                                                                       100
                                 50




                                                                                            50




                                                                                                                                                       50
                                 0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                       0     50    100   150     200                              0     50    100   150     200                              0     50    100   150     200
                                           Revenue Discrepancy                                        Revenue Discrepancy                                        Revenue Discrepancy



     Notes: Variables are scaled by dividing by (pre-notification reported revenue +1). The dashed line indicates a 45-degree line. Also shown is a
     fitted line, and a 95% confidence interval for the fitted line. Axes are in thousands of USD and are restricted to show zero to 200 thousand, but
     the fitted line and confidence interval reflect the unrestricted sample. Slopes are as follows: 1.017 for the 2009 round, 1.067 for the 2010 round,
     and 0.620 for the 2008 round.
                                                                               Figure A3
                                                           Cost Matching, Scaled by Baseline Reported Revenues

                                            2009                                                      2010                                                   2008




                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                      200
                            200




                                                                                                                                             150
          Cost Adjustment




                                                                    Cost Adjustment




                                                                                                                           Cost Adjustment
                                                                                      150
                            150




                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                      100
                            100




                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                      50
                            50
                            0




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                      0
                                  0    50    100     150      200                           0    50    100     150   200                           0    50    100     150   200
                                      Revenue Adjustment                                        Revenue Adjustment                                     Revenue Adjustment
50




     Notes: Variables are scaled by dividing both the variables on the y and x-axis by (pre-notification reported revenue +1). The dashed line
     indicates a 45-degree line. Also shown is a fitted line, and a 95% confidence interval for the fitted line. Axes are in thousands of USD and are
     restricted to show zero to 200 thousand but the fitted line and confidence interval reflect the unrestricted sample. Slopes are as follows: 1.035
     for the 2009 round, 1.003 for the 2010 round, and 0.949 for the 2008 round.
                                                             Figure A4
                                              Mean Reported Revenues in Subsequent Filings
                                  3,000,000
                                  2,500,000
                   Value in USD
                                  2,000,000
                                  1,500,000
                                  1,000,000




                                              2008          2009                 2010        2011
                                                                   Fiscal Year

                                                               Treatment           Control




Notes: Lines show mean reported revenues by year for treatment firms (above) and control (below) firms.
Treatment firms are those notified in the 2008 round. Control firms are those selected to be notified in
the 2008 round but not actually notified due to time constraints.




                                                                    51
                                                             Figure A5
                                                Mean Reported Costs in Subsequent Filings
                                  3,000,000
                                  2,500,000
                   Value in USD
                                  2,000,000
                                  1,500,000
                                  1,000,000




                                              2008           2009                 2010        2011
                                                                    Fiscal Year

                                                                Treatment           Control




Notes: Lines show mean reported costs by year for treatment firms (above) and control (below) firms.
Treatment firms are those notified in the 2008 round. Control firms are those selected to be notified in
the 2008 round but not actually notified due to time constraints.




                                                                     52
Appendix A2: Policy Intervention Message: Year 2008

                       SERVICIO DE RENTAS INTERNAS
               DEPARTAMENTO DE GESTIÓN TRIBUTARIA


Quito, 5 de septiembre del 2011


Señor (a) xxxxxx

Gerente General de xxxxx

El Art. 67 del Código Tributario y el segundo artı́culo de la Ley de Creación del Servicio
de Rentas Internas otorgan a esta Administración Tributaria la facultad para efectuar la
determinación, recaudación y control de los tributos internos del Estado.

Esta Administración Tributaria, luego de revisar las bases de datos con las que cuenta,
ha identificado valores atribuibles a ingresos de la sociedad a la que usted representa
superiores al monto registrado en la declaración de impuesto a la renta correspondiente al
ejercicio fiscal 2008.

De conformidad a lo establecido por los artı́culos 89 del Código Tributario y 101 de la Ley
de Régimen Tributario, las declaraciones de impuestos efectuadas por los sujetos pasivos
tienen el carácter de definitivas y vinculantes, por lo que hacen responsable al declarante
y, en su caso, al contador que firme la declaración, por la exactitud y veracidad de los
datos que contenga; sin embargo el sujeto pasivo, a petición expresa del Servicio de
Rentas Internas podrá, dentro de los seis años siguientes a la fecha de presentación de la
declaración original, rectificar en una declaración sustitutiva, los rubros requeridos por la
Administración Tributaria.

El Art. 19 de la Ley de Régimen Tributario Interno y el artı́culo 37 de su reglamento,
establecen que todas las sociedades están obligadas a llevar contabilidad y declarar el
impuesto en base a los resultados que arroje la misma. Adicionalmente los libros conta-
bles tienen que estar debidamente respaldados por los correspondientes comprobantes de
venta y demás documentos pertinentes, documentación toda que puede ser requerida en
cualquier momento por la Administración Tributaria para fines de control.

En atención a los antecedentes y a las normas legales citadas, esta Administración le

                                              53
solicita presente la declaración sustitutiva correspondiente al impuesto a la renta del
ejercicio fiscal 2008 vı́a Internet, dentro de los diez (10) dı́as hábiles posteriores a la
presente comunicación.

Adicionalmente le recordamos que en la declaración del impuesto a la renta del año 2008,
debe registrar el valor del anticipo calculado de impuesto a la renta con cargo al ejercicio
fiscal 2009, de conformidad al artı́culo 41 de la Ley de Régimen Tributario Interno.

A la vez se le informa que de ser el caso, el sujeto pasivo, deberá calcular el impuesto,
interés y multa a pagar considerando los pagos previos efectuados, conforme la normativa
tributaria vigente respecto a la imputación al pago.

Finalmente, se advierte al sujeto pasivo que la Administración Tributaria se reserva el
derecho de verificar oportunamente la información contenida en las declaraciones de im-
puestos, que en el caso de que el sujeto activo ejerza su facultad determinadora procederá
a cobrar un recargo del veinte por ciento (20%) calculado en base al impuesto determi-
nado, y que en caso de comprobar la existencia de actos de ocultación o falsedad, por los
que se haya dejado de pagar en todo o en parte los tributos debidos, en provecho propio
o de un tercero, tales hechos se considerarán defraudación fiscal, conforme lo señala el
artı́culo 342 del Código Tributario y cuyas sanciones se especifican en el Libro Cuarto del
mismo cuerpo legal que se refiere al Ilı́cito Tributario.

En caso de requerir mayor información sobre la presente comunicación puede acercarse a
las oficinas del Departamento de Gestión Tributaria, ubicadas a nivel nacional.

El envı́o de este correo es automático, por favor no lo responda.

Atentamente,


Servicio de Rentas Internas


Nota: Ahora es más fácil cumplir con sus obligaciones tributarias, utilizando nuestro ser-
vicio gratuito de declaraciones y anexos por internet, que le permitirá presentar ágilmente
la información. Obtenga su clave de seguridad y el programa en cualquiera de las oficinas
del Servicio de Rentas Internas a nivel nacional.




                                             54
Appendix A3: Policy Intervention Message: Years 2009 - 2010




                       SERVICIO DE RENTAS INTERNAS

                DEPARTAMENTO DE GESTIÓN TRIBUTARIA




Quito, a viernes, 20 de abril de 2012



Señor (a) xx


Representante Legal de xx


El Art. 67 del Código Tributario y el segundo artı́culo de la Ley de Creación del Servicio
de Rentas Internas otorgan a esta Administración Tributaria la facultad para efectuar la
determinación, recaudación y control de los tributos internos del Estado.

El Servicio de Rentas Internas, ha realizado el cruce especial de información donde se
verifican los valores declarados en el rubro Ventas Gravadas y No Gravadas. Ası́, luego
de revisar las bases de datos con las que cuenta, ha detectado valores atribuibles a la
sociedad a la que usted representa, diferentes a los montos registrados en la declaración
de impuesto a la renta correspondiente al ejercicio fiscal 20XX, según se puede observar
en el siguiente detalle:


   Año     Casillero de la Declaración   Valor calculado por la Ad-   Valor declarado por
   Fiscal   de Impuesto a la Renta         ministración Tributaria     el contribuyente
   20XX     699 - TOTAL INGRESOS                     777.499,10              719.153,50



                                                55
De conformidad a lo establecido por los artı́culos 89 del Código Tributario y 101 de
la Ley de Régimen Tributario, las declaraciones de impuestos efectuadas por los su-
jetos pasivos tienen el carácter de definitivas y vinculantes, por lo que hacen respon-
sables al declarante y al contador que firmen la declaración, por la exactitud y ve-
racidad de los datos que contenga la misma; sin embargo el sujeto pasivo, a petición
expresa del Servicio de Rentas Internas podrá, dentro de los seis años siguientes a la
fecha de presentación de la declaración original, rectificar en una declaración sustitutiva,
los rubros requeridos por la Administración Tributaria.

El Art. 19 de la Ley de Régimen Tributario Interno y el artı́culo 37 de su reglamento,
establecen que todas las sociedades están obligadas a llevar contabilidad y declarar el
impuesto en base a los resultados que arroje la misma. Adicionalmente los libros contables
tienen que estar debidamente respaldados por los correspondientes comprobantes de venta
y demás documentos pertinentes, documentación toda que puede ser requerida por la
Administración Tributaria para fines de control.

En atención a los antecedentes y a las normas legales citadas, esta Administración le
apremia a presentar la declaración sustitutiva correspondiente al impuesto a la renta del
ejercicio fiscal 20XX vı́a Internet.

Adicionalmente se le recuerda que en la declaración del impuesto a la renta del año 20XX
debe registrar el valor del anticipo calculado de impuesto a la renta con cargo al ejercicio
fiscal 20XX, de conformidad al artı́culo 41 de la Ley de Régimen Tributario Interno.

De ser el caso, el sujeto pasivo deberá calcular el impuesto, interés y multa a pagar, con-
siderando los pagos previos efectuados, conforme la normativa tributaria vigente respecto
a la imputación al pago.

Finalmente, se informa al sujeto pasivo que la Administración Tributaria se reserva el dere-
cho de verificar oportunamente la información contenida en las declaraciones de impuestos,
y que en el caso de que el sujeto activo ejerza su facultad determinadora procederá cobrar
un recargo del veinte por ciento (20%) calculado en base al impuesto determinado; ası́
como también, que en caso de comprobar la existencia de actos de ocultación o falsedad,
por los que se haya dejado de pagar en todo o en parte los tributos debidos, en provecho
propio o de un tercero, tales hechos se considerarán defraudación fiscal, conforme lo señala
el artı́culo 342 del Código Tributario y cuyas sanciones se especifican en el Libro Cuarto

                                              56
del mismo cuerpo legal que se refiere al Ilı́cito Tributario.

La asesorı́a que se requiera para el cumplimiento de obligaciones tributarias, la puede
obtener en todas las oficinas del Servicio de Rentas Internas a nivel nacional o a través
de nuestra página web (www.sri.gob.ec).



Atentamente,



Servicio de Rentas Internas




                                             57
