NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICIES
WHEN INCOMES ARE UNCERTAIN:
A CONTRADICTION TO
RICARDIAN EQUIVALENCE

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 2062

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, Economic Fluctuations
and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2062
November 1986

The Effects of Fiscal Policies When Incomes are Uncertain:
A Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence

ABSTRACT

This paper shows that when earnings are uncertain the substitution of
deficit finance for tax finance or the introduction of an unfunded social
security program will raise consumption even if all bequests reflect

intergenerational altruism. Thus, contrary to the theory developed by Barro
and a number of subsequent writers, an operative bequest motive need not imply
Ricardian equivalence.

Since there is no uncertainty in the present analysis about the date of
each individual's death, this conclusion does not depend on imperfections in

annuity markets. Nor does it depend on the existence of non-lump-sum taxes
and other distortions. Rather it follows from the result derived in the paper
that, when an individuaPs future earnings are uncertain, his future bequest
is also uncertain and his consumption therefore rises more in response to an

increase in his current disposable income than to an equal present value
increase in the disposable income of his potential heirs.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

The Effects of Fiscal Policies When Incomes are Uncertain:
A Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence

Martin Feldstein*

This paper shows that when earnings are uncertain the substitution of
deficit finance for tax finance or the introduction of an unfunded social
security program will raise consumption even if all bequests reflect

intergenerational altruism. Thus, contrary to the theory developed by Barro
(1974) and a number of subsequent writers, an operative bequest motive need

not imply Ricardian equivalence. Since there is no uncertainty in the present
analysis about the date of each individual's death, this conclusion does not

depend on imperfections in annuity markets. Nor does it depend on the
existence of non-lump-sum taxes or other distortions. Rather it follows from
the result derived below that, when future earnings are uncertain, bequests
are also uncertain and that consumption therefore rises more in response to an
increase in current disposable income than to an equal present value increase
in the disposable income of the next generation.
It is useful to begin with a summary of the reasoning to be developed in

this paper. The starting point of the analysis is the observation that the
level of earnings during the "second half" of an individual's working life

cannot be accurately predicted during the earlier years. This is particularly
important among individuals in managerial, entrepreneurial and professional

occupations who account for a relatively large share of all savings and

bequests. Because of this uncertainty, it is optimal for a younger individual
to save more than he would if his expected future income were known with

—2—

certainty. The uncertainty about future income also implies that an
individual during the early stage of his life does not know whether he will
later want to make a bequest to his children if he can use an annuity to avoid

accidental bequests. But even if all bequests are intended and are motivated
only by intergenerational altruism, the uncertainty of the individual's future
income means that bequests are uncertain.
This uncertainty of future bequests means that an individual is not
indifferent between receiving an additional dollar of income when he is young
and having his children later receive an amount with a present value of one

dollar. Similarly, a one dollar increase in his current disposable income
will increase his current consumption by more than a rise in his children's

income with a present value of one dollar. This in turn implies that a tax
cut financed by an increase in national debt that will be serviced by future

generations will raise current consumption. Similarly, an unfunded social
security program that promises a net transfer to the current generation from
future generations will also raise current consumption.

Before presenting a formal proof of these propositions, I will review the
current state of the debate about Ricardian equivalence in the context of an

economy in which there is no uncertainty about individual incomes. This is
done in Section 1. The second section then presents a formal model of
consumption and bequest decisions of individuals whose earnings during the

second half of their working lives are uncertain. Section 3 uses this
analysis to examine the effects of fiscal policies that transfer income to the

current generation from the next generation. A numerical illustration is
presented in Section 4. There is then a brief concluding section.

—3-

1.

The Ricardian Equivalence Theorem

Although several economists over the years noted the possibility that the

aggregate national debt might not be regarded as a net asset because of the
implied future debt obligation and therefore that a tax cut might not induce
an increase in consumption,1 it was Robert Barro (1974) who first presented an

explicit model in which finite-lived individuals who make bequests to the next
generation will completely offset any intergenerational lump-sum transfer

imposed by the government. In Barro's analysis, an individual chooses a path
of consumption and a bequest to the next generation by maximizing a utility
function that has as its arguments the individual's own annual consumption

amounts and the utility of the next generation. A current tax cut that is
matched by a rise in national debt that is serviced by taxes on future
generations does not change the opportunity set of the representative

individual. He can maintain his own consumption path and the utility level of
the next generation by saving the entire tax cut and bequeathing it (with

accumulated interest) to the next generation. This inheritance allows the
next generation to maintain its original consumption path and to provide a
bequest to its heirs that maintains that generation's utility level.

In

effect, the process of bequests makes the series of finite-lived individuals

act like an infinitely lived individual. With no change in the
infinite-horizon budget constraint, there is no reason to change consumption
at any date, thus establishing the equivalence of tax finance and debt
finance.

One line of objection to this analysis (see, e.g., James Tobin, 1980, and

—4—

Martin Feldstein, 1982) is that an operative bequest motive is relatively rare
because individuals believe that the marginal utility of their own retirement
consumption exceeds the marginal utility of bequests to their children.
Defenders of Ricardian equivalence reply that bequests are In fact relatively
common among the upper income groups that account for such a large share of
total wealth accumulation and point to the evidence of Laurence Kotlikoff and
Lawrence Summers (1981) that most existing wealth can be traced to bequests
rather than to life cycle accumulation.

Andrew Abel (1985) and Zvi Eckstein, Martin Eichenbaum and Dan Peled
(1985) showed that the observation of substantial bequests does not imply an
operative bequest motive if the age at which death occurs is uncertain and an

annuity market does not exist. Moreover, in such an economy Ricardian
equivalence will be violated and fiscal policies will affect consumption.
However, annuity markets exist and, even with the less than actuarially fair
return estimated by Benjamin Friedman and Mark Warshawsky (1985), older
egoistic individuals will prefer annuities to accidental bequests.
Although the observation of bequests in an economy with an annuity market
may therefore suggest that there is an operative altruistic bequest motive of
the type assumed by Barro, other types of bequest motives have been proposed

that do not imply Ricardian equivalence. Douglas Bernstein, Andre Schlaefer,
and Lawrence Summers (1986) note that bequests may be made for the "strategic"
purpose of maintaining the attention if not the actual affection of children

and grandchildren. Laurence Kotlikoff and Avia Spivak (1981) suggest that
bequests may be the result of an explicit or implicit contract between aged
parents and their children in which the parents agree to leave a bequest if

—5—

they die before a certain age while the children agree to provide support if
the parents live beyond that age and therefore exhaust their assets.
Alternatively, individuals may make bequests because they regard themselves as
"stewards" of the funds that they inherited with a moral responsibility to

bequeath at least a similar amount to their own children. Each of these
models implies that a fiscal transfer from children to parents (i.e., a tax
cut or an increase in social security retirement benefits) will not be offset
by an equivalent increase in bequests.
Economists will of course differ in the extent to which they accept the
strategic bequest, family annuity or stewardship theories as an explanation of

observed bequests. Although I believe that there is probably some truth in
each of these explanations, I doubt that they can explain the observed

bequests without reference also to intergenerational altruism. The
stewardship theory cannot explain the bequests of those who did not receive

inheritances. The family annuity theory may be relevant to some moderate
income individuals who are likely to exhaust their assets during retirement
but cannot be applied to the wealthy aged whose assets continue to increase as

they get older because their spending is less than their income. The
strategic bequest theory is more difficult to reject as the primary
explanation of observed bequests but is contrary to the persuasive "evidence"
of personal introspection as well as to the less reliable assertions of other

prospective donors. Moreover, as has been noted by Barro and others, these
other bequest motives have ambiguous implications about the direction of the
effect of fiscally imposed intergenerational transfers on current
consumption.

-6-

Robert Barsky, Gregory Mankiw and Stephen Zeldes (1986) have shown how
the existence of non-lump-sum taxes on subsequent risky income can invalidate
Ricardian equivalence and cause a positive marginal propensity to consume out

of a deficit-financed increase in disposable income. Income taxes on risky
income reduce the variance of future net income, providing an otherwise
unavailable insurance to individuals that reduces precautionary savings and

increases current consumption. Barsky et. al. also show that an analagous
result holds when individuals live only one period but are uncertain about the

income that their heirs will earn. In that case, the non-lump-sum tax on
their heirs' income reduces its variance and therefore, by reducing the
expected marginal utility of such income to the initial generation, reduces

the desired bequest and increases current consumption. Their analysis is thus
fundamentally different from that of the current paper because they do not

consider the effect of an individual's own income uncertainty on his desired

level of bequests. Moreover, the non-lump-sum nature of the taxes that they
consider inevitably introduce a non-neutrality.

Abel (1986) shows how a different type of non-lump-sum tax, a progressive
tax on bequests or capital, changes the relative cost of current consumption
and bequests and thus introduces an incentive to consume more at the present
time.

The present paper shows that none of these departures from the original
Barro formulation is necessary to demonstrate that Ricardian equivalence is
false and that a fiscally mandated intergenerational transfer from the future

to the present implies an increase in current consumpton. To establish this,
I analyze a simple model in which all bequests are caused by intergenerational

-.7—

altruism (i.e. there are no accidental bequests due to an uncertain time of
death and the strategic11, family altruism and stewardship motives for

bequests are ignored). All taxes and transfers are lump sum. The only
difference from the traditional model is that individuals in the first half of
their working lives are uncertain about their earnings in the second half.

2.

A Life Cycle Model with Uncertain Earnings

This section extends the traditional life cycle model with bequests by

recognizing the inherent uncertainty of income in later years.2 Since the
purpose of this paper is to demonstrate a contradiction to Ricardian
equivalence in a model in which all bequests are motivated by explicit
intergenerational altruism, the model analyzed here is a very simple one that

serves this purpose rather than a more realistic model designed to explore the
response of aggregate consumption, capital accumulation, and bequests to
variations in the stochastic properties and predictability of lifetime
income.3

Consider therefore a model in which the individual lives two periods. In
the first period he works a fixed amount and receives a certain income

which includes any bequest that he receives. In the second period he also
works a fixed amount but earns an amount y2 that cannot be predicted during
the first period of life. The second period of life also contains a fixed
interval of retirement before death at a known time. Since the amount of work
1n the first and second periods and the duration of retirement are all fixed,

these quantities need not be specified explicitly. Moreover, the assumption

—8-

of a known date of death is equivalent to assuming the existence of

actuarially fair annuities. Finally, there is no need to distinguish between
consumption during the working years of the second period and the
retirement years because the analysis here focuses on the way that fiscal
transfers affect consumption during the first period when subsequent Income is
unknown.

The individual's utility depends on his consumption during the first and

second periods of his life and on the utility of his children. The essential
features of the intergenerational bequest model that establishes Ricardian
equivalence when income is not stochastic can be captured by assuming that the

next generation is the final one: the children of the current generation
make no bequests and bear the full burden of any fiscal transfer to the

current generation. The utility of the children can therefore be written as a
function of their own consumption. In the current context, replacing this
specification with an infinite horizon model with each generation linked to
the next through the parents' utility function would only complicate the
analysis without changing anything essential.
The simplest specification of the stochastic nature of second period
income is that the individual receives a fixed amount
and receives zero with probability 1 -

p.

with probability p

It will also eliminate unnecessary

notation without changing anything fundamental to assume that the interest
rate is zero.

In the first period of life, the individual chooses first period

consumption (c1) to maximize expected utility. In the second period, the
individual observes either y2 =

or

y2 = 0 and, conditional on that

—9-

observation, chooses second period consumption (c2) and a non-negative bequest
(B ) 0) to maximize utility subject to the budget constraint
yl -

Cl

+

= c2 + B.

Since this generation's utility is a function of the expected utility of

the next generation, some comments about the next generation are in order. In
its first period, the next generation receives income z1 plus the bequest B

from this generation. In its second period, the next generation receives

income Z with robabilitv D and zero with Drobabilitv 1 -

o.

Since the next

generation makes no bequest, its utility is a function of its own path of
consumption and its maximum expected utility can be written as a function of

the parameters of its stochastic budget constraint: •(z1÷B,Z2,p).
It will be convenient to restate this with the uncertain second period
income replaced by its certainty equivalent (x2) defined by the condition that
the maximum expected utility that is possible with the parameters z1 + B,
Z2
and p is equal to the maximum utility that the individual would obtain subject
to the nonstochastic budget constraint that lifetime consumption is not

greater than z1 + B +

x2.

Thus q(z1+B,Z2,p) =

J,(z1+B+x2).

Since bequests are

added to the nonstochastic first period income (z1) in both specifications,
the substitution of the certainty equivalent does not alter the conclusions of
the analysis.

With these assumptions, the first period problem of an individual in the
current generation is to choose c1 to maximize E[u(c1,c2,4,(z1+B+x2))] knowing

that in the second period he will choose c2 and B to maximize

u(c,c2,js(z1+B+x2)) where c? is the value of c1 chosen in period 1. Note that
a positive bequest will be chosen at time 2 only if u3' > u2 at B = 0, i.e.,
if the marginal utility of the first dollar of bequest exceeds the marginal

-10-

utility of an additional dollar of consumption when the bequest level is zero.

The interesting case explored below is the one in which this condition holds

when y2 =

but

does not hold when y2 =

0, i.e., when the bequest is made

only when the second period income exceeds its expected value.
To derive explicit parametric and numerical results, I assume that the
utility function is log-linear:

(1)

E(u) =

in

c1 +

E(in

c2 +

aln(z1+B+x2)]

where a reflects the weight that the current generation assigns to the

logarithm of the certainty equivalent income of their prospective heirs. To
find the value of C1 that maximizes expected utility, the individual must
follow the stochastic dynamic programming principle of solving the second

period problem first and then using the optimal conditional values of c2 and B

to find the optimal value of c1. From the vantage point of the second period,
c1 is fixed at c and c2, B must be chosen to maximize in c2 +
subject to the budget constraint y1 +

c

constraint y1 -

=

c2

+ B if y2 =

-

V2

c c
=

+ B if y2 =

aln(z1+B+x2)

V

or the

0.

A positive bequest will be optimal if and only if
(2)

1

a

0<
y1+y2-c1 zl+x2

i.e., if the marginal utility of c2 evaluated at B = 0 is less than the marginal
utility of increased second generation income, also evaluated at B =

0.

The

only interesting case in the current analysis is the one in which a bequest is
optimal when y2 = V2 but not optimal when y2 = 0:

—11-

a
(3)

+ V2 —
C1

yl

1

<

0<
Z1 + X2

y1 — C1

This case will be assumed in the analysis that follows.4
Thus y2 = 0 implies B* = 0 and c =

y1-

C? while y2 = V2 implies that 8*

maximizes in c2 + aln(z1+B+x2) subject to the constraint that

C2 + B =

(4)

y1

—

+

The first order condition is

c?.
1

—

+

C

=0

y1+Y2—c_B* z1+x2+B*
and implies

(5)

B* + z1 +

=

1

(yi+Y2+zi+x2—c?)

and

(6)

c =

1

Thus when second period income is high enough to make a positive bequest
optimal, the available resources of the two generations are divided in the
ratio a to 1 implied by the parameters of the utility function.

These conditional values of B and c2 can now be substituted into equation
(1) with probability weights p and 1 -

p

to derive the optimal value of c1.

Thus

(7)

E(u) =

in

c1 + p(1n(1+a1(Y1+Y2+z1+x2—c1)

+ aln(a/1+a)(y1+Y2+z1+x2-c1)]
+ (1—p)(ln(y1—c1) + aln(z1+x2)].

—12—

The first order condition for the optimal value of c1 is thus:
1

8

p(1+a)

-

1 - p

c y1+Y2+z1+x2-c y1-c

or, equivalently, the quadratic equation:

(2i-pa)c!2 —

(9)

((2—p)(yl+Y2+zl+x2) + (1+p+pa)y ]c*

+ y1(y1+Y2+z1+x2) =

0.

Before analyzing the implications of (9) for the effects of fiscal

policy, it is useful to derive the optimal consumption and bequests in the

same model but without the uncertainty of second period income. If the
individual knows with certainty at the beginning of his life that his second

period income will be pY2 (i.e., the mean of the uncertain distribution), he
will choose c1, c2 and B to maximize ln c1 + in C2 + ain(z1+x2+B) subject to
the budget constraint c1 + c2 + B =

on bequests (B

y1 + pY2 and the non—negativity constraint

0). This implies the optimal values
y1 + pY2 + z1 + x

(10)

c* =

(11)

c** =

(12)

B**+z1+x2=

1

2+a
y1 + pV2 + z1 + x

2

2+a
a(y1+pY2+z1+x2)

2+a

as long as the implied value of B

0. If the desired bequest is negative,

the constraint is binding and the optimum consumption is simply

Cr =

cr

=

(y1 + pY2)/2.

—13—

The Effects of Fiscal Policies

3.

-

We

are now ready to analyze how recognizing the uncertainty of second

period income alters the effects of fiscal policy. Consider therefore a tax
cut that raises the first period disposable income of the initial generation
(y1) and increases the national debt that must be repaid by reducing the first

period disposable income of their children (z1). Since the interest rate is
assumed equal to zero, the debt repayment is equal to the initial tax cut:
dy1 = dz1.
Equation (10) shows that in the case of certainty this fiscal policy has

no effect on the first period consumption of the initial generation: dc1 = 0
because c1 depends only on the combined endowment of both generations
(y1 + pY2 + z1 +

x2) and that is unaffected by increasing y1 and decreasing

z1 by equal amounts. This is the fundamental Ricardian equivalence result of
Barro.

In contrast, equation (9) shows that when the uncertainty of second
period income is recognized a fiscal change that raises y1 and reduces z1 by

an equal amount will not leave c1 unchanged. More specifically, a tax cut
that raises y1 but leaves y1 +

z1

unchanged will raise first period

consumption. To see this, note that the solution to equation (9) can be
written as5

Q -

-

/Qa2

4(2+pa)(y1+Y2+z1+x2)y1
2(2+pa)

(13)

c =

where Q =

(2-p)(y1+Y2+z1+x2)

that, with y1 +

V2

+

z1

+

+

(1+p+pa)y1

x2 constant,

>

0.

It is straightforward to show

-14-

(14)

dc

+

y1 +

1

2 -

+ x2 -

(1+p+pa)c

4(2+pcz)(y1+Y2+z1+x2)y1

Since the denominator is positive, dc/dy1 > 0 if

(15)

c* <
1

yl + V2 + z1 + x2

1+p+pa

But equation (10) showed that when there is no uncertainty about second period

mci +h rni-4mI

r i r**
(V +nY+, 4-i /(4qT1 1 =''1212''
'''
1

the

'

cm11ir run+l-I +hri

right hand side of (15) since for any p < 1, 2 + a > 1 + p + pa and

pY2 < 2• Moreover, the existence of second period income uncertainty
increases precautionary saving in the first period and therefore implies that

c < Cr. Since c < Cr and cr < (y1+V2+z1+x2)/(1+p+pa), inequality (15) is
satisfied and therefore dc1/dy > 0; a tax cut balanced by a tax increase on
the next generation raises current spending.
Before pursuing the formal analysis any further, it is desirable to ask

why income uncertainty causes Ricardian equivalence to fail. When
second period income is uncertain, the individual does not know at the time

that he chooses c1 whether he will ultimately want to make a bequest. If he
knew with certainty that he was not going to make a bequest, the extra tax

borne by the next generation would be irrelevant to him and he could divide

his tax cut between his own consumption in the first and second periods. More
generally, the individual raises his first period consumption (although by
less than the increase in disposable income), knowing that with probability
1 - p he will not want to make a bequest and will raise his second period

consumption by the remainder. With probability p the individual will have

—15-

high income in the second period, will therefore choose to make a bequest, and
will use some of his additional first period saving to make a larger bequest

than he would otherwise have made. Nevertheless, the tax cut raises total
consumption of the initial generation and reduces total consumption of the
next generation even when a bequest is made.
To see this explicitly, note that equation (5) implies that, when a
bequest is to be made, an increase in y1 and an equal decrease in z1 implies

that the next generation's consumption is reduced by a fraction of the induced
consumption:
d(B*+z +x2)

=

(16)

dy1

B* > 0

-

a dc*

1+ady

Since there is no offsetting change in bequest when y2 = 0 and B* =

0,

the average

chan9e in second generation income In response to a current tax cut financed
by a tax increase on the second generation is

(17)

a
d(B*+z1+x2) =
—(p 1 +
dy1

dc1 + (1—p)].

The analysis of social security retirement benefits is essentially

identical in the current context to the analysis of the tax cut. Consider a
program that pays a sure benefit

to the current generation In its

second period and finances this by a tax of

on the income

of the next

generation. When there is no income uncertainty, the social security program
raises second period income to p?2 +
earnings to 21 -

, leaving

and reduces the next generation's initial

c!* in equation (10) unchanged. In the case of

uncertain second period income, the payment of a sure second period benefit is

analytically identical to a tax cut. To see this, note that y2 = 0 now implies

—16-

=

y1- c +

so that the payment of the second period benefit is the same

as an increase in first period income if it induces the same c?. Similarly,
when y2 = Y2, the individual maximizes in c2 +

constraint that C2 + B =

y1

+

V2

+

a1n(z1-+B+x2)

subject to the

— c?; this is also identical to the

effect of a tax cut that increases y1 and decreases z1 as long as it yields

the same c. To see that the optimal first period consumption is indeed the
same, note that the expression to be maximized in equation (7) is modified in

exactly the same way by the social security program as it would be by a

tax-induced rise in y1 and reduction in z1. Thus a social security program
has the same effect of increasing first generation consumption and reducing
the second generation's subsequent consumption as an equal—sized
intergenerational transfer achieved by a tax cut.6

4.

A Numerical Illustration

A numerical example will illustrate the potential effect of income
uncertainty on consumption, on bequests, and on the impact of fiscal policy.
The specific example is obviously arbitrary but indicates the potential

importance of income uncertainty. In the example, the marginal propensity to
consume out of the tax-induced increase in disposable income is almost as
large as the average propensity to consume.

Since the results are essentially independent of the Units of

measurement, I set first period income equal to unity: y1 = 1.
and V2 =

With p =

2, the expected value of second period income is also one. The

economic specification is completed by setting the next generation's first

0.5

—17—

period income and second period certainty equivalence income both equal to one

as well: z1 = x2

=

1.

The analysis will be done for two alternative values

of the intergenerational altruism parameters: a =

and a =

1

3.

Consider first the case in which there is no uncertainty. Second period
income is pY2 = 1 and is known with certainty. From equation (12), the

optimal bequest is B** =

max(4a/(2+a)-2,0].

Thus with a = 1 the individual

gives too little weight to the next generation to make any bequest and

0.

=

In this case the individual consumes all of his income in each

period: Cr =

q* = 1.0.

With a =

3, there is enough weight on the next

generation's welfare to induce a bequest: B** =

0.4 and cr =

c* = 0.8.

When second period income is uncertain, the optimal value of c1 is given

by equation (13). With a = 1,

c = 0.6311

while a = 3 implies ct =

0.5937.

In both cases, first period consumption is substantially less than it would be
if the same expected second period income could be anticipated with certainty.
This reflects both the precautionary demand for saving (against the risk that

0) and the saving for subsequent bequests (if y2 = 2).

=

If y2 =

with a =

3.

0, the individual will choose to make no bequest with a =

1 or

In contrast, if y2 = 2 the individual will choose a bequest of

8* = 0.1844 with a = 1 and 8* = 1.3047 with a =

3.

Thus with a = 1 the income

uncertainty increases the average bequest from B = 0 to pB* = 0.0922 and
with a = 3 the income uncertainty increases the average bequest from
= 0.40 to p8* =

0.6524.

Consider now the effect of a fiscal policy that increases the initial
generation's first period disposable income from y1 =

1.0

to y1 =

1.1 and

reduces the corresponding disposable income of the next generation from
=

1.0

to z1 =

.9.

This raises the first period consumption from

-18-

c = 0.6311

with a = 1 and y1 =

1.0

0.6896 with a =

to c! =

1

1.1;

and y1 =

the increase of 0.0585 implies a marginal propensity to consume out of the
fiscal transfer of 0.585, almost as high as the initial average propensity to

consume of 0.631. Similarly, with a = 3, first period consumption rises from

c = 0.5937 to c = 0.6434,

implying a marginal propensity to consume out of

the fiscal transfer 0.497, approximately 85 percent of the average propensity
to consume.

The fiscal transfer induces an increased bequest, although not a large

enough increase to maintain the consumption of the next generation. This is
true even if attention is limited to the case in which y2 = 2 so that a

bequest is made. For example, with a =

1

the bequest when y2 = 2 rises from

B* = 0.1844 to B* = 0.2552 but the increased bequest of 0.0708 is less than

the increased tax of 0.10 paid by the next generation. Moreover, the fiscal
0.0922 to

transfer only raises the average bequest from 0.5(0.1844)

0.5(0.2552) =

0.1276, an increase of 0.0354 in comparison to the universal tax

rise of 0.1000. Similarly, with a =
B* = 1.3047 with y1 =

1.0

to B* =

3,

the bequest when y2 = 2 rises from

1.3674 when y1 = 1.1.

(0.0627) is slightly smaller then with a =

1

The increased bequest

and offsets less than two—thirds

of the tax increase even among those who receive a bequest. More generally,
the average bequest rises from 0.5(1.3047) = 0.6524 to 0.5(1.3674) =
a rise of 0.0313 or less than one-third of the average tax increase.

0.6837,

—19-

5.

Concluding Comment

This paper has shown that the inability of individuals to predict
accurately their subsequent earnings implies that fiscal transfers from future

generations to the current generation will raise current consumption. Thus
earnings uncertainty is incompatible with Ricardian equivalence. The
individual's uncertainty of his future income also reduces consumption and
increases the probability and expected size of bequests.
Unlike the uncertainty that arises because the time of death is unknown,
the unpredictability of individual future income cannot be avoided even in

principle by an annuity market or other insurance market. The uncertainty of
personal earnings Is unavoidable because of the moral hazard problem involved
in trying to insure individual earnings.
The very simple model developed in this paper can demonstrate the

potential importance of earnings uncertainty and the general inapplicability

of Ricardian equivalence. It would be desirable to extend this analysis to a
more realistic specification of uncertainty and to analyze the implications
for capital accumulation, income distribution and fiscal policy in an infinite
horizon model.

September, 1986
Cambridge, Mass.

-20-

Footnotes

*professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President, the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
1.

This group includes Don Patinkin (1956), Martin Bailey (1971), and Merton

Miller and C. Upton (1974).

It is not clear whether David Ricardo actually

believed this to be true; see Ricardo (1951) and Gerald O'Driscoll (1977).
2.

Although there have been several analyses of life cycle models with

uncertain income and asset returns (see, e.g., Agnar Sandmo (1970), Jacques
Dreze and Franco Modigliani (1972) and Robert Barsky, Gregory Mankiw and
Stephen Zeldes (1986)), these have not dealt with the relation between income
uncertainty and bequests.
3.

For such an analysis, see Feldstein (1987).

4.

The case where a bequest is always optimal corresponds to the original

Barro analysis despite the income uncertainty while the case where a bequest
is never optimal is contrary to the observation that individuals do make
bequests.
5.

This is the only feasible solution of the quadratic equation; adding

instead of subtracting the square root expression implies a value of c1
greater than initial income.
6.

This assumes that the size of the second period benefit is not so large

that the individual wants to consume more than his entire first period income.
In this case, it is still true that the benefit increases first period

consumption but by less than the rise that would result from an equally large
tax reduction.

—21—

Bibliography

Abel, Andrew B. (1985), "Precautionary Saving and Accidental Bequests,"
American Economic Review 75: 777-91.
Abel, Andrew B. (1986), "The Failure of Ricardian Equivalence Under

Progressive Wealth Taxation." NBER Working Paper No. 1983. Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bailey, M.J. (1971), National Income and the Price Level. New York: McGraw
l!
ni II II.

Barro,

Robert J. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of

Political Economy.

Barsky, at al. (1986), "Ricardian Consumers with Keynesian Propensities,"
American Economic Review 76: 676-91.
Bernheim, Douglas, Andre Schlaefer and Lawrence Summers (1984), "Bequests as

a Means of Payment." NBER Working Paper No. 1303. Cambridge, Mass.:
National Bureau of Economic Research (March).
Dreze, Jacques and Franco Modigliani (1972), "Consumption Decisions Under

Uncertainty" Journal of Economic Theory 5 (December): 308-25.
Eckstein, Zvi, Martin S. Eichenbaum and Dan Peled (1985), "The Distribution
of Wealth and Welfare in the Presence of Incomplete Annuity Markets,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Feldstein, Martin (1982), "Government Deficits and Aggregate Demand," Journal
of Monetary Economics.
Feldstein, Martin (1987), "The Aggregate Effects of Income Uncertainty on

Capital Accumulation and Bequests." Forthcoming.

—22—

Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshawsky (1985), "The Cost of Annuities:

Implications for Saving Behavior." NBER Working Paper No. 1682.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kotlikoff, Laurence and Avia Spivak (1981), "The Family as an Incomplete
Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy 89 (April): 372-91.
Kotlikoff, Laurence and Lawrence Summers (1981), "The Importance of
Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal
of Political Economy (August).

Leyland, Hayne E. (1968), "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precuationary Demand
for Saving," Quarterly Journal of Economics 82 (August): 465-73.

Miller, M. and C. Upton (1974), Macroeconomics: A Neo-classical Introduction.

Homewood, Ii.: Irwin.
O'Driscoll, Gerald P., Jr. (1977), "The Ricardian Nonequivalence Theorem,"
Journal of Political Economy 85: 207-10.

Patinkin, Don (1956), Money, Interest and Prices. Evanston, Ii.: Rowe
Peterson.

Ricardo, D. (1951), The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, P. Sraffa,

ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sandmo, Agnar (1970), "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions,"
Review of Economic Studies 37 (July): 353-60.

Tobin, James (1980), Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

