                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MARKETS WITH MULTIDIMENSIONAL PRIVATE INFORMATION

                                          Veronica Guerrieri
                                           Robert Shimer

                                        Working Paper 20623
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20623


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




We thank Briana Chang, Piero Gottardi, Robert Hall, Guido Lorenzoni, and numerous seminar audiences
for comments on earlier versions of this paper. For research support, Guerrieri is grateful to the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation and Guerrieri and Shimer are grateful to the National Science Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20623.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Veronica Guerrieri and Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Markets with Multidimensional Private Information
Veronica Guerrieri and Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 20623
October 2014, Revised September 2015
JEL No. D82,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper explores price formation when sellers are privately informed about their preferences and
the quality of their asset. There are many equilibria, including a semi- separating one in which each
seller's price depends on a one-dimensional index of her preferences and asset quality. This multiplicity
does not rely on off-the-equilibrium path beliefs and so is not amenable to standard signaling game
refinements. The semi- separating equilibrium may be not Pareto efficient, even if it is not Pareto dominated
by any other equilibrium. Instead, efficient allocations may require transfers across uninformed buyers,
inconsistent with any equilibrium.


Veronica Guerrieri
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
vguerrie@chicagobooth.edu

Robert Shimer
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
shimer@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction
This paper develops and explores a canonical exchange economy in which the initial owner of
an asset has private information both about the quality of the asset and about her preferences.
We are interested in understanding how market mechanisms work, whether such mechanisms
involve price dispersion for different assets, whether markets reallocate assets towards more
productive users, and whether equilibrium allocations are Pareto efficient.
    The model we develop in this paper is abstract, but it may be useful to keep a particular
example in mind, the market for used cars (Akerlof, 1970). The car’s initial owner may have
private information about some of the car’s attributes, such as its reliability. She may also
have private information about her own preferences for newer versus older model cars. When
the owner sets a price, she may perceive a trade-off: if she asks for a higher price, it will
take her longer to sell the car, but she will get more money when she succeeds in selling it.
Given these perceptions, the price she sets will depend both on her preferences and on the
attributes of the car. If she has only a weak desire for a newer model and the car is reliable,
she will prefer to set a high sale price and risk failing to sell it. She will set a lower sale price
and sell the car faster in the opposite circumstance.
    Turn now to a used car buyer. When he sees a car with a high asking price conditional on
its observable attributes, he should conclude that either the car is reliable or that the seller
has a weak desire to sell it. If in expectation he believes that higher prices are associated
with higher quality cars, he may be willing to pay a higher price. This behavior can support
an equilibrium with price dispersion.
    We can answer the questions in the first paragraph using the terminology from this
example. We find that observationally identical cars may sell for heterogeneous prices,
depending on the owner’s preferences. Conversely, at any given price, heterogeneous cars are
typically available. While markets generally transfer assets from sellers with a strong taste
for new cars to buyers with a greater willingness to purchase a used car, some sales shift low
quality cars away from their natural owners. Finally, our analysis shows that under some
conditions the equilibrium allocation is Pareto efficient. If it is inefficient, there may be other
Pareto superior equilibria which cross-subsidize sellers through pooling prices. Alternatively,
there may be no Pareto superior equilibrium, but instead a Pareto improving allocation may
require cross-subsidizing uninformed buyers. The remainder of the introduction explains
these findings in more detail and places them in the context of the existing literature.
    Our model economy is abstract but is designed to capture the real-world trade-offs faced
by buyers and sellers. It is populated by a continuum of risk-neutral investors who live
for two periods. Investors are heterogeneous in their discount factor between the periods.


                                                 1
At the start of the first period, investors are endowed with a perishable consumption good
(potential buyers), with assets that produce dividends in the second period (potential sellers),
or possibly with both goods and assets. Assets are heterogeneous in their quality, defined as
the amount of the second period consumption good that they produce.
    At the beginning of the first period each investor privately observes his discount factor
and the quality of any assets that he owns. Next, investors may exchange the first period
consumption good for assets. Investors may use their consumption goods to buy assets, sell
their assets for the consumption good, engage in both activities if they are endowed both
with assets and consumption goods, or simply consume their endowment. We allow investors
to buy or sell at any price, forming beliefs about the probability that they will be able to
trade at that price and about the composition of assets offered for sale at that price. Trade
is rationed by the short side of the market at every price, with all traders on the long side
of the market equally likely to trade.
    We show that our model features multiple equilibria. First, we describe a semi-separating
equilibrium of the sort we highlighted in the used car example. Sellers with higher continua-
tion values, defined as the product of their discount factor and their asset quality, set higher
prices and sell their assets with lower probability. As long as sellers with higher continuation
values have higher quality assets on average, buyers rationally perceive that they will get
more by paying more, and so are willing to buy at a range of different prices. In such an
equilibrium, identical quality assets sell at different prices, reflecting heterogeneity in the
sellers’ preferences, while heterogeneous assets sell at the same price if the two sellers have
the same continuation value. Then we show that, under some assumptions, there is also
a one-price equilibrium, in which all trade takes place at a single price. Any seller with
a continuation value below this price sells for sure at that price, while sellers with higher
continuation values do not sell. There are also many other equilibria, for example equilibria
in which all trade takes place at n different prices for arbitrary n, and mixed equilibria that
combine some pooling mass points and some semi-separating intervals.
    What drives the multiplicity of equilibria? One might conjecture that this is a conse-
quence of the signaling aspect of our model: a seller’s price is a noisy signal of her asset’s
quality. Signaling games often exhibit many equilibria, unless one imposes restrictions on
off-the-equilibrium-path beliefs, i.e. beliefs about who would sell for a price that no one
actually sets in equilibrium (Cho and Kreps, 1987; Banks and Sobel, 1987). We include
such restrictions directly in our definition of equilibrium and so this is not the source of our
multiplicity. Instead, multiple equilibria are a consequence of the multidimensional private
information. Sellers with the same continuation value have the same preferences and so may
all be indifferent about setting any price in a nontrivial interval. This implies that the single


                                               2
crossing condition holds only weakly in our environment. Buyers care which seller sets which
price even when sellers are indifferent. This creates the scope for multiple equilibria.
    We also introduce a more restrictive definition of equilibrium with unidimensional private
information. This definition reduces the sellers’ private information to a single dimension,
their continuation value. We impose that (i) all sellers with the same continuation value
set the same price; and (ii) buyers believe that all sellers with the same continuation value
are equally likely to select any sale price not chosen in equilibrium. We prove that the
semi-separating equilibrium is unique under this more restricted notion of equilibrium.
    Nevertheless, we believe it is a mistake to collapse the seller’s multiple dimensional pri-
vate information down to a single dimension. Preferences and endowments are distinct in
an Arrow-Debreu economy and so it makes sense to keep them distinct in an economy with
private information as well. Distinguishing between preferences and endowments is impor-
tant for understanding how markets reallocate goods across heterogeneous investors. For
example, in addition to the anticipated finding that private information reduces the amount
of trade, particularly for high quality goods, we find that it also leads to some pairwise
inefficient trades. Some assets are sold by a more patient seller to a less patient buyer.
    We explore the efficiency of the equilibrium, particularly the semi-separating equilibrium,
within the set of incentive-feasible allocations. It is well known that a pooling allocation can
Pareto dominate a separating allocation (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). The benefit of
a pooling allocation is that separation is wasteful, as it reduces the trading probabilities.
The cost is that sellers cross-subsidize each other, and so pooling is less attractive to high
quality sellers. If there are few low quality sellers, the benefit of pooling outweighs the
cost for everyone and hence a pooling allocation Pareto dominates a separating allocation.
This might suggest that the one-price equilibrium will Pareto dominate the semi-separating
equilibrium under similar conditions.
    It turns out it is easy to construct examples where this is not the case, even if there
are arbitrarily few low quality sellers. Even though both a semi-separating and a one-price
equilibrium exist, the equilibria are not Pareto comparable. Either some buyers or some
sellers prefer each equilibrium to the other. We also consider mixed equilibria, where small
subsets of sellers set a common price, while other sellers set different prices. We show that
under a mild regularity condition, the semi-separating equilibrium is not Pareto dominated
by a mixed equilibrium.
    Finally, we find that efficient allocations may require cross-subsidizing uninformed buyers,
which is impossible in any market equilibrium. In equilibrium, buyers may be indifferent
over a range of different prices, rationally anticipating that they will obtain sufficiently high
average quality at high prices so as to offset the high cost. In contrast, implementing an


                                               3
efficient allocation may require buyers to lose money at some prices and make money at other
prices. Such cross-subsidization of buyers is not a natural feature of a market environment,
but we show that it may be important for a Pareto optimal allocation.
    The analysis of our model with multidimensional private information differs from our
previous work in which investors’ discount factors were observable (Guerrieri and Shimer,
2014) and so there was only a single dimension of private information. In that model, we
found a unique fully-separating equilibrium in which higher quality assets trade at higher
prices in less liquid markets. The predictions of our two models differ in a number of ways.
Most importantly, we find that a continuum of equilibria exist in this environment, which
allows us to compare welfare across equilibria. Moreover, we show that Pareto efficient
allocations may require cross-subsidization of both buyers and sellers.
    In addition, even if we were to focus on the semi-separating equilibrium in this envi-
ronment, the nature of the equilibrium differs qualitatively between the two papers. With
multidimensional private information there is price dispersion for assets of the same quality
and heterogeneous assets sell for the same price. This is relevant for any empirical analysis
of the relationship between price and quality. It is also important for information transmis-
sion through prices. In a semi-separating equilibrium, buyers can learn something about the
quality of their asset from its price, but they cannot learn everything. In our prior work,
there was a one-to-one mapping between asset quality and price, so equilibrium prices fully-
revealed an asset’s quality. This leads to the possibility that in a dynamic extension of our
model, multidimensional private information leads to the gradual loss of private information
in secondary markets. We also find that with multidimensional private information, some
investors may be willing to buy and sell, depending on both their preferences and the qual-
ity of their asset. In contrast, with observable preferences, investors’ decision to buy or sell
depends only on their preferences.
    Although the setup of our paper is deliberately abstract, we believe the analysis offers
insight into many real-world markets, not just the market for used cars. The market for
existing homes shares many of the same characteristics as the used car market. Sellers have
multiple hidden motives for putting their home on the market and buyers only care about
some dimensions of the sellers’ private information. Our approach may be useful for un-
derstanding the joint determination of prices and sales volume in this important market.
Private information may also be important in some securities markets. For example, a num-
ber of recent empirical papers have analyzed the extent to which mortgage originators have
private information about the quality of mortgage pools, particularly for low-documentation
loans. (see, for example, Keys, Mukherjee, Seru and Vig, 2010; Demiroglu and James, 2012;
Jiang, Nelson and Vytlacil, 2014a,b; Piskorski, Seru and Witkin, 2015). Our framework may


                                               4
be useful for understanding price formation in this market as well. Moreover, to the extent
that buyers in primary markets learn some of the mortgage originators’ private information
from the transaction price, information asymmetries may persist in secondary markets, a
possibility that the empirical literature has thus far neglected. Finally, the nature of equi-
librium may have important implications for the efficacy of particular policy interventions.
Although a serious analysis of these possibilities goes beyond the scope of our paper, we
comment more on these possibilities in the conclusion.
    Our notion of equilibrium builds on Guerrieri, Shimer and Wright (2010), which in turn
builds on prior research, most notably Wilson (1980), Gale (1996), and Ellingsen (1997).
All of these papers share the idea that price dispersion can arise in the presence of adverse
selection, as privately-informed sellers can use a high selling price to signal a high quality
asset, if higher sale prices are associated with lower sale probabilities.
    The closest related paper in this research stream is Chang (2014). The two papers address
different questions. First, while Chang also assumes sellers differ both in their preferences
and in the quality of their asset, she collapses the analysis to a single dimension, equivalent
to our continuation value. This avoids the source of our multiple equilibria and hence most
of the questions we address in this paper. Second, Chang focuses on a number of specific
policy proposals, while we examine the efficiency properties of equilibrium more generally.
Third, we impose a restriction on parameters, that sellers with higher continuation values
have higher quality assets on average. The most novel parts of Chang are concerned with
situations in which this restriction is violated.
    There are numerous other small but important differences between the papers. Chang
(2014) looks at an environment in which the role of an investor as a buyer or seller is
determined exogenously, while we allow investors to choose whether to buy assets, sell assets,
do both, or do neither. Chang assumes that all buyers value any asset more than the average
seller does, which implies that in equilibrium, all assets are sold with a positive probability.
In our model, investors are heterogeneous and the decision to buy and sell is endogenous.
As a result, we find that some investors may choose not to attempt to sell their assets
and that some assets are transferred from investors who value them more to investors who
value them less. We believe these insights may be important for understanding real-world
trading patterns. For example, in the market for existing homes, the decision to sell or buy
is endogenous and such an endogeneity may be an important determinant of the equilibrium
allocation.
    There is a related line of research that studies how optimal mechanisms can allow for
separation when sellers are privately informed, in the spirit of Maskin and Tirole (1992). In
DeMarzo and Duffie (1999), sellers can commit to retain a portion of an asset in order to


                                               5
signal its quality. In a similar spirit, in Chari, Shourideh and Zetlin-Jones (2014), buyers
offer sellers a menu of contracts, inducing sellers of high quality assets to sell a small amount
of their holdings at a high price. Both of these papers focus on environments in which asset
quality is private information but sellers’ preferences are common knowledge, while we allow
for multidimensional private information. More fundamentally, we show that markets can
achieve the same outcome through a shortage of buyers and rationing. While there is no
mathematical difference between probabilistic sales and sales of a fraction of asset holdings
in our environment, the distinction may again be important for understanding real-world
trading patterns. For example, sellers do not retain a fraction of their home to signal its
quality.
    Daley and Green (2012) obtain a separating outcome using a different approach, again in
a model with homogeneous sellers who are privately informed about their asset quality. They
show that delay in a dynamic model plays a similar role to sale probabilities in our static
setting. In their equilibrium, a sequence of short-lived buyers offer an increasing sequence
of sale prices. Sellers with a low valuation sell quickly while those with a high valuation sell
later, again dissipating some of the gains from trade. We show that the same dissipation of
rents can occur in a static environment through an endogenous shortage of buyers at high
prices.
    Still other papers have developed models of adverse selection in which all trade occurs at
a single price. In some of these papers, such as Eisfeldt (2004) and Kurlat (2013), investors
are not allowed to consider trading at a different price. In other papers, such as Tirole (2012)
and Chiu and Koeppl (2011), the equilibrium is characterized by a pooling price for traded
assets.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic model. In Section 3 we
define our notion of equilibrium with multidimensional private information and establish by
construction that our model exhibits a continuum of equilibria, including the semi-separating
and one-price equilibria. In Section 4 we define an equilibrium with unidimensional private
information, which imposes that sellers with identical preferences behave identically and that
buyers believe that they will behave identically. We also establish uniqueness of the semi-
separating equilibrium under this restricted notion of equilibrium. In Section 5 we explore
whether equilibria can be Pareto ranked and show that a semi-separating equilibrium may
be Pareto dominated by an incentive-feasible allocation, but not by any other equilibrium.
This is because, even though sellers may pool, buyers cannot cross-subsidize each other in
equilibrium. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of why the notion of equilibrium may be
important.



                                               6
2       Model
The economy lasts for two periods, t = 1, 2. It is populated by a unit measure of risk-neutral
investors. A typical investor i ∈ [0, 1] has a discount factor βi ≥ 0 and is endowed with
ei ≥ 0 units of the period 1 consumption good and ai ≥ 0 units of an asset that produces
the period 2 consumption good as a dividend in period 2. Assets are heterogeneous in their
dividend. If ai > 0, let δi ≥ 0 denote the amount of the period 2 consumption good that each
unit of i’s asset produces.1 Both consumption goods and assets are divisible. Consumption
must be nonnegative in each period.
    At the beginning of period 1, each investor privately observes his type, that is, his dis-
count factor βi and his endowment (ei , ai , δi ). Next, there is a market in which period 1
consumption goods and assets are exchanged. We refer to an investor with ei > 0 as a
potential buyer and an investor with ai > 0 as a potential seller and suppress the word
“potential” in the remainder of the paper. We allow for the possibility, but do not require,
that some investors are both buyers and sellers. We assume that an investor can only buy
assets using the period 1 consumption good that he holds at the start of the period, and
so must consume any period 1 consumption goods he gets from selling his asset.2 After
the market meets, investors consume any remaining period 1 consumption good, c1 ≥ 0.
In period 2, each investor consumes the dividends generated by the assets he holds in that
period, c2 ≥ 0. An investor with discount factor β seeks to maximize E(c1 + βc2 ), where
expectations recognize that the investor may be uncertain about whether he will succeed in
buying and selling assets and about the quality of the assets that he buys.
    The identity of individual investors is unimportant for our analysis, only the distribution
                                                                               R1
of goods and assets across investors with different preferences. Let Gb (β) ≡ 0 I(βi ≤ β)ei di
with closed support B ⊂ R+ denote the initial measure of the period 1 consumption good
held by investors with discount factor smaller than β, where I is an indicator function, equal
                                                                 R1
to 1 if its argument is true and zero otherwise. Let Gs (β, δ) ≡ 0 I(βi ≤ β ∩ δi ≤ δ)ai di with
closed support S ⊂ R2+ denote the initial measure of assets with dividend less than δ held
by investors who have a discount factor less than β. It will also be useful to define a seller’s
                                                                             R1
continuation value per unit of asset that is not sold, v ≡ βδ. Let H(v) ≡ 0 I(βi δi ≤ v)ai di
with closed support V ⊂ R+ denote the measure of assets held by sellers with continuation
value less than v. It is useful to define the lowest continuation value, v ≡ min V . For
expositional convenience, we assume that Gb , Gs , and H are atomless and let gb , gs , and h
denote the associated densities.
    1
    We assume for notational convenience that an investor only holds one type of asset.
    2
    Other assumptions are possible here. While they would change some of our calculations, we do not
believe that changing this “consumption-good-in-advance” constraint would alter our main results.


                                                 7
   Finally, let Γ : V → R+ denote the expected dividend conditional on an investor’s
continuation value v. It is straightforward to prove that

                                                      gs vδ , δ dδ
                                                   R           
                                           Γ(v) ≡ R 1 v  ,
                                                       g , δ dδ
                                                     δ s δ


We focus our analysis on the case where the following restriction holds:3

Assumption 1 Γ is continuous and increasing.

Note that Γ depends on Gs and so this is an assumption on a primitive model object. We
also believe that this is a natural assumption: knowing that a seller’s continuation value
βδ is slightly higher leads us to conclude that her asset quality δ is slightly higher. Not
surprisingly, it is easy to find distribution functions that satisfy this restriction.
    Two concrete examples may help to illuminate this assumption. Suppose β and δ have
independent Pareto distributions, Gs (β, δ) = (1−β −αβ )(1−δ −αδ ) on [1, ∞)2 for some positive
constants αβ and αδ . Then

                              αβ v −αδ − αδ v −αβ             (αβ − αδ )(v αβ −αδ +1 − 1)
                H(v) = 1 −                        and Γ(v) =                              ,
                                    αβ − αδ                  (αβ − αδ + 1)(v αβ −αδ − 1)

both continuous and increasing on [1, ∞).
    Alternatively, suppose Gs (β, δ) = β αβ δ αδ on [0, 1]2 for some positive constants αβ and
αδ . Then
                                                      (αδ − αβ ) 1 − v αδ −αβ +1
                                                                                 
                       αβ v αδ − αδ v αβ
               H(v) =                    and Γ(v) =                               ,
                           αβ − αδ                   (αδ − αβ + 1) 1 − v αδ −αβ
again both continuous and increasing on [0, 1].


3         Multidimensional Private Information
This section defines and characterizes equilibrium with multidimensional private information.
We describe two such equilibria and explain how to construct many more. Despite the
multiplicity of equilibrium, our structure puts some restriction on outcomes, and so we
conclude the section by discussing those.
    3
        Much of the analysis in Chang (2014) is focused on environments in which Γ is not monotonic.




                                                       8
3.1     Definition of Equilibrium
We start by developing our notion of equilibrium. During the first period, a continuum of
markets, each characterized by a nonnegative price, opens up. Each buyer has to decide
whether to consume his endowment of the period 1 consumption good or to use it to try to
buy assets and, if he tries to buy assets, he has to decide at which price, pb (β). Each seller
has to decide whether to try to sell his assets or not and, if he sells, he has to decide at
which price, ps (β, δ). Each unit of asset and each unit of the period 1 consumption good
can be brought to only one market, so an effort to sell (or buy) an asset at a price p is also
a commitment not to sell (or buy) the asset at any other price.4
    In making their decisions, investors must form beliefs about the trading probability and
the type of assets for sale at any nonnegative price, even those not offered in equilibrium.
Let Θ(p) ∈ R+ ∪ ∞ denote the market tightness associated with price p, that is, the ratio of
the amount of the consumption good that buyers want to use to buy at price p, relative to
the cost of the assets that sellers want to sell at price p. If Θ(p) < 1, there are not enough
goods to buy all the assets for sale at price p and the sellers are randomly rationed. If instead
Θ(p) > 1, there are more goods than needed to buy all the assets for sale at price p and the
buyers are randomly rationed. Specifically, a seller who attempts to trade at price p expects
to sell with probability min{Θ(p), 1}, or equivalently to sell a fraction min{Θ(p), 1} of his
assets. Similarly, a buyer who attempts to trade at price p expects to buy with probability
min{Θ(p)−1 , 1}, or equivalently to use a fraction min{Θ(p)−1 , 1} of his goods to buy assets.
A seller who is rationed keeps his assets and in period 2 consumes the dividend produced by
it. A buyer who is rationed consumes his period 1 consumption goods.
    In addition, let ∆(p) denote buyers’ belief about the average dividend among the assets
offered for sale at a price p. If some assets are sold at a price p, these beliefs must be
consistent with the quality of assets offered for sale. Our definition of equilibrium also rules
out equilibria sustained by unreasonable beliefs about the quality of assets for sale in markets
that are inactive. Our definition builds on our prior work (Guerrieri, Shimer and Wright,
2010), which in turn builds on earlier research, most notably Wilson (1980), Gale (1996),
and Ellingsen (1997).

Definition 1 An equilibrium with multidimensional private information is four functions
ps : S → R+ , pb : B → R+ , Θ : R+ → R+ ∪ ∞, and ∆ : R+ → R+ satisfying the following
conditions:
  4
     We again assume for notational convenience that each investor must choose a single buy price and a
single sell price. Allowing an investor to divide his assets or consumption good and attempt to trade at
different prices would not affect the set of equilibria.



                                                   9
   1. Optimal Selling Decision: given Θ, for all (β, δ) ∈ S
                                                                         
                                 ps (β, δ) ∈ arg max min{Θ(p), 1}(p − βδ) ;
                                                       p≥βδ


   2. Optimal Buying Decision: given Θ and ∆, for all β ∈ B
                                                                               
                                                                   −1    β∆(p)
                            pb (β) ∈ arg max              min{Θ(p) , 1}        −1 ;
                                               p≥0                         p

   3. Beliefs: For all p ∈ R+ with Θ(p) < ∞,

       (a) if there exists a (β, δ) ∈ S with ps (β, δ) = p, ∆(p) = E(δ|ps (β 0 , δ 0 ) = p); otherwise
        (b) there exists a (β1 , δ1 ), (β2 , δ2 ) ∈ S with p ≥ max{β1 δ1 , β2 δ2 }, δ1 ≤ ∆(p) ≤ δ2 , and

                                 min{Θ(p0 ), 1}(p0 − β1 δ1 ) = arg 0max               min{Θ(p0 ), 1}(p0 − β2 δ2 ) ;
                                                                                                                
            p = arg 0max
                      p ≥β1 δ1                                            p ≥β2 δ2


   4. Market Clearing: for all p ≥ 0, dµb (p) = Θ(p) dµs (p), where
                                 ZZ                                               Z
                                                                                                gb (β)
                     µs (p) ≡                      gs (β, δ) dδ dβ and µb (p) ≡                        dβ
                                      ps (β,δ)≤p                                     pb (β)≤p   pb (β)

       are the measure of assets for sale at prices below p and the purchasing power of goods
       at prices below p. Moreover, if there exists a (β, δ) ∈ S with ps (β, δ) = p and Θ(p) > 0,
       then there exists a β 0 ∈ B with pb (β 0 ) = p; and if there exists a β ∈ B with pb (β) = p
       and Θ(p) < ∞, then there exists a (β 0 , δ 0 ) ∈ S with ps (β 0 , δ 0 ) = p.

    The first condition requires that sellers set optimal prices given their beliefs about the
difficulty of selling at each price. Each seller (β, δ) sets a price p for her asset, recognizing
that she will only succeed in selling with probability min{Θ(p), 1}, or equivalently only sells
this fraction of her assets.5 She gets p units of the consumption good per unit of asset sold
in period 1 but gives up δ units of the consumption good in period 2, which she values at
βδ. If she fails to sell, she gains nothing. We also impose the restriction that sellers never
set a price below their continuation value βδ, since such a strategy is weakly dominated.
    The second condition requires that buyers set optimal prices given their beliefs about
the difficulty of buying at each price and the quality of assets available at each price. Each
buyer β sets a price p for buying assets, recognizing that he will only succeed in buying
with probability min{Θ(p)−1 , 1}, or equivalently only buys using this fraction of his period
   5
    There is no loss of generality in assuming that she attempts to sell the asset. Attempting to sell at any
price p ≥ βδ always weakly dominates not selling the asset.

                                                            10
1 consumption good. He gets 1/p units of assets per unit of the consumption good, each of
which produces an expected dividend ∆(p) next period.6 If he fails to buy, he gains nothing.
    The third condition imposes restrictions on buyers’ beliefs. In particular, condition 3(a)
imposes that buyers’ beliefs about asset quality are consistent with the observed trading
patterns whenever possible. If at least one seller sets a price p, then the expected dividend
must be the average among the sellers who set that price.
    Condition 3(b) describes beliefs at prices that nobody sets, a refinement in the vein
of the intuitive criterion (Cho and Kreps, 1987) or divinity (Banks and Sobel, 1987). We
require that buyers must be able to rationalize the expected dividend as coming from some
probability distribution over sellers, each of whom finds this price weakly optimal. This
means that there must either be some seller (β, ∆(p)) with p ≥ β∆(p) who finds it optimal
to set the price p, or that there must be both a seller with a higher quality asset and a seller
with a lower quality asset who find this price optimal. In the latter case, appropriate weights
on those two sellers justify the expectation ∆(p).7
    One way to think about condition 3(b) is to imagine what would happen if a single buyer
set a price p that was not previously set in the market. Some sellers would respond by
offering some assets at that price, driving down the buyer-seller ratio until some investors
are indifferent between p and another price and no investor finds p strictly optimal. The
assumption states that buyers believe that if they purchase at this price, they will not buy
from some combination of the sellers who find this price weakly optimal.
    The fourth condition imposes market clearing. It requires that the buyer-seller ratio Θ(p)
at any price p is equal to the ratio of the measure of the purchasing power of buyers at price
p to the measure of sellers selling at that price. The last piece of this condition ensures that
this holds even if both measures are zero, yet a finite number of buyers or sellers sets price
p. For notational convenience alone, we do not impose that the buyer-seller ratio is exactly
equal to Θ(p) in this case.


3.2     Partial Characterization
Equilibrium imposes some restrictions on behavior. The first observation is that in order
for some sellers to be willing to set a high price and others to be willing to set a low price,
there must be a trade-off between the selling price and the selling probability. Moreover,
   6
     In any equilibrium with trade, Θ(p) = ∞ at sufficiently low prices p. Therefore buyers can always be
sure to consume in period 1 by setting a low price and so we do not give buyers the explicit option not to
buy.
   7
     In our previous research (Guerrieri, Shimer and Wright, 2010; Guerrieri and Shimer, 2014), the analogous
condition defined a probability distribution over seller types at each price p. None of the results in this paper
would change if we used that definition. We adopt this one for its notational simplicity.


                                                       11
sellers with different continuation values perceive the trade-off differently. If a seller with
some continuation value prefers the low price to the high price, then any seller with a lower
continuation value must have the same preferences. This leads to our first proposition:

Proposition 1 Consider an equilibrium with multidimensional private information. Take
any seller who sells with a positive probability. Then any other seller with a lower continu-
ation value sells with a weakly higher probability at a weakly lower price.

   The second observation is that buyers’ behavior is determined simply by the value they
place on period 2 consumption. Patient buyers buy, impatient buyers don’t buy, and the
marginal buyer is indifferent about buying all the assets. This implies that assets are priced
using the preferences of the marginal buyer:

Proposition 2 Consider an equilibrium with multidimensional private information. There
is a marginal buyer with discount factor β̂ who is indifferent about paying any price at which
assets are sold. All buyers who are more patient use all their period 1 consumption good to
buy assets and are indifferent about which price they pay. All buyers who are less patient do
not buy assets.

We prove these propositions in Appendix B.
    Equilibrium with multidimensional private information imposes some other restrictions
on behavior. For example, suppose a range of sellers with different continuation values pool
at a common price. Then a seller with a slightly lower continuation value must set a discretely
lower price; otherwise buyers would prefer to buy from the pool. The seller must also trade
with a discretely higher probability; otherwise she would prefer setting the pooling price.
Symmetrically, a seller with a slightly higher continuation value must set a discretely higher
price; otherwise buyers would prefer to buy from this seller rather than the pool. And the
sale probability must be discretely lower; otherwise sellers in the pool would prefer setting
this price. Still, these restrictions are quite weak. We illustrate this by discussing some of
the possible equilibria in the remainder of this section.


3.3    Semi-Separating Equilibrium
Suppose Assumption 1 holds and there are gains from trade with the average seller who has
the lowest continuation value. Appendix A.1 makes this “gains from trade” condition precise
and then characterizes an equilibrium with multidimensional private information in which
sellers set different prices if and only if they have different continuation values. We call such
an equilibrium semi-separating (rather than separating) to emphasize that sellers with the
same continuation value have different preferences and hold different quality assets. In a

                                               12
                                         1




                                                         con
                                                           sum
                                                               e
                                                                         buy




                       asset quality δ
                                                 try to sell

                                                                       buy and
                                                                      try to sell


                                         0
                                             0                   β̂                 1

                                                    discount factor β


                    Figure 1: Behavior in a semi-separating equilibrium.

semi-separating equilibrium, heterogeneous assets sell at the same price and the same asset
sells at heterogeneous prices. These outcomes are a joint consequence of the heterogeneity
in sellers’ preferences and the presence of multidimensional private information.
    In a semi-separating equilibrium, sellers set a price that is strictly increasing in their
continuation value, ps (β, δ) = P (βδ). They perceive a cost of setting a higher sale price, the
shortage of buyers at high prices. That is, Θ(p) is decreasing. The single crossing property
that drives Proposition 1 ensures that sellers with higher continuation values set higher prices,
because they are less concerned with the risk of failing to sell their assets. The difference in
seller continuation values across sale prices then delivers a steep enough relationship between
expected asset quality and sale price, ∆(p), so as to leave buyers indifferent about the price
they pay, consitent with Proposition 2.
    Figure 1 illustrates investors’ behavior in the semi-separating equilibrium. Investors are
divided into four groups. Patient investors with high quality assets buy other assets. Impa-
tient investors with low quality assets try to sell their asset. There are also patient investors
with low quality assets who try to sell their asset and buy other assets; and somewhat im-
patient investors with high quality assets who neither buy nor sell asset but simply consume
their endowment in each period.




                                                          13
3.4    One-Price Equilibrium
We can also construct an equilibrium with multidimensional private information in which
all trade takes place at a single price. In this equilibrium, sellers perceive a simple choice:
they can sell for sure at p∗ or they cannot sell. From the perspective of a buyer, the quality
of assets available at prices above p∗ does not justify the higher price, and so buyers are
only willing to buy at p∗ . The existence of this equilibrium imposes some restrictions on the
support of the seller’s type distribution S; see Appendix A.2 for details.
    Our construction of the one-price equilibrium ensures that some seller sets every price
between p∗ and the highest continuation value in the seller population. By doing so, we
avoid imposing any restrictions on buyers’ off-the-equilibrium-path beliefs. For this reason,
a one-price equilibrium with multidimensional private information is robust to standard
equilibrium refinements based on forward inducation (Cho and Kreps, 1987; Banks and
Sobel, 1987).
    Eisfeldt (2004) and Kurlat (2013) assume that all trade occurs at price p∗ . They restrict
trading opportunities so a seller has no technology for selling his asset at a price different
than p∗ . We allow sellers to set such prices, yet all trade occurs at p∗ in a one-price equi-
librium. Our approach clarifies that the existence of a one-price equilibrium is sensitive to
buyers’ beliefs ∆(p) at prices p > p∗ . It might be most natural to think that all sellers
with continuation value just above p∗ set a price just above p∗ . If that were the case, and
Assumption 1 holds, buyers would anticipate being able to purchase an asset with expected
quality just above Γ(p∗ ) at such prices. Since the expected quality of assets for sale at p∗ ,
∆(p∗ ), is discretely less than this—it is the average quality of assets held by sellers with
continuation values less than or equal to p∗ —buyers would find it more profitable to pay this
higher price, breaking the one-price equilibrium.
    Instead, we support the one-price equilibrium through buyers’ belief that sellers with a
continuation value just above p∗ will set a price just above p∗ only if they have the lowest
quality asset consistent with the continuation value. This pushes down buyers’ beliefs and
supports the equilibrium. Moreover, by construction these beliefs are consistent with sellers’
actual behavior in equilibrium; some sellers do set a price just above p∗ , justifying these
beliefs.


3.5    Other Equilibria
Once one understands how to construct the one-price equilibrium, it is easy to construct
many other equilibria. For example, we show in Appendix A.3 that our model admits a
continuum of one-price equilibria, each characterized by a sale price p∗ , a marginal buyer


                                              14
β̂, and a sale probability θ∗ < 1. At lower prices, the sale probability is higher than θ∗ ,
eventually reaching 1 at some p < p∗ . The sale probability Θ(p) in this interval leaves the
seller with the lowest continuation value indifferent about charging any price p ∈ [p, p∗ ] and
induces sellers with higher continuation values to set the equilibrium price p∗ . Buyers do
not prefer buying at a higher price because they believe that they will only encounter sellers
with low quality assets relative to their continuation value, as we have discussed above. They
also do not prefer buying at a lower price because they again anticipate getting lower quality
assets, lower than the average quality held by sellers with the lowest continuation value.
    Building on this logic, we show in Appendix A.3 that our model can also admit a con-
tinuum of equilibrium with n prices for any positive n. It may also exhibit a continuum of
semi-separating equilibria, again distinguished by the highest selling price (and lowest selling
probability) of an investor with the lowest continuation value. The behavior that supports
these equilibria is similar to that which supports the other one-price equilibria.
    Finally, we show in Appendix A.4 that our model also admits equilibria that combine
some pooling prices that attract a positive measure of buyers and sellers with some intervals
where sellers with different continuation values set different prices. We call these “mixed
equilibria.” We use limiting versions of these equilibria, with very small mass points, in
our normative analysis in Section 5, treating them as perturbations of the semi-separating
equilibrium.


4      Unidimensional Private Information
In this section, we propose a more restrictive equilibrium definition that effectively collapses
private information to one dimension. We characterize such an equilibrium and, extending
the results in our previous work, we show that it is unique.


4.1      Definition of Equilibrium
An equilibrium with unidimensional private information imposes that all sellers with the
same preference ordering over lotteries set the same selling price and that all buyers believe
that such sellers always do so:

Definition 2 An equilibrium with unidimensional private information is an equilibrium with
multidimensional private information {ps , pb , Θ, ∆} satisfying

    1. Seller Behavior: for all (β, δ), (β 0 , δ 0 ) ∈ S with βδ = β 0 δ 0 , ps (β, δ) = ps (β 0 , δ 0 ); and



                                                       15
  2. Buyer Belief: for all p ∈ R+ with Θ(p) < ∞, there exists a v1 , v2 ∈ V with p ≥
     max{v1 , v2 }, Γ(v1 ) ≤ ∆(p) ≤ Γ(v2 ), and

                        min{Θ(p0 ), 1}(p0 − v1 ) = arg max min{Θ(p0 ), 1}(p0 − v2 ) .
                                                                                  
            p = arg max
                    0                                  0
                    p ≥v1                               p ≥v2


    We tighten the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private information in two
ways. First, we modify condition 1 by restricting sellers with the same continuation value to
set the same selling price. Second, we modify condition 3(b) by imposing that buyers believe
that sellers with the same continuation value behave in the same manner. Both modifica-
tions are important for the uniqueness result that follows. For example, the construction
of the one-price equilibrium with multidimensional private information in Section 3.4 relies
on sellers with the same continuation value behaving differently in equilibrium. The first
condition in the definition of equilibrium with unidimensional private information precludes
this possibility. However, we could also support the same allocation with sellers with the
same continuation value setting the same equilibrium price, but buyers not believing that
this is the case at prices that no one sets in equilibrium. The second condition precludes
this possibility.
    The definition of equilibrium with unidimensional private information might be appealing
because it imposes that sellers with the same cardinal preferences over prices behave and
are expected to behave in the same way. For example, Chang (2014) defines a seller’s
type to be her continuation value, rather than the separate components (β, δ). This hard-
wires the restriction into her analysis. However, we believe the notion of equilibrium with
multidimensional private information is useful for several reasons.
    First, we prove in Proposition 3 below that there is a unique equilibrium with unidimen-
sional private information and so multiple equilibria are intimately connected to multidi-
mensional private information. Many of our normative results concern welfare comparisons
across equilibria, and so having multiple equilibria is central to these results.
    Second, defining a seller’s type to be her continuation value v rather than the separate
components (β, δ) obscures the economics of the model. In an Arrow-Debreu economy,
individuals’ preferences (β) and endowments (δ) are distinct concepts. Private information
does not eliminate the distinction between preferences and endowments and there is no good
reason why it should. This distinction is important for a number of issues. For example, we
are interested in understanding the extent to which markets transfer assets from low value
(low β) sellers to high value (high β) buyers and whether inefficient trades from high value
sellers to low value buyers can occur in equilibrium. We are also interested in understanding
whether high or low quality assets are more likely to trade in equilibrium. Neither of these


                                             16
questions is naturally asked when the seller’s type is defined directly as her continuation
value and the buyer’s value is simply assumed to be Γ(v).
    Third, and most fundamentally, there is no good theoretical justification for imposing
that all individuals with the same preferences behave the same. For example, equilibrium
often requires that buyers with the same preferences pay different prices. A restriction that
any two investors with the same preferences over lotteries behave the same would generally
preclude the existence of equilibrium.


4.2    Unique Equilibrium
Aware of those concerns, we still think it is useful to characterize an equilibrium with unidi-
mensional private information. In particular, we prove that such an equilibrium is unique:

Proposition 3 Under Assumption 1, there exists a unique equilibrium with unidimensional
private information. In particular,

  1. if βΓ(v) ≤ v for all β ∈ B, the equilibrium features no trade at any positive price;

  2. otherwise, the equilibrium features trade and is semi-separating: sellers with higher
     continuation value sell at a higher price with lower probability;

We prove this result in Appendix B. The proposition extends uniqueness results in our
earlier work (Guerrieri, Shimer and Wright, 2010; Guerrieri and Shimer, 2014), but the
proof strategy is completely different. This is because those papers assumed that there
were a finite number of types of sellers and single type of buyer, while here we allow for a
continuum of “types” v as well as heterogeneous buyers.
     When βΓ(v) ≤ v for all β ∈ B, there are no gains from trade with the seller who has
the lowest continuation value. In this case, the unique equilibrium with unidimensional
information features no trade. If there were trade of any other type of asset, the owners of
the worst asset would pretend to own such an asset and break the equilibrium. Otherwise,
the unique equilibrium with unidimensional private information is equivalent to the semi-
separating one we described in Section 3.3. The seller with the lowest continuation value sells
for sure at a low price, while sellers with higher continuation values, up to some threshold
p̄, sell with lower probabilities at higher prices. Sellers with still higher continuation values
fail to sell their assets. Buyers are willing to pay heterogeneous prices because they expect
to get higher quality assets when they pay a higher prices.




                                               17
4.3     The Role of Beliefs
We comment briefly on the role of off-the-equilibrium path beliefs in the definition of an
equilibrium. Consider a relaxed version of the definitions. Rather than part 3(b) in the
definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private information and the second part of
the definition of equilibrium with unidimensional private information (the analog of 3(b)),
we require only that if no seller sets a price p, there must be a v ∈ V with Γ(v) = ∆(p).
That is, we require that buyers have some belief about the seller who offers an off-equilibrium
price p, but do not require that they believe it is the seller with the strongest incentive to
do so. This alternative assumption opens the door to additional equilibria. For example the
one-price equilibrium in Section 3.4 would be an equilibrium with unidimensional private
information, according to this relaxed definition.
    How does the set of allocations consistent with this relaxed version of equilibrium with
unidimensional private information compare to the set of allocations consistent with equi-
librium with multidimensional private information? In general, it is easiest to support a
particular allocation by giving buyers the most pessimistic “off-the-equilibrium-path” beliefs
abut sellers’ asset quality. In the relaxed unidimensional private information problem, this
means buyers believe that ∆(p) = Γ(v) at any price not offered in equilibrium. In the mul-
tidimensional private information problem, buyers believe ∆(p) is equal to the lowest asset
quality among the sellers who find price p to be weakly optimal.8
    These two beliefs are not the same, and so in general the sets of allocations are different.
To be concrete, consider the other semi-separating equilibria with multidimensional private
information mentioned in Section 3.5. In these equilibria, there is a one-to-one mapping
between a seller’s continuation value and the price she sets, ps (β, δ) = P (βδ); however, in
contrast to the usual semi-separating equilibrium, even sellers with the lowest continuation
value are rationed. This is because buyers believe that if they pay less than P (v), they will
get an asset quality below the average of the sellers with the lowest continuation value, Γ(v).
Such beliefs are inconsistent with the relaxed version of equilibrium with unidimensional
private information, where the worst possible belief is ∆(p) = Γ(v), so the hypothetical
seller is average among those with the lowest continuation value.
    Conversely, we find that if the support of the buyer type distribution is an interval B and
the support of the seller type distribution is a rectangle S = B × D for some interval D, then
any relaxed equilibrium with unidimensional private information is also an equilibrium with
   8
    In the multidimensional private information problem, beliefs need not be off-the-equilibrium-path. In-
stead, sellers may actually offer all prices in equilibrium. See the again the construction of the one-price
equilibrium with multidimensional private information in Appendix A.2.




                                                    18
multidimensional private information.9 If for some continuation values, the upper bound on
the support of the seller’s discount factor is less than the highest buyer type, we can reverse
this conclusion as well.


5       Efficient Allocations
This section explores the efficiency of the equilibria of our model. We address this in two
ways. First, given the plethora of equilibria with multidimensional private information, we
ask whether the equilibria can be Pareto ranked. In particular, we examine whether pooling
some or all of the sellers can improve welfare relative to the semi-separating equilibrium.
Second, we ask whether other incentive feasible allocations—that is, allocations that respect
the investors’ private information and the economy’s resource constraint—Pareto dominate
the semi-separating equilibrium. We find that this may be the case, even when the semi-
separating equilibrium is not Pareto dominated by another equilibrium. This highlights some
of the constraints that equilibrium places on allocations.
    We focus most of our discussion in the text on a particular example and leave a more
general analysis, including a formal definition of the set of incentive feasible allocations,
to Appendix C. We assume β and δ have independent Pareto distributions, Gs (β, δ) =
(1 − β −α−1 )(1 − δ −α ) on [1, ∞)2 for some positive constant α. This implies

                                                                                  1+v
                      H(v) = 1 − (α + 1)v −α + αv −α−1           and Γ(v) =           .
                                                                                   2

In the semi-separating equilibrium, the seller’s trading probability depends on the identity
of the marginal buyer β̂, but is independent of the parameter α:
                           
                                        β̂
                              β̂+v(β̂−2) 2−β̂
                                                                                        
                                                      β̂ > 2 or β̂ < 2 and v < β̂/(2 − β̂)
                           
                           
                            2(β̂−1)
                           
             Θ(P (v)) =                               β̂ < 2 and v ≥ β̂/(2 − β̂)
                           0
                           
                                                if
                           
                           e1−v
                           
                                                      β̂ = 2.

The identity of the marginal buyer depends on the distribution of the consumption good
    Consider, for example, the one price equilibrium, where all sellers with v ≤ p∗ sell for p∗ and the marginal
    9

buyer has a discount factor β̂. To support this allocation, it is sufficient to show that buyers believe that
they will get an asset with dividend less than ∆(p∗ ) when they pay a higher price. In a relaxed equilibrium
with unidimensional private information, buyers believe the dividend is Γ(v); this is smaller than ∆(p∗ ),
since Γ is increasing and ∆(p∗ ) is equal to the average value of Γ(v) among all v ≤ p∗ . In an equilibrium
with multidimensional private information, buyers believe the dividend is p∗ / max B, the worst asset held by
a seller with continuation value p∗ (using the seller’s full support assumption). This again must be smaller
than ∆(p∗ ), because buyers’ indifference condition requires ∆(p∗ ) = p∗ /β̂ and β̂ ≤ max B.


                                                      19
across buyers Gb (β). Through a judicious choice of Gb , we can set this equal to any desired
value. For this reason, we treat β̂ parametrically in this section.


5.1     Semi-Separating versus One-Price Equilibrium
A cost of the semi-separating equilibrium is that a seller with a high continuation value must
convince a buyer that she has a high quality asset by undertaking an inefficient activity, set-
ting a price that ensures she is unlikely to sell her good. In contrast, in the one-price equilib-
rium, any seller who wants to sell at that price can sell for sure. We know from Rothschild
and Stiglitz (1976) and many other papers that pooling can be Pareto superior to separating.
The cost of pooling is that sellers with low continuation values are cross-subsidized, while
the benefit is that it eliminates the wasteful signal. Since in this example, there are very
few sellers with a low continuation value—formally, H(1) = H 0 (1) = 0—one might expect
that the one-price equilibrium Pareto dominates the semi-separating equilibrium. It turns
out that this is not the case.
     This is easiest to see if the marginal buyer has a high discount factor, β̂ ≥ 2, in the
semi-separating equilibrium. In that case, all sellers sell with some probability in the semi-
separating equilibrium, but not in the one-price equilibrium. Any seller whose continuation
value exceeds the one price p∗ prefers the semi-separating equilibrium, in which she trades,
to the one-price equilibrium, in which she lives in autarky.
     The same is true if the identity of the marginal buyer in the semi-separating equilibrium
is lower, β̂ < 2, so all sellers with a continuation value below β̂/(2 − β̂) sell with positive
probability. The proof is a bit more cumbersome. First, it is straightforward to prove that
all buyers are better off in any equilibrium where the identity of the marginal buyer is lower.
Therefore, the identity of the marginal buyer in the one-price equilibrium must be weakly
lower than the identity of the marginal buyer in the semi-separating equilibrium, say β̂p ≤ β̂,
if the former is to Pareto dominate the latter. Next, we can prove algebraically that if β̂p ≤ β̂,
the one-price equilibrium price, p∗ , is strictly less than β̂/(2 − β̂). Sellers with continuation
values in the open interval (p∗ , β̂/(2 − β̂)) again trade in the semi-separating equilibrium but
live in autarky in the one-price equilibrium, and so must prefer the former to the latter, a
contradiction.
     Of course, it is possible to construct other examples where the one-price equilibrium
Pareto dominates the semi-separating equilibrium.10 There may be very little trade in the
semi-separating equilibrium because buyers value the asset held by sellers with a low con-
  10
    Convesely, it is easy to show that the semi-separating equilibrium does not Pareto dominate the one-
price equilibrium for any buyer and seller distributions Gb and Gs for which both equilibria exist. Either
the seller with the lowest continuation value or buyers or both prefer the one-price equilibrium.


                                                   20
tinuation value only a bit more than do the sellers. A one-price equilibrium may allow for
trade at a much higher price, where the buyers’ valuations significantly exceed the sellers’.


5.2      Perturbing the Semi-Separating Equilibrium
Even when the one-price equilibrium does not Pareto dominate the semi-separating equilib-
rium, like in our example, the basic idea that pooling sellers may be welfare enhancing seems
plausible. In this section, we argue that, under mild assumptions, this idea is incorrect, at
least if we consider only allocations that are consistent with our notion of equilibrium with
multidimensional private information.
    We consider smaller pools of sellers. For example, we could look at an equilibrium in
which all sellers with continuation values in some interval, say βδ ∈ (v − ε, v + ε), set a
common price. Sellers with other continuation values set a price that is strictly increasing in
their continuation value. More generally, in Appendix A.4, we describe a mixed equilibrium
as a set of points v1 < · · · < vn , and non-overlapping pools of positive radius ε1 , . . . , εn
around those points. Any two sellers set the same price if and only if they have the same
continuation value or are members of the same pool.11 Our analysis in that Appendix shows
that we can construct an equilibrium with multidimensional private information of this form
under fairly general conditions; however equilibrium imposes some strong restrictions on
prices and trading probabilities. Once we account for these restrictions, we find that such
equilibria generally cannot Pareto dominate the semi-separating equilibrium.
    The first restriction is that the pooling price must be fair given the quality of the assets
sold in the pool. A fair price leaves buyers indifferent between buying at the pooling price
or buying at a price offered by a different seller who is not part of the pool. This implies
that a seller with continuation value vi − εi (respectively, vi + εi ) must set a price discretely
below (respectively, above) the pooling price, P (vi − εi ) < P (vi ) < P (vi − εi ), reflecting the
difference in asset quality.
    The second restriction is that the trading probabilities must give sellers an incentive to
set the postulated price. This means that the sale probability must drop discretely at both
ends of the pool, Θ(P (vi − εi )) > Θ(P (vi )) > Θ(P (vi − εi )), and the size of the drop must
leave sellers with continuation value vi − εi and vi + εi just indifferent about setting the
pooling price.
    Although it is difficult to analyze the full scope of such equilibria, we consider the limit
as the radius of the pools vanishes. That is, we look at small perturbations of the semi-
separating equilibrium. We find that under weak conditions, weaker than our specific Pareto
  11
     That is, for all (β, δ) and (β 0 , δ 0 ), ps (β, δ) = ps (β 0 , δ 0 ) if and only if βδ = β 0 δ 0 or there exists an
i ∈ {1, . . . , n} with βδ ∈ (vi − εi , vi + εi ) and β 0 δ 0 ∈ (vi − εi , vi + εi ).


                                                          21
example, no such equilibrium Pareto dominates the semi-separating equilibrium:

Proposition 4 Impose Assumption 1 and that the elasticity of Γ is smaller than 2. There
is no mixed equilibrium with arbitrarily small pools {εi }ni=1 that Pareto dominates the semi-
separating equilibrium.

We prove this result in Appendix B. We first show that if the identity of the marginal buyer
is different in the mixed equilibrium, the two equilibria are not Pareto comparable. We then
prove that if the marginal buyer were the same and all sellers were weakly better off in the
mixed equilibrium, then the mixed equilibrium would require transferring more resources
from buyers to sellers in period 1 and back again in period 2. This is inconsistent with a
constant identity of the marginal buyer.
    The condition on the elasticity of Γ being smaller than 2 is only a sufficient condition
and we view it as a weak one. For example, if all sellers have the same discount factor, the
elasticity is 1. In our Pareto example, the elasticity is always strictly smaller than 1 and so
there is no Pareto improving perturbation of the semi-separating equilibrium. An elasticity
larger than 2 means that a seller with twice as high a continuation value has an asset that is
at least four times as good on average, and so on average a much lower continuation value.


5.3         Cross-Subsidizing Buyers
If pooling sellers is not welfare enhancing, does that mean that the semi-separating equilib-
rium is Pareto efficient? Within the set of equilibrium allocations, the only feasible deviation
from the semi-separating equilibrium involves pooling sellers, so the answer is “yes.” But
the underlying economic environment allows for other possibile allocations. We find that it
is sometimes feasible to raise welfare by cross-subsidizing buyers who pay different prices.
    We return to the example to illustrate this point. Assume now that α = 3 and β̂ = 2 in
the semi-separating equilibrium.12 We construct a Pareto improvement by creating two pools
of sellers, one containing all individuals with v ∈ [1, 1.01], the other containing all individuals
with v ∈ [8.3, 11.3]. Every seller who is a member of a pool trades with the raw average
value of Θ(P (v)) for that group of sellers in the semi-separating equilibrium. Every seller
who is not a member of a pool trades with the same probability as in the semi-separating
equilibrium. Finally, the sale price ensures that each seller finds it optimal to trade at the
appropriate price.
    The proposed allocation is not an equilibrium because buyers are not indifferent about
which price they pay, inconsistent with Proposition 2. It turns out that the quality of assets
    12
         The identity of theR marginal buyer β̂ is endogenous. Such an equilibrium exists if and only if
                              ∞
                 = 1.280 = 1 P (v)Θ(P (v))h(v)dv, where P (v) = β̂Γ(v) = 1 + v and Θ(P (v)) = e1−v .
R
       g (β)dβ
    β≥2 b


                                                     22
sold by the pool of low value sellers is high relative to the price of the pool, while the quality
of assets sold by the pool of high value sellers is low relative to the price of the pool. In
equilibrium, buyers get to choose their buying price and so no buyer would be willing to buy
from the high value pool; however, we find that the marginal buyer would prefer buying a
share of both pools rather than not participating in the market at all. That is, the proposed
allocation requires cross-subsidizing buyers.
    There is no inherent reason why cross-subsidizing buyers is infeasible, although it is ruled
out by our notion of equilibrium. For example, in another environment, a buyer might be
able to decide whether he wants to buy, but he is not able to decide on the purchase price.
Instead, he buys a lottery ticket and is committed to buying whatever bundle the lottery
instructs him to buy. The proposed allocation yields a sufficiently low average price that the
marginal buyer is willing to buy a lottery ticket.
    Whether allocating buyers to prices through lotteries is feasible depends on the com-
mitment technology available. If the buyer can refuse to buy when he does not like the
outcome of the lottery, this outcome may be unattainable. Instead, a Pareto improvement
from the semi-separating equilibrium may require explicit cross-subsidization of buyers who
are instructed to pay different prices.
    Despite this example, there are also situations in which we can conclude that the semi-
separating equilibrium is Pareto efficient. Establishing this requires a significant investment
in new notation and so we place the relevant results in Appendix C, where we define the set
of feasible allocations. Propositions 6 and 7 in the appendix give necessary and sufficient
conditions for the semi-separating equilibrium to be Pareto efficient. In our example, we find
that the semi-separating equilibrium is never Pareto efficient if the Pareto parameter is big,
α > 2, and the identity of the marginal buyer is large, β̂ ≥ 2. Otherwise, Pareto efficiency
hinges on the distribution of buyer preferences.


6     Conclusion
This paper develops and analyzes an environment in which sellers have multidimensional pri-
vate information and buyers only care about one dimension of the private information. Our
model delivers multiple equilibria which may sometimes be Pareto-rankable. Collapsing the
private information to single dimension eliminates the equilibrium multiplicity and delivers a
unique semi-separating equilibrium. In such an equilibrium, sellers who are eager to sell set
a low price and sell with a high probability, while less motivated sellers set a high price and
sell with a low or zero probability. Buyers are willing to pay a range of prices, knowing that
they will be rewarded with high quality on average when they pay a high price. In particular,

                                               23
the marginal buyer is indifferent about buying any of the assets offered for sale. We also
find that the semi-separating equilibrium can be Pareto inefficient even if no equilibrium
Pareto dominates it. This is because efficient allocations may require cross-subsidization of
uninformed buyers, not just informed sellers.
    The type of equilibrium matters for two reasons that we have not yet discussed. The
first concerns how private information is transmitted in a dynamic setting. Suppose, for
example, that only the initial owner (say a mortgage originator) of an asset (a mortgage
pool) can observe its quality, but future owners know the price they paid for the asset. In a
one-price equilibrium, most information about asset quality is lost in the secondary market
since prices are a coarse aggregator of information. In a semi-separating equilibrium, buyers
receive more nuanced information since different buyers pay different prices. Therefore, in
a semi-separating equilibrium in which past transactions prices are not observed by other
market participants, private information can get transmitted to secondary asset markets. It
would be interesting to explore this possibility both theoretically, in a dynamic extension of
this model, and empirically, investigating the secondary market for certain mortgage-backed
securities, such as those backed by low-documentation loans.
    Second, the response to policy interventions is likely to depend on the nature of the equi-
librium. For example, a small amount of bad assets can have a big effect on a semi-separating
equilibrium, in an extreme case leading to a breakdown in trade. An asset purchase program
that removes the lowest-quality assets from the market can then have a big impact on asset
prices and trading volumes. In contrast, a small intervention is unlikely to substantially alter
a one-price equilibrium, since the equilibrium by its nature depends on all the inframarginal
traders. While our model is too stylized to be calibrated, we believe these observations are
likely to carry over to a quantitatively serious model of private information.
    Finally, the multiplicity of equilibria suggests new possibilities and new concerns for pol-
icy intervention. On the one hand, there may be policies that move the economy from one
equilibrium to another by changing traders’ beliefs about the two key equilibrium objects,
the market tightness Θ and the average quality of available assets ∆. To the extent that
the economy is trapped in a Pareto inefficient equilibrium, this opens the door to inex-
pensive welfare-enhancing interventions. On the other hand, any policy intervention must
affect traders’ beliefs and hence risks shifting beliefs towards an undesirable equilibrium.
This points towards the need for an improved understanding of equilibrium selection in an
environment with multidimensional private information.




                                              24
References
Akerlof, George A., “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
 Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 488–500.

Banks, Jeffrey S. and Joel Sobel, “Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games,” Econo-
 metrica, 1987, 55 (3), 647–661.

Chang, Briana, “Adverse Selection and Liquidity Distortion,” 2014. University of Wiscon-
 sin Mimeo.

Chari, V.V., Ali Shourideh, and Ariel Zetlin-Jones, “Reputation and Persistence of
 Adverse Selection in Secondary Loan Markets,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104
 (12), 4027–4070.

Chiu, Jonathan and Thorsten V. Koeppl, “Trading Dynamics with Adverse Selection
 and Search: Market Freeze, Intervention and Recovery,” 2011. Bank of Canada Mimeo.

Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps, “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 1987, 102 (2), 179–221.

Daley, Brendan and Brett Green, “Waiting for News in the Dynamic Market for
 Lemons,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (4), 1433–1504.

DeMarzo, Peter and Darrell Duffie, “A Liquidity-Based Model of Security Design,”
 Econometrica, 1999, 67 (1), 65–99.

Demiroglu, Cem and Christopher James, “How Important is Having Skin in the Game?
 Originator-Sponsor Affiliation and Losses on Mortgage-backed Securities,” Review of Fi-
 nancial Studies, 2012, 25 (11), 3217–3258.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., “Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets,” Journal of Finance, 2004,
  59 (1), 1–30.

Ellingsen, Tore, “Price Signals Quality: The Case of Perfectly Inelastic Demand,” Inter-
  national Journal of Industrial Organization, 1997, 16 (1), 43–61.

Gale, Douglas, “Equilibria and Pareto Optima of Markets with Adverse Selection,” Eco-
 nomic Theory, 1996, 7 (2), 207–235.

Guerrieri, Veronica and Robert Shimer, “Dynamic Adverse Selection: A Theory of
 Illiquidity, Fire Sales, and Flight to Quality,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104,
 1875–1908.

                                          25
  ,  , and Randall Wright, “Adverse Selection in Competitive Search Equilibrium,”
  Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6), 1823–1862.

Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Aiko Nelson, and Edward Vytlacil, “Liar’s loan? Effects of
  origination channel and information falsification on mortgage delinquency,” Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (1), 1–18.

  , , and , “Securitization and Loan Performance: A Contrast of Ex Ante and Ex Post
  Relations in the Mortgage Market,” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (2), 454–483.

Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, “Did Secu-
 ritization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 306–362.

Kurlat, Pablo, “Lemons Markets and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks,” American
 Economic Review, 2013, 103 (4), 1463–1489.

Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, “The Principal-Agent Relationship with an Informed
 Principal, II: Common Values,” Econometrica, 1992, 60 (1), 1–42.

Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru, and James Witkin, “Asset Quality Misrepresentation
  by Financial Intermediaries: Evidence from RMBS Market,” 2015. Forthcoming, Journal
  of Finance.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz, “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Mar-
 kets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 1976, 90 (4), 629–649.

Tirole, Jean, “Overcoming Adverse Selection: How Public Intervention Can Restore Mar-
  ket Functioning,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 29–59.

Wilson, Charles, “The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets with Adverse Selection,” Bell
 Journal of Economics, 1980, 11 (Spring), 108–130.




                                          26
                                       Appendix

A      Examples of Equilibria
For the following analysis, it is useful to introduce some additional notation. In parallel with
v = min V , let v̄ = max V , β = min B, and β̄ = max B.


A.1     Semi-Separating Equilibrium
Impose Assumption 1 and assume there exists a β ∈ B with βΓ(v) > v. The semi-separating
equilibrium is characterized by a discount factor for the marginal buyer, β̂ ∈ B, which is
determined in equation (1) below. For now, fix β̂ and assume, as we verify below, that
β̂Γ(v) > v.
    We next define two critical prices. The lowest price with trade is p ≡ β̂Γ(v), the value
that the marginal buyer places on an asset sold by the seller with the lowest continuation
value. Note that, given our assumption, p > v, so a seller with the lowest continuation value
strictly prefers selling his asset for p rather than retaining it. The second critical price is the
highest one with trade. Let p̄ be the smallest price satisfying p̄ = β̂Γ(p̄), or p̄ = ∞ if there
is no such price. That is, β̂Γ(v) > v whenever v < p̄.
    In the semi-separating equilibrium, the equilibrium buyer-seller ratio satisfies
                             
                             
                             
                              ∞                                            p<p
                                 R                                
                                     p
                       Θ(p) = exp − p              1
                                             p0 −Γ−1 (p0 /β̂)
                                                              dp0       if p ∈ [p, p̄]
                             
                             
                             
                              0                                            p > p̄.

Facing this market tightness, the first part of the definition of equilibrium implies that any
seller (β, δ) with continuation value βδ < p̄ maximizes his profit by setting the sale price
ps (β, δ) = β̂Γ(βδ). A seller (β, δ) with a higher continuation value cannot sell his asset at
any price satisfying p ≥ βδ and Θ(p) > 0. Although such a seller is indifferent between all
sale prices at which he cannot sell his asset, i.e. with Θ(p) = 0, his behavior still matters
in equilibrium since it influences buyers’ beliefs. We assume that such an investor sets price
ps (β, δ) = max{βδ, β̂Γ(βδ)}.
    Turn next to the buyers’ belief about the quality of asset offered at each price. At prices
p < p, buyers are unable to find sellers, Θ(p) = ∞, and so beliefs are undefined. Intermediate
prices, p ∈ [p, p̄], are offered only by investors with continuation value v = Γ−1 (p/β̂). Since
the average quality asset held by these sellers is Γ(v) = p/β̂, part 3(a) of the definition of


                                                 27
equilibrium imposes ∆(p) = p/β̂ when p ∈ [p, p̄]. Finally, at still higher prices, ∆(p) ≤ p/β̂.
Such beliefs are rational, since by construction an investor with continuation value v > p̄
always sets a price at least equal to β̂Γ(βδ).13
    Given these beliefs, we now use part 2 of the definition of equilibrium. An investor with
discount factor β > β̂ maximizes his profit by buying at any price p ∈ [p, p̄], weakly prefers
buying at those prices rather than any higher price, and strictly prefers buying at these
prices rather than a lower price where there are no sellers. An investor with discount factor
β < β̂ prefers to offer a price p < p, which ensures that he fails to buy in equilibrium.
    The last piece of equilibrium is the determination of the marginal discount factor. In
order to ensure that the supply of assets is equal to the demand, we require
                      Z                    ZZ
                              gb (β)dβ =                ps (β, δ)Θ(ps (β, δ))gs (β, δ) dβdδ              (1)
                       β>β̂                     βδ<p̄


The left hand side is the total supply of the period 1 consumption good brought to the
market by investors with discount factors greater than β̂. The right hand side is the total
cost of purchasing up the assets brought to the market by investors with continuation values
βδ < p̄. We prove in the proof of Proposition 3 that there is a unique solution to this
equation. Finally, we allocate buyers with β > β̂ to markets so as to equate supply and
demand at each price, in accordance with part 4 of the definition of equilibrium.


A.2      One-Price Equilibrium
Assume that the support of the buyer’s type distribution is an interval B and the support
of the seller type distribution is a rectangle S = B × D for some interval D. Under these
restrictions, we prove the existence of a one-price equilibrium characterized by two numbers,
the trading price p∗ and the identity of the marginal buyer β̂ ∈ B.
    In a one-price equilibrium, an investor can purchase an asset at any price greater than
or equal to p∗ and can sell an asset at any price less than or equal to p∗ :
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                              ∞
                                             
                                       Θ(p) = 1                 ⇔ p Q p∗ .
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                             0

Part 1 of the definition of equilibrium implies that, taking Θ(p) as given, an investor (β, δ)
with a continuation value βδ ≤ p∗ will choose to sell for ps (β, δ) = p∗ . Investors with a
  13
   Part 3(a) of the definition of equilibrium, together with the assumption that ps (β, δ) = max{βδ, β̂Γ(βδ)}
imposes additional restrictions on ∆(p), but these are unimportant for our analysis.

                                                           28
higher continuation value, βδ > p∗ , set a higher sale price. To support the equilibrium, we
choose one such price, ps (β, δ) = β̄δ if βδ > p∗ .
   Turn next to buyers’ beliefs. At prices p < p∗ , buyers cannot find any seller so beliefs are
undefined. At p = p∗ , Part 3(a) of the definition of equilibrium implies that buyers expect
                                              RR
                                      ∗   βδ≤p        ∗    δgs (β, δ) dδ dβ
                                ∆(p ) = RR                                    ,
                                                   βδ≤p∗
                                                           gs (β, δ) dδ dβ

the average quality asset held by investors with a continuation value below p∗ . At p > p∗ ,
beliefs are also pinned down by condition 3(a): ∆(p) = max{p/β̄, min D} whenever p ∈
(p∗ , v̄]. This is the worst quality asset held by an investor with continuation value p. Finally,
we assume ∆(p) = max D when p > v̄, consistent with condition 3(b).
     Now turn to part 2 of the definition of equilibrium. Let β̂ = p∗ /∆(p∗ ). Given the beliefs
we just constructed, buyers with discount factor β > β̂ find it strictly optimal to buy at
price p∗ , while buyers with lower discount factors find it better to offer a price p < p∗ at
which they cannot buy.
     Finally, we close the model using the market clearing condition, part 4 of the definition
of equilibrium:               Z                  ZZ
                                    gb (β)dβ = p∗                  gs (β, δ) dβdδ.            (2)
                             β>β̂                          βδ<p∗

The left hand side is the amount of the period 1 consumption good held by investors with
discount factors greater than β̂ and the right hand side is the cost of buying the assets held
by investors with continuation value less than p∗ .
    A one-price equilibrium is a pair (β̂, p∗ ) solving β̂∆(p∗ ) = p∗ and equation (2). Depending
on functional forms, one or more one-price equilibrium may exist.


A.3     Other Equilibria
We illustrate the full multiplicity of equilibria through a parametric example. Assume
Gs (β, δ) = βδ 2 on [0, 1]2 , so v = 0, v̄ = 1, Γ(v) = 1+v
                                                        2
                                                           , and H(v) = v(2 − v).

Other Semi-Separating Equilibria We start by showing there is a continuum of semi-
separating equilibria. These equilibria are indexed by the identity of the seller with the
highest continuation value, p̄ ∈ [0.456, 1]. Given p̄, let p = p̄/(1 + p̄), β̂ = 2p, and

                                            (1 − p̄)(2 + p̄)(3 + p̄)
                                     θ̂ =                            .                        (3)
                                                  4p̄2 (6 − p̄)



                                                     29
The restriction on the range of p̄ ensures that θ̂   ∈ [0, 1]. In such an equilibrium, the buyer-
seller ratio is                       
                                      
                                      
                                       ∞             if p < θ̂p
                                      
                                      
                                      θ̂p/p          if p ∈ [θ̂p, p)
                                      
                             Θ(p) =
                                           p̄−p p̄
                                                 
                                      
                                      
                                       θ̂   pp̄
                                                      if p ∈ [p, p̄]
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      0              if p > p̄,

while the expected quality of assets offered for sale at prices above θ̂p is ∆(p) ≤ p/β̂, with
equality if p ∈ [p, p̄].
   To prove this is an equilibrium, we need to discuss buying and selling behavior. Start
with selling. For any investor (β, δ) with continuation value with βδ ∈ (0, p̄), the unique
optimal selling price is ps (β, δ) = β̂Γ(βδ). For investors with the lowest continuation value,
βδ = 0, any ps (β, δ) ∈ [θ̂p, p] is optimal; we assume ps (β, δ) = p. For investors with higher
continuation values, βδ ≥ p̄, any ps ≥ βδ is optimal; we assume ps (βδ) = βδ.
   Given these beliefs,                 
                                        
                                        
                                         0           if p ∈ [θ̂p, p)
                                        
                               ∆(p) = p/β̂            if p ∈ [p, p̄]
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                        (1 + p)/2 if p > p̄.

Note that we are free to assign any beliefs at prices p ∈ [θ̂p, p), since all investors with β = 0
find such prices optimal. We choose to assign beliefs that only those investors who have δ = 0
set these prices. Given these beliefs, optimal buying behavior sets any price pb (β) ∈ [p, p̄] if
β ≥ β̂ and any prices pb (β) < θ̂p if β < β̂.
    Finally, we can verify that equation (3) ensures that the goods market clears.
    Building on this logic, we can construct a continuum of semi-separating equilibria when-
ever the lowest asset quality held by investors with the lowest continuation value is smaller
than the average asset quality held by investors with the lowest continuation value. If the
support of (β, δ) is a rectangle, this requires that the lowest continuation value is zero, but
otherwise it may hold more generally.

Other One-Price Equilibria The same logic supports a continuum of one-price equilibria
with rationing at the equilibrium trading price. Equilibria are now characterized by three
numbers, the equilibrium trading price p∗ , the probability of trade at that price θ1 ∈ [0, 1],
and the discount factor of the marginal buyer β̂, but only two equations. First, the marginal




                                               30
buyer must be indifferent about buying all the assets offered for sale at p∗ :

                                                      3 − p∗ 2
                                           p∗ = β̂              ,
                                                     3(2 − p∗ )

where (3 − p∗ 2)/3(2 − p∗ ) is the average quality of assets held by investors with continuation
value v < p∗ . Second, the goods market must clear:

                                     1 − β̂ = θ1 p∗ 2(2 − p∗ ),

where p∗ (2−p∗ ) is the fraction of sellers at the price p∗ . There is a solution to these equations
with θ1 ∈ [0, 1] if p∗ ∈ [0.426, 0.634], giving

                                               3 − 6p∗ + 2p∗ 2
                                    θ1 =
                                           p∗ 2(2 − p∗ )(3 − p∗ 2)

and
                                                  3p∗ (2 − p∗ )
                                           β̂ =                 .
                                                    3 − p∗ 2
In such an equilibrium, the buyer-seller ratio satisfies
                                        
                                        
                                        
                                         ∞                if p < θ1 p∗
                                        
                               Θ(p) =     θ1 p∗ /p         if p ∈ [θ1 p∗ , p∗ ]
                                        
                                        
                                                           if p > p∗ ,
                                        
                                        0

while the expected quality of assets for sale relative to the price is maximized at p∗ .
   To construct an equilibrium of this sort, we again discuss buying and selling behavior. All
investors (β, δ) with continuation value βδ < p∗ set price p∗ in equilibrium, while those with
higher continuation values set price ps (β, δ) = δ. This pins down buyers’ beliefs at prices
above p∗ . At prices between θ1 p∗ and p∗ , rational beliefs requires that investors anticipate
meeting sellers with zero continuation value. To support the equilibrium, we assume that
they anticipate meeting sellers with zero-quality assets:
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                              0               if p < p∗
                                             
                                                  3−p∗ 2
                                  ∆(p) =       3(2−p∗ )
                                                               if p = p∗
                                             
                                             
                                                               if p > p∗
                                             
                                             p


One can verify that ∆(p)/p is maximized at p∗ for all p∗ ≤ 0.634, so buyers with β ≥ β̂ in
fact prefer to pay this single price: pb (β) = p∗ if β ≥ β̂ and pb (β) = 0 otherwise. Finally,

                                                     31
one can verify that the goods market clears.
   Again, this logic shows how to construct a continuum of one-price equilibria whenever
the lowest asset quality held by investors with the lowest continuation value is smaller than
the average asset quality held by investors with the lowest continuation value.

n-Price Equilibria Our model also admits an n-dimensional set of n-price equilibria.
Denote the prices by p1 < · · · < pn ; in equilibrium all trade occurs at these prices. Also let
θ1 > · · · > θn denote the buyer-seller ratios at these prices, with θ1 ∈ (0, 1]. Let v1 < · · · < vn
denote the n critical continuation values who are indifferent between neighboring prices (so
vi is indifferent between setting prices pi and pi+1 and vn is indifferent between setting price
pn and setting a higher price at which she cannot sell). Finally, let β̂ denote the discount
factor of the marginal buyer. This gives us a total of 3n + 1 variables. These must satisfy
2n + 1 equations. The first n equations come from the indifference conditions of the marginal
sellers:
                       θi (pi − vi ) = θi+1 (pi+1 − vi ) for i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1}

and pn = vn . The next n equations come from the marginal buyer’s indifference about
buying at any price. With our functional forms, this gives
                                                    2
                                               3 − vi−1 − vi−1 vi − vi2
                                   pi = β̂                              ,
                                                  3(2 − vi−1 − vi )

where v0 = 0. The fraction is the average value of the assets held by investors with continu-
ation value v ∈ [vi−1 , vi ]. Finally, the goods market must clear:
                                     n
                                     X
                          1 − β̂ =            θi pi (vi (2 − vi ) − vi−1 (2 − vi−1 ),
                                      i=1


where vi (2 − vi ) − vi−1 (2 − vi−1 ) is the measure of investors who set price pi , those with
continuation values v ∈ [vi−1 , vi ].
   In equilibrium, the buyer-seller ratio satisfies
                             
                             
                             
                              ∞                   p < p0
                             
                               θi (pi −vi )
                    Θ(p) =        p−vi
                                              if   p ∈ [pi , pi+1 ], i ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}
                             
                             
                             
                             0                    p > pn ,

where p0 = θ1 p1 and θ0 = 1. Given this structure, only sellers with continuation value vi find
prices p ∈ (pi , pi+1 ) optimal for i ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}. To support the equilibrium, we assume


                                                        32
buyers anticipate that investors (β, δ) with β = 1 and δ = vi set these prices. Finally,
investors with βδ > pn and δ = p set price p > pn . This pins down buyers’ beliefs. The
remainder of the construction of equilibrium is now standard.
     In our parametric example, first suppose θ1 = 1. We find that for any value of θ2 ∈
[0, 0.832], it is possible to construct an equilibrium with trade at two prices. Higher values
of θ2 are associated with lower values of p1 (falling from 0.426 to 0.371), lower values of
p2 = v2 (falling from 0.527 to 0.446), lower values of v1 (falling from 0.426 to 0), and higher
values of β̂ (rising from 0.714 to 0.743). It does not seem possible to construct equilibria
with θ2 > 0.832, because the system of equations would imply v1 < 0. For lower values of
θ1 , there is a smaller interval of θ2 corresponding to an equilibrium, but the interval always
exists.
     The possibility that θ1 < 1 again hinges on the assumption that the lowest asset quality
held by investors with the lowest continuation value is smaller than the average asset quality
held by these investors. However, the remaining construction does not rely on this restriction
and so appears to be completely general. For example, there are many n-price equilibria in
the independent Pareto example that we use throughout the text.
     Qualitatively an n-price equilibrium looks very similar to the semi-separating equilibrium.
Investors with higher continuation values set weakly higher sale prices and sell with a weakly
lower probability. Indeed, we conjecture that in the limit as n converges to infinity, the
functions Θ(p) and ∆(p) in any n price equilibrium will be close to their values in some
semi-separating equilibrium in the sense of the sup-norm.


A.4      Mixed Equilibria
Equilibria may also feature a mix of mass points and continuous distributions. We discuss
how to construct such equilibria here; it will be useful later in our analysis, so we break it
into a separate section.
    Take a set of points v1 < · · · < vn , and construct pools of positive radius ε1 , . . . , εn
around those points with v1 − ε1 > v and vi − εi > vi−1 + εi for all i ∈ 2, . . . , n. We look
for an equilibrium where any two sellers with continuation values in the same pool set the
same price. That is, for all (β, δ) and (β 0 , δ 0 ), ps (β, δ) = ps (β 0 , δ 0 ) if and only if there exists
an i ∈ {1, . . . , n} with βδ ∈ (vi − εi , vi + εi ) and β 0 δ 0 ∈ (vi − εi , vi + εi ).
    Within each pool, the equilibrium price reflects the quality of the pool:
                                                 R vi +εi
                                                  vi −εi
                                                            Γ(v)dH(v)
                                    pi = β̂                                                              (4)
                                              H(vi + εi ) − H(vi − εi )



                                                      33
Using the known functional forms, it is possible to simplify this and the subsequent expres-
sions. Outside of these pools, the price is the fair one, ps (β, δ) = β̂Γ(βδ).
    We turn next to the sale probability. For sellers (β, δ) with the lowest continuation value,
βδ ∈ [v, v1 − ε1 ], the sale price is β̂Γ(βδ) and the sale probability is as in the semi-separating
equilibrium with the same value of the marginal buyer β̂,
                                                                                              !
                                              Z     β̂Γ(βδ)
                                                                         1
                      Θ(β̂Γ(βδ)) = exp −                                                dp0
                                                p             p0   −   Γ−1 (p0 /β̂)

We then proceed recursively. Assume for some i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, we have already found
Θ(β̂Γ(vi − εi )), the trading probability at the bottom of the pool. A seller with this contin-
uation value must be indifferent about charging the separating price β̂Γ(vi − εi ) or charging
the pooling price pi :
                                                                                  
               Θ(β̂Γ(vi − εi )) β̂Γ(vi − εi ) − (vi − εi ) = Θ(pi ) pi − (vi − εi ) .                              (5)

This pins down the trading probability in the pool, Θ(pi ). Next, we turn to the seller with
continuation value vi + εi . He must be indifferent between separating and pooling as well,
                                                                                  
               Θ(β̂Γ(vi + εi )) β̂Γ(vi + εi ) − (vi + εi ) = Θ(pi ) pi − (vi + εi ) ,                              (6)

which we solve for Θ(β̂Γ(vi + εi )). Finally, sellers (β, δ) with βδ ∈ [vi + εi , vi+1 − εi+1 ]
must find the price β̂Γ(βδ) optimal. It is straightforward to prove that this price is locally
optimal if and only if the sale probability is proportional to its level in the semi-separating
equilibrium. The value of Θ(β̂Γ(vi + εi )) pins down the constant of proportionality:
                                                                                                           !
                                                         Z     β̂Γ(βδ)
                                                                                        1
             Θ(β̂Γ(βδ)) = Θ(β̂Γ(vi + εi )) exp −                                                     dp0       .   (7)
                                                              β̂Γ(vi +εi )   p0   −   Γ−1 (p0 /β̂)

This completes the recursion.
    All that remains is pinning down the beliefs of a buyer at prices without trade. We make
those as pessimistic as possible. In our example, this means that a buyer believes that if a
price p is weakly optimal for a seller with continuation value v but no such seller sets the
price, ∆(p) = v (and so the seller’s discount factor is β = 1). Such beliefs always support
the mixed equilibrium.




                                                  34
B      Omitted Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Fix (β1 , δ1 ) ∈ S and (β2 , δ2 ) ∈ S with β1 δ1 < β2 δ2 . Part 1 of
the definition of equilibrium implies

    min{Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )), 1}(ps (β1 , δ1 ) − β1 δ1 ) ≥ min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1}(ps (β2 , δ2 ) − β1 δ1 )    (8)
    min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1}(ps (β2 , δ2 ) − β2 δ2 ) ≥ min{Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )), 1}(ps (β1 , δ1 ) − β2 δ2 ).   (9)

Add the inequalities and simplify to get

                (min{Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )), 1} − min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1}) (β2 δ2 − β1 δ1 ) ≥ 0

or min{Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )), 1} ≥ min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1}.
    Now assume the seller with the higher continuation value sells with a positive probability,
Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )) > 0. Divide the left hand side of inequality (9) by min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1} and the
right hand side by the larger quantity min{Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )), 1} to prove ps (β2 , δ2 ) ≥ ps (β1 , δ1 ).
    Finally, suppose to find a contradiction that prove Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )) < Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )). If
Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )) < 1, this contradicts the first step. On the other hand, if Θ(ps (β1 , δ1 )) ≥ 1,
min{Θ(ps (β2 , δ2 )), 1} = 1 as well. But then inequality (8) implies ps (β1 , δ1 ) ≥ ps (β2 , δ2 ), a
contradiction.


Proof of Proposition 2. Let β̂ be the infimal value of p/∆(p) among p with Θ(p) < ∞.
This means that for all β > β̂, there exists a p with Θ(p) < ∞ such that β > p/∆(p), or
equivalent β∆(p)/p > 1. Part 2 of the definition of equilibrium implies that buyers with
that discount factor buy at some such price. If β < β̂, then for any p with Θ(p) < ∞,
β∆(p)/p < 1. Buyers with this discount factor are better off not buying, i.e. setting a price
such that Θ(pb (β)) = ∞.
    Now suppose there is a seller (β, δ) ∈ S with 0 < Θ(ps (β, δ)) < ∞. The definition of
β̂ implies β̂ ≤ ps (β, δ)/∆(ps (β, δ)). If the inequality were strict, part 2 of the definition of
equilibrium implies there is there is no buyer who finds the price ps (β, δ) optimal, contra-
dicting part 4 of the definition of equilibrium. Therefore β̂ = ps (β, δ)/∆(ps (β, δ)). It follows
immediately that all buyers with β ≥ β̂ are indifferent about buying any of the assets sold
in equilibrium.


   We turn next to the proof of Proposition 3. To prove this, we first state and prove five
preliminary Lemmas.


                                                      35
Lemma 1 Consider an equilibrium with multidimensional private information. Take any
p1 < p2 . If 0 < Θ(p1 ) < ∞, Θ(p2 ) < min{1, Θ(p1 )}. If Θ(p1 ) = 0, Θ(p2 ) = 0 as well.

Proof of Lemma 1. Suppose there is a p1 < p2 with 0 < Θ(p1 ) < ∞. Part 3 of the
definition of equilibrium implies that there is a (β, δ) who finds p1 an optimal sale price. In
particular, p1 ≥ βδ and p1 gives weakly higher profits than p2 :

                      min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − βδ) ≥ min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − βδ).                       (10)

Now if Θ(p2 ) ≥ 1, min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − βδ) = p2 − βδ. Also, since p1 ≥ βδ, p1 − βδ ≥
min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 −βδ). Combine these inequalities with (10) to get p1 ≥ p2 , a contradiction.
   Now suppose 0 < Θ(p1 ) ≤ Θ(p2 ). Then 0 < min{Θ(p1 ), 1} ≤ min{Θ(p2 ), 1}. Divide
equation (10) by this inequality to get p1 ≥ p2 , a contradiction. This proves Θ(p2 ) <
min{1, Θ(p1 )} when 0 < Θ(p1 ) < ∞.
   Finally, assume Θ(p1 ) = 0. Since the left hand side of inequality (10) is zero, the right
hand side must be as well. Given that p2 > p1 ≥ βδ, it must be that Θ(p2 ) = 0.



Lemma 2 Consider an equilibrium with multidimensional private information. Let V :
R+ ⇒ V denote the set of sellers’ continuation values v for which the price p ≥ v is weakly
optimal:
                    v ∈ V(p) ⇔ p ∈ arg max 0
                                              min{Θ(p0 ), 1}(p0 − v).
                                              p ≥v

If Θ(p) < ∞, the set V is nonempty. Take any p1 < p2 with Θ(p1 ) < ∞, v1 ∈ V(p1 ), and
v2 ∈ V(p2 ). If Θ(p1 ) ≥ 0 then v1 ≤ v2 . Moreover, V(p) is convex and closed for all p with
Θ(p) < ∞.

Proof of Lemma 2. First observe that part 3(b) of the definition of equilibrium with
multidimensional private information implies that the set V(p) is nonempty when Θ(p) is
finite. Next, by the definition of V, a seller with continuation value v1 weakly prefers p1 to
p2 :
                      min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − v1 ) ≥ min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − v1 ),                (11)

Similarly, a seller with continuation value v2 either finds the price p1 suboptimal because
p1 < v2 or prefers p2 to p1 . First suppose p1 < v2 . Since v1 ∈ V(p1 ), v1 ≤ p1 , proving v1 < v2 .
Second suppose v2 prefers p2 to p1 and p1 ≥ v2 :

                       min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − v2 ) ≥ min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − v2 ).                    (12)


                                                36
If Θ(p2 ) = 0, Θ(p1 ) > 0 implies p1 = v2 so again v1 ≤ v2 . If instead Θ(p2 ) > 0, multiply
inequalities (11) and (12) and simplify to get (p2 − p1 )(v2 − v1 ) ≥ 0, which proves that
v2 ≥ v1 .
    To prove V(p) is convex, take any p and v1 < v2 with v1 , v2 ∈ V(p). Fix any ṽ ∈ (v1 , v2 )
and p̃ such that ṽ ∈ V(p̃). Note that such a p̃ must exist; set p̃ = ps (β, δ) for any βδ = ṽ. If
p < p̃, v2 ∈ V(p) and ṽ ∈ V(p̃) contradicts the first part of the lemma. If p̃ < p, v1 ∈ V(p) and
ṽ ∈ V(p̃) contradicts the first part of the lemma. Therefore ps (β, δ) = p for all βδ ∈ (v1 , v2 ).
    To prove V(p) is closed, suppose there exists a sequence {vn } → v with vn ∈ V(p) for all
n but v 6∈ V(p). Since p ≥ vn for all n, p ≥ v as well. The definition of V then implies that
there exists a p̃ ≥ v with

                     min{Θ(p̃), 1}(p̃ − v) − min{Θ(p), 1}(p − v) ≡ ε > 0

But since {vn } → v, there exists an N such that for all n > N ,
                                                       
                           min{Θ(p̃), 1} − min{Θ(p), 1} (vn − v) < ε.

Using the definition of ε, this implies min{Θ(p̃), 1}(p̃ − vn ) > min{Θ(p), 1}(p − vn ), and in
particular p̃ > vn , which contradicts vn ∈ V(p).



Lemma 3 Impose Assumption 1 and consider an equilibrium with unidimensional private
information. Take any p with 0 < Θ(p) < ∞. Then p ≥ v and there exists a V(p) ∈
[v, min{p, v̄}] such that V(p) = {V(p)} and hence ∆(p) = Γ(V(p)). Moreover, V and ∆ are
continuous.

Proof of Lemma 3. Since Θ(p) < ∞, the second part of the definition of equilibrium
with unidimensional private information implies that there is a (β, δ) who finds p an optimal
sale price and in particular p ≥ βδ ≥ v. If p = 0, these inequalities imply βδ = v = 0 as
well, so V(0) = {V(0)}, where V(0) = 0.
    Otherwise, p > 0 and in order to find a contradiction, suppose V(p) 6= {βδ}. Then
Lemma 2 implies it must be an interval, V(p) = [v1 , v2 ]. Lemma 2 also implies that p is
the only optimal sale price for v ∈ (v1 , v2 ): ps (β, δ) = p if βδ ∈ (v1 , v2 ), while any investor
who finds a lower (higher) sale price optimal must have a lower (higher) continuation value.
Then part 3(a) of the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private information




                                                37
implies ∆(p) is the average quality asset held by sellers with this continuation value:
                                             R v2
                                              v1
                                                 Γ(v)h(v)dv
                                    ∆(p) =     R v2         .
                                                v1
                                                    h(v)dv

Monotonicity of Γ (Assumption 1) implies

                                Γ(v1 ) < ∆(p) < Γ(v2 ) ≤ ∆(p0 )

for any price p0 > p. Note that the last inequality uses the definition of unidimensional
private information.
    We can use this to prove that no buyer finds setting the price p optimal. If there were
such a buyer, he must have β∆(p) ≥ p by part 2 of the definition of equilibrium with
multidimensional private information. So take any p0 > p with p0 ∆(p) < p∆(p0 ); this is
a nonempty interval since ∆(p0 ) > ∆(p) and p > 0. Since Θ(p) < ∞, Lemma 1 implies
Θ(p0 ) < 1. Then

                                    β∆(p0 )                        β∆(p0 )
                                                                          
          −1  β∆(p)      β∆(p)                           0 −1
min{Θ(p) , 1}       −1 ≤       −1 <         − 1 = min{Θ(p ) , 1}           −1 .
                p          p          p0                             p0

The first inequality uses min{Θ(p)−1 , 1} ≤ 1 and β∆(p) ≥ p. The second uses ∆(p)/p <
∆(p0 )/p0 . The equality uses Θ(p0 ) < 1. All buyers prefer p0 to p.
    We now have a contradiction. The measure of buyers setting price p is zero, dµb (p) = 0,
                                                                      Rv
while the measure of sellers setting price p is positive, dµs (p) = v12 h(v)dv. This is inconsis-
tent with part 4 of the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private information,
dµb (p) = Θ(p)dµs (p).
    Now suppose V has a discontinuity at p. Using the arguments in Lemma 2, all v ∈
  lim inf p0 →p V(p0 ), lim supp0 →p V(p0 ) must find price p optimal, which contradicts the first
                                           

part of this result. Finally, ∆(p) = Γ(V(p)) by the second part of the definition of equilibrium
with unidimensional private information, and continuity of ∆ follows from Assumption 1.




Lemma 4 Impose Assumption 1 and consider an equilibrium with unidimensional private
information. Take any p1 < p2 with Θ(p1 ) < ∞ and Θ(p2 ) > 0. Then V(p1 ) ≤ V(p2 ) with
strict inequality if V(p1 ) < max V .

Proof of Lemma 4. Since Θ(p1 ) < ∞, Lemma 1 implies Θ(p) < 1 for all p > p1 . And
since Θ(p2 ) > 0, the same Lemma implies Θ(p) > 0 for all p < p2 . Then Lemma 3 implies

                                                38
V(p) = {V(p)}, a singleton, and Lemma 2 implies V(p) is weakly increasing on this interval,
V(p1 ) ≤ V(p2 ).
   Now to find a contradiction, suppose v = V(p1 ) = V(p2 ) < max V and let p3 = max p
such that v = V(p). By definition, v ≤ p1 < p2 ≤ p3 . Moreover, for any price p ∈ (p1 , p3 ),
the fact that sellers with continuation value v find p an optimal price implies

                                                           p1 − v
                                  Θ(p) = min{Θ(p1 ), 1}           .                            (13)
                                                           p−v

If v = p1 , Θ(p2 ) = 0, a contradiction. Therefore v < p1 and Θ(p) > 0.
    Now since v < max V , we can find a continuation value ṽ > v that satisfies the following
two restrictions: (1) Γ(ṽ) < Γ(v)p3 /p1 and (2) ṽ < p3 . The first restriction is feasible since Γ
is continuous by Assumption 1 and p1 < p3 by assumption. The second restriction is feasible
because v < p3 . Finally, let p̃ denote an optimal price for a seller with continuation value ṽ,
say p̃ = ps (β̃, δ̃) for some β̃ δ̃ = ṽ. By Lemma 3, ṽ > v implies p̃ > p3 .
    The fact that a seller with continuation value ṽ sets price p̃ implies in particular that

                                  Θ(p̃)(p̃ − ṽ) ≥ Θ(p3 )(p3 − ṽ).

Since Θ(p3 ) > 0 and p3 > ṽ, the right hand side is positive. The left hand side must therefore
be as well, so in particular Θ(p̃) > 0, so some buyers offer price p̃.
   Now consider the value to a buyer of offering p ∈ (p1 , p3 ) rather than p̃:
                                                                        
            −1  βΓ(v)      βΓ(v)     βΓ(ṽ)                −1     βΓ(ṽ)
  min{Θ(p) , 1}       −1 =       −1>        − 1 = min{Θ(p̃) , 1}         −1
                  p          p         p̃                           p̃

The first equality holds because Θ(p) < 1. The inequality holds because Γ(v)/p > Γ(ṽ)/p3 >
Γ(ṽ)/p̃, first by construction of ṽ, second by p̃ > p3 . The second equality holds because
Θ(p̃) < 1 as well. But then p̃ is not an optimal price for any buyer, inconsistent with part 4 of
the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private information. This contradiction
implies V(p1 ) < V(p2 ).



Lemma 5 Impose Assumption 1 and consider an equilibrium with unidimensional private
information. Take any p1 < p2 with Θ(p1 ) < ∞ and Θ(p2 ) > 0. Then

      −Θ(p2 )      Θ(p2 ) − Θ(p1 )     Θ(p2 ) − min{Θ(p1 ), 1}   − min{Θ(p1 ), 1}
                 ≥                 and                         ≥                  ,            (14)
     p1 − V(p1 )      p2 − p1                  p 2 − p1            p2 − V(p2 )

both strictly if V(p1 ) < max V . In particular, if 0 < Θ(p) < 1 and p > V(p), Θ0 (p) =

                                                 39
−Θ(p)/(p − V(p)).

Proof of Lemma 5. Lemma 4 implies

                  min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − V(p1 )) ≥ min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − V(p1 )),

and strictly so if V(p1 ) < max V , since a seller with continuation value V(p1 ) only finds the
price p1 optimal. Note that this implies p1 > V(p1 ) as well. Since Θ(p1 ) < ∞, Lemma 1
implies Θ(p2 ) < 1, while p1 > V(p1 ) implies Θ(p1 )(p1 − V(p1 )) ≥ min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − V(p1 )).
Combining these inequalities yields the first inequality in condition (14).
    Similarly, Lemma 4 implies

                  min{Θ(p2 ), 1}(p2 − V(p2 )) ≥ min{Θ(p1 ), 1}(p1 − V(p2 )),

and strictly so if V(p1 ) < max V , since V(p1 ) is the only seller who finds price p1 weakly
optimal. Again note that Θ(p2 ) < 1 but now Θ(p1 ) > 1 is possible. This then leads to the
second inequality in condition (14).
   Now suppose 0 < Θ(p) < 1 and consider an arbitrary sequence of prices {p̃} with
0 < Θ(p̃) < 1 and converging to p. Since V is continuous by Lemma 3, V(p̃) → V(p) as well.
At every point in the sequence, condition (14) implies

                                  p − V(p)                 p − V(p̃)
                           Θ(p)             ≥ Θ(p̃) ≥ Θ(p)            .
                                  p̃ − V(p)                p̃ − V(p̃)

The two bounds converge to Θ(p), proving that Θ(p̃) → Θ(p). Finally, condition (14) also
implies
                          −Θ(p̃)    Θ(p̃) − Θ(p)      −Θ(p)
                                  ≥              ≥             .
                         p − V(p)       p̃ − p      p̃ − V(p̃)
Again both bounds converge to −Θ(p)/(p − V(p)), establishing the result.


Proof of Proposition 3. First we assume that βΓ(v) ≤ v for all β ∈ B and show that
we can construct an equilibrium with no trade. Set P (v) = max{β̄Γ(v), v} for all v, where
β̄ = max B. Also set Θ(p) = 0 for all p ≥ P (v) and Θ(p) = ∞ otherwise. Finally, assume
∆(p) ≤ p/β̄ for all p. It is easy to verify that this is an equilibrium with unidimensional
private information.
    Now to find a contradiction, suppose that βΓ(v) ≤ v for all β ∈ B and there is an
equilibrium with Θ(p) > 0 for some p > v. Sellers’ optimality implies P (v) > v with
Θ(P (v)) > 0. Lemma 4 implies only sellers with the lowest continuation value set this price,


                                                40
and therefore ∆(P (v)) = Γ(v). Stringing together these inequalities gives β∆(P (v)) < P (v)
for all β ∈ B, and so part 2 of the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional private
information implies no buyer sets this price. This contradicts part 4 of the definition of
equilibrium with multidimensional private information.
     For the remainder of the proof, assume β̄Γ(v) > v. We first rule out the possibility of an
equilibrium in which Θ(p) = ∞ for p < p̄ and Θ(p) = 0 for p > p̄ for some p̄ ≥ 0. If p̄ > v
and Θ(p̄) < 1, there is no ps (β, δ) consistent with part 1 of the definition of equilibrium with
multidimensional private information for βδ ∈ [v, p̄), a contradiction. If p̄ > v and Θ(p̄) ≥ 1,
P (v) = p̄ for v ∈ [v, p̄), which contradicts Lemma 3. Therefore it must be the case that
v ≥ p̄ and hence β̄Γ(v) > p̄. Part 1 of the definition of equilibrium with multidimensional
private information implies ps (βδ) ≥ βδ > p̄ for all βδ > v, hence sellers (β, δ) don’t sell,
i.e. the market must shut down. But the second part of the definition of equilibrium with
unidimensional private information implies ∆(v) ≥ Γ(v) for all v, which implies β̄∆(v) > p̄:
a sufficiently patient buyer would make money buying at a price just above p̄, contradicting
the market clearing condition. This cannot be an equilibrium.
     Now using Lemma 1, there are thresholds p < p̄ where Θ(p) = ∞ if p < p, Θ(p) = 0
if p > p̄, and Θ(p) ∈ (0, 1) if p ∈ (p, p̄). The differential equation for Θ in Lemma 5 then
applies in this range, giving
                                                                            !
                                                Z       p
                                                                1
                              Θ(p) = λ exp −                           dp                   (15)
                                                    p       p̃ − V(p̃)

for all p ∈ (p, p̄) and some constant of integration λ > 0. In addition, Lemma 1 ensures
that λ ≤ 1 so that Θ(p) < 1 for all p > p. And if λ < 1, an investor with continuation
value v = V(p) where p < p < (p − Θ(p)p)/(1 − Θ(p)) would earn higher profits selling with
probability 1 at price p − ε for some sufficiently small ε, rather than selling at price p, a
contradiction. Therefore λ = 1.
    Turn now to the buyers’ problem. Buyers know that only a seller with continuation
value V(p) sells at price p, so ∆(p) = Γ(V(p)). For buyers to be willing to purchase at all
prices p ∈ [p, p̄], it must be the case that p/∆(p) = β̂ for some constant β̂, or equivalently
Γ(V(p)) = p/β̂. Substituting this into equation (15) and changing the variable of integration
gives                                                               !
                                                Z v
                                                     β̂Γ0 (ṽ)
                              Θ(P (v)) = exp −                  dṽ                       (16)
                                                 v β̂Γ(ṽ) − ṽ

for v ∈ (v, p̄). Moreover, we can extend this to v = v since buyers must be willing to
purchase assets from the sellers with the lowest continuation value as well, which requires


                                               41
that Θ(p) ≤ 1.
    Given equation (16), sellers with continuation value v < p̄ set price P (v) = β̂Γ(v),
while all sellers with higher continuation values are indifferent about all prices p > p̄ and in
particular are willing to set prices such that P (v) ≥ β̂Γ(v). This ensures that buyers with
β > β̂ are indifferent about buying at any price p ∈ [p, p̄] and prefer those prices to higher
prices. Buyers with lower continuation values set lower prices and do not succeed in buying.
To find an equilibrium, we simply allocate the buyers to the different prices in a way that
ensures the appropriate buyer-seller ratio at each price. This is feasible if the total wealth
of buyers with β > β̂ is exactly enough to purchase the assets sold by sellers with v ∈ [v, p̄]:
                          Z                       Z
                                   gb (β)d(β) =          P (v)Θ(P (v))h(v)dv.                 (17)
                            β≥β̂                  v≤p̄


This is the same as equation (1). The left hand side is decreasing in β̂, equal to 0 when
β̂ = β̄. The right hand side is strictly positive when β̂ = β̄ and increasing in β̂. To prove
monotonicity, note first that p̄, defined as the smallest solution to p̄ ≥ β̂Γ(p̄) is nondecreasing
in β̂. So are P (v) = β̂Γ(v) and Θ(P (v)) defined in equation (16). There is a unique β̂ that
solves equation (17).


Proof of Proposition 4. Let β̂ denote the marginal buyer in the semi-separating equilib-
rium and β̂m denote the marginal buyer in the mixed equilibrium. We first prove that if a
mixed equilibrium Pareto dominates the semi-separating equilibrium, it must have β̂m = β̂.
If β̂m > β̂, all buyers with β > β̂ are worse off in the mixed equilibrium, since they live in
autarky rather than buying, and so it does not Pareto dominate the semi-separating equilib-
rium. If β̂m < β̂, consider a seller with the lowest continuation value v. He sells for sure in
both equilibria, earning a price equal to Γ(v) times the discount factor of the marginal buyer.
A reduction in the discount factor of the marginal buyer therefore makes him worse off and
so again the mixed equilibrium does not Pareto dominate the semi-separating equilibrium.
     The bulk of the proof then compares a semi-separating equilibrium with a given value of
β̂ to a mixed equilibrium with the same value of β̂m = β̂. Here we focus on the limiting case
where the pool sizes are arbitrarily small. For the construction of the mixed equilibrium
when the pool sizes are not necessarily small, see Appendix A.4; we use those results here.
     We start by approximating the price charged by each pool. Taking a Taylor expansion
of equation (4) in a neighborhood of vi , we obtain

                                                     2Γ0 (vi )h0 (vi ) 2
                                                                     
                                     β̂     00
                     pi ≈ β̂Γ(vi ) +       Γ (vi ) +                    εi + O(ε3i ).         (18)
                                     6                    h(vi )


                                                      42
We next turn to the trading probabilities. For notational convenience, we let Θ(P (v)) and
ω(v) denote the equilibrium trading probabilities for a seller with continuation value v in
the semi-separating and mixed equilibrium. The latter probabilities are defined recursively
in equations (5), (6) and (7).
    First, we claim that the mixed equilibrium makes all sellers better off than the the semi-
separating equilibrium if and only if ω(vi + εi ) ≥ Θ(P (vi + εi )) for i = 1, . . . , n. For vi + εi ,
pooling alters the probability of trade but not the price, and so this seller is better off if and
only if ω(vi + εi ) ≥ Θ(P (vi + εi )). This proves the “only if” part of the statement. To prove
the “if” part, we turn to the other sellers. In the mixed equilibrium, all individuals with
v ∈ (vi − εi , vi + εi ) trade with the same probability and at the same price. Moreover, vi + εi
is indifferent about trading at that price. If trading in the pool makes vi + εi better off, then
it makes all the members of the pool, who have lower quality assets better off. Additionally,
for individuals who are separating in the mixed equilibrium, v ∈ (vi + εi , vi+1 − εi+1 ), pooling
raises the probability of trade by the same proportion as it raises the probability of trade
for vi + εi and again it has no effect on their trading price. This establishes the claim.
    Next we compute ω(vi + εi )/Θ(P (vi + εi )). Use equations (5) and (6) to get
                                                                             
                     ω(vi + εi )   β̂Γ(vi − εi ) − (vi − εi ) pi − (vi + εi )
                                 =                                           .
                     ω(vi − εi )
                                                             
                                   β̂Γ(vi + εi ) − (vi + εi ) pi − (vi − εi )

Equation (7) implies
                                                                                 !
                                                       vi +εi
                                                                  β̂Γ0 (ṽ)
                                                  Z
                           ω(vi + εi )
                                       = exp −                                 dṽ .
                           ω(vi − εi )              vi −εi      β̂Γ(ṽ) − ṽ

Finally, the relative trading probabilities between the mixed and semi-separating equilibria
are constant within the separating regions:

                                ω(vi − εi )       ω(vi−1 + εi−1 )
                                               =                     ,
                               Θ(P (vi − εi ))   Θ(P (vi−1 + εi+1 ))

where v0 + ε0 ≡ v and ω(v) = Θ(P (v)) = 1. Combining these three equalities and solving
the recursion gives

                  i                                                Z vj +εj                 !
  ω(vi + εi )     Y  β̂Γ(vj − εj ) − (vj − εj ) pj − (vj + εj )                β̂Γ0 (ṽ)
                =                                               exp                      dṽ
 Θ(P (vi + εi )) j=1 β̂Γ(vj + εj ) − (vj + εj ) pj − (vj − εj )
                                               
                                                                      vj −εj β̂Γ(ṽ) − ṽ


for i = 1, . . . , n. Thus all sellers are better off in the mixed equilibrium than the semi-



                                                  43
separating equilibrium if and only if

        i                                                          ! Z v +ε                  !
        X               β̂Γ(vi − εi ) − (vi − εi ) pi − (vi + εi )         j  j
                                                                                 β̂Γ0 (ṽ)
                log                                               +                       dṽ ≥ 0
        j=1             β̂Γ(vi + εi ) − (vi + εi ) pi − (vi − εi )      vj −εj β̂Γ(ṽ) − ṽ


for i = 1, . . . , n. Finally, perform a Taylor expansion of this sum near εj = 0, using the
approximation for pi given in equation (18). This gives

                                      i
                                                                                                   !                  !
                                                2β̂Γ0 (vj )          h0 (vj ) 2 − β̂Γ0 (vj )
                             
             ω(vi + εi )              X
  log                             =                                          −                         ε3j + O(ε4j ) . (19)
            Θ(P (vi + εi ))           j=1   3(β̂Γ(vj ) − vj   )2     h(vj )    β̂Γ(vj ) − vj

All sellers are better off in the mixed equilibrium if and only if this is non-negative.
    Now we turn to the amount of consumption goods buyers use to purchase assets in the
first period. We compute the difference in this cost in the mixed equilibrium compared to
the semi-separating equilibrium:

  n                                                                           Z    vi+1 −εi+1                          
  X                                                ω(vi + εi )
                                                     
            pi ω(vi ) H(vi + εi ) − H(vi − εi ) +                                                β̂Γ(v)ω(v)dH(v)
  i=1
                                                  Θ(P (vi + εi ))              vi +εi
                                                                               Z    vn+1 −εn+1
                                                                           −                     β̂Γ(v)Θ(P (v))dH(v).
                                                                                   v1 −ε1


The first term on the first line is the cost within the pooling regions and the second term is
the cost in the separating regions in the mixed equilibrium. The second line is the cost in
the semi-separating equilibrium.
    We substitute the previous expressions for ω(vi ) and ω(vi + εi )/Θ(P (vi + εi )) into this ex-
pressions, then perform a Taylor expansion of this sum near εj = 0, using the approximation
for pi given in equation (18). This gives that the increase in first period cost is

  n
                                                                !Z
                                                                     ∞
  X           2β̂Γ0 (vi )             h0 (vi ) 2 − β̂Γ0 (vi )
                                              −                          β̂Γ(v)Θ(P (v))dH(v)
  i=1   3(β̂Γ(vi ) − vi )2            h(vi )    β̂Γ(vi ) − vi      vi
                                                                                                 !           n
                                                                                                             X
                                                                                            0
                                              + β̂Θ(P (vi ))h(vi )(2Γ(vi ) − vi Γ (vi ))           ε3i   +         O(ε4i ). (20)
                                                                                                             i=1


A quick comparison of this expression with equation (19) shows that the first period cost of
the mixed equilbrium exceeds the first period cost of the semi-separating equilibrium with
the same value of β̂ whenever the mixed equilibrium leaves all sellers better off and the
elasticity of Γ is smaller than 2. Because Gb (β) is continuous, this is inconsistent with Part



                                                              44
4 of the definition of equilibrium, market clearing.




C      Pareto Efficient Allocations
C.1      Incentive Feasible Allocations
We start by using the revelation principle to define the set of incentive compatible and feasible
allocations. Each seller and buyer reports his or her private information to a mechanism,
which then recommends certain trades. Without loss of generality, we focus on incentive-
compatible mechanisms and we verify that the resulting trades are feasible.
    We start with buyers. Each buyer reports her discount factor β to the mechanism and
receives consumption cB                           B
                        1 (β) in period 1 and c2 (β) in period 2. The mechanism must be
incentive compatible, so a buyer prefers to report her true type β rather than misreporting
it as some other β̃:

                        uB (β) = cB             B        B              B
                                  1 (β) − 1 + βc2 (β) ≥ c1 (β̃) − 1 + βc2 (β̃)                          (21)

for all β and β̃, where uB (β) is the buyer’s gain from trade. In addition, the mechanism
must satisfy the buyer’s participation constraint, uB (β) ≥ 0 for all β.
    Turning now to sellers, each seller reports his continuation value v to the mechanism,
getting expected consumption cS (v) in period 1 and giving up his asset with probability
ω(v).14 Again, the mechanism must be incentive compatible, so a seller prefers to report his
true type v rather than misreporting it as some other ṽ:

                               uS (v) = cS (v) − vω(v) ≥ cS (ṽ) − ω(ṽ)v

for all v and ṽ, where uS (v) is the seller’s gain from trade. In addition, the mechanism must
satisfy the seller’s participation constraint, uS (v) ≥ 0 for all v.
    Standard arguments imply that the seller’s mechanism is incentive compatible if and only
if ω(v) ∈ [0, 1] is non-increasing and
                                             Z     v̄
                                    S
                                   c (v) =              ω(x)dx + vω(v) + k
                                               v
  14
    We assume that a seller only reports his continuation value, rather than both his discount factor and his
asset quality. It is an open question whether a mechanism that allows a seller to separately report his asset
quality and discount factor would do better still.



                                                          45
for some constant k. Substituting this back into the expression for uS (v) in the previous
paragraph gives                          Z v̄
                                 S
                                u (v) =       ω(x)dx + k.                             (22)
                                                                 v

The seller’s participation constraint imposes that k ≥ 0, which in turn also guarantees that
cS (v) ≥ 0 for all v.
    We next turn to feasibility, i.e. the cost of this mechanism. We start with the buyers’
cost. In period 1, a buyer with discount factor β consumes cB  1 (β) units of the consumption
good per unit of endowment. Allowing for free disposal, the cost is therefore
                                                   Z   β̄
                                         C1B   ≥            (cB
                                                              1 (β) − 1)dG1 (β).                          (23)
                                                   β


In period 2, the buyers have no endowment and receive cB
                                                       2 (β) units of the consumption good
per unit of endowment. Thus the cost is simply
                                                       Z        β̄
                                           C2B     ≥                 cB
                                                                      2 (β)dG1 (β).                       (24)
                                                            β


Now turn to the sellers’ cost. In period 1, the sellers receive cS (v) units of the consumption
good, so the cost is
                            Z   v̄                              Z        v̄
                  C1S   ≥            S
                                     c (v)h(v)dv =                            ω(v)(H(v) + vh(v))dv + k,   (25)
                            v                                        v


where the equality uses incentive compatibility and integration by parts. The total cost of
the mechanism in period 2 is negative, given by the amount of dividends collected from the
sellers:                                Z v̄
                                 S
                                C2 ≥ −       ω(v)Γ(v)h(v)dv.                          (26)
                                                            v

The buyers’ and sellers’ mechanisms are feasible if total costs are zero in each period, C1B +
C1S = C2B + C2S = 0.
    It is straightforward to verify that any equilibrium allocation is incentive compatible and
feasible, but the converse is not true. The most important difference lies in the trading
probability ω(v). Incentive compatibility and feasibility only restricts ω(v) to lie between 0
and 1 and be non-increasing. We argued in Section 3.2 that equilibrium imposes additional
restrictions on ω; for example, a pair of discontinuities must surround any constant portion
of ω. It follows that some incentive compatible and feasible allocations cannot be supported
in any equilibrium.

                                                                     46
C.2      Buyer Efficiency
We say an allocation is buyer efficient if it is incentive-compatible, feasible, and Pareto
optimal for buyers among all the incentive-compatible, feasible allocations with the same
buyer cost (C1B , C2B ). We prove that any buyer efficient allocation is characterized by a
threshold β̂. Buyers with discount factor β < β̂ consume only in the first period, while
buyers with β > β̂ consume only in the second period. A buyer with discount factor β̂ is
indifferent between consuming in the two periods.

Proposition 5 Let b and β̂ solve

                                                     (Gb (β̄) − Gb (β̂))b
                        C1B = bGb (β̂) − 1 and C2B =
                                          
                                                                          .                            (27)
                                                              β̂

If this defines b ≥ 1, then any buyer efficient allocation has
                                                                   
                              b    if β < β̂                       0       if β < β̂
                   cB
                    1 (β) =                       and    cB
                                                          2 (β) =                        .
                              0    if β > β̂                       b/β̂    if β > β̂

Otherwise there is no incentive-compatible, feasible allocation with cost (C1B , C2B ).

Proof of Proposition 5. The proposed allocation is incentive compatible, has cB      1 (β) and
 B
c2 (β) nonnegative, and satisfies the feasibility constraints (23) and (24). Now consider a
competitive equilibrium of an economy in which each individual with β < β̂ has an endow-
ment of b in period 1 and 0 in period 2, while each individual with β ≥ β̂ has an endowment
of 0 in period 1 and b/β̂ in period 2. It is easy to verify the equilibrium involves no trade.
The first welfare theorem implies this allocation is Pareto optimal among all allocations sat-
isfying the two feasibility constraints. It is therefore Pareto optimal among the smaller set
of allocations that also satisfy the incentive constraint (21).
    A corollary of this result is that any equilibrium of our model is buyer efficient. This is
not surprising, since there is no interesting information problem on the buyer’s side of the
market. A buyer is privately informed about her discount factor, but a seller does not care
about the buyer’s discount factor when they trade.15 This contrasts with the seller’s side
of the market, since a buyer cares about a seller’s expected valuation v, which is private
information. We turn to the seller’s problem next.
  15
    Comparing Propositions 2 and 5 shows that a buyer efficient allocation with b > 1 can never be supported
in equilibrium. Such an allocation would require an initial redistribution of b − 1 units of the period 1
consumption good to each buyer.




                                                    47
C.3         Seller Efficiency
An allocation is seller efficient if it is incentive compatible, feasible, and Pareto optimal
for sellers among all the incentive-compatible, feasible allocations with the same seller cost
(C1S , C2S ). This section provides necessary and sufficient conditions for a semi-separating
equilibrium to be seller efficient:

Proposition 6 If Assumption 1 holds and Γ(v) > 0, the semi-separating equilibrium is seller
efficient if and only if there exist non-negative numbers ψ1 and ψ2 satisfying the following
conditions:

   • ψ1 ≥ 1,

   • J(v) = 0,

   • J(v) nondecreasing for v ∈ [v, p̄],

   • J(p̄) = 1, and
       Rv
   •   p̄
            J(x)dx/(v − p̄) ≥ 1 for v > p̄,

where J(v) ≡ ψ1 (H(v) + vh(v)) − ψ2 Γ(v)h(v).

Proof of Proposition 6. To start, assume that the semi-separating equilibrium is seller
efficient. This means that there are nondecreasing integrated Pareto weights Λ(v) with
Λ(v) ≥ 0 and Λ(v̄) = 1,16 such that the allocation maximizes the Pareto-weighted sum of
seller utilities,                   Z                 v̄
                                                           uS (v)dΛ(v),
                                                  v

among all incentive compatible and feasible allocations. Eliminate uS (v) using equation (22)
and perform integration-by-parts to rewrite the Pareto-weighted sum of utilities as
                                    Z    v̄
                                              ω(v)(Λ(v) − Λ(v))dv + k.                               (28)
                                     v


Any seller-efficient allocation maximizes (28) subject to ω(v) ∈ [0, 1] non-increasing, k ≥ 0,
and the two resource constraints (25) and (26) for some nondecreasing integrated Pareto
weights Λ(v).
  16
     The integrated Pareto weight Λ(v) is the sum of the Pareto weights on sellers with continuation value
less than or equal to v, so the Pareto weight on v is dΛ(v).




                                                             48
  Write the Lagrangian of the Pareto-weighted maximization problem, placing nonnegative
multipliers ψ1 and ψ2 on the two constraints (25) and (26):
                                Z       v̄
                        L=                   ω(v)φ(v)dv + (1 − ψ1 )k + ψ1 C1S + ψ2 C2S           (29)
                                    v


subject to k ≥ 0, and ω(v) ∈ [0, 1] non-increasing, where φ(v) ≡ Λ(v) − Λ(v) − J(v) with

                               J(v) ≡ ψ1 (H(v) + vh(v)) − ψ2 Γ(v)h(v).

The Lagrangian is linear in k, which implies that ψ1 ≥ 1; otherwise raising k would increase
the Lagrangian without bound. In addition, integration by parts implies
                          Z    v̄                                    Z    v̄
                                    ω(v)φ(v)dv = ω(v̄)Φ(v̄) −                  Φ(v)dω(v),
                           v                                          v

                 Rv
where Φ(v) ≡ v φ(x)dx. Therefore the Lagrangian is also linear in dω(v), which implies that
ω(v) is constant at any v that does not maximize Φ(v). In the semi-separating equilibrium,
Θ(P (v)) is strictly decreasing for all v ∈ [v, p̄]. Therefore if the equilibrium is Pareto efficient,
all values of v in this interval must maximize Φ(v). We use this to characterize the conditions
for Pareto efficiency.
    Now assume there is a pair (ψ1 , ψ2 ) such that the five conditions in the statement of
the proposition hold. Set Λ(v) = J(v) for v ∈ [v, p̄] and Λ(v) = 1 for v > p̄. The first
condition ensure that k = 0 is optimal with these Pareto weights and Lagrange multipliers.
The next three conditions ensure that Λ(v) = 0, Λ(v) is nondecreasing, and Λ(p̄) = 1, so
dΛ(v) are valid Pareto weights. By construction φ(v) = Φ(v) = 0 for all v ∈ [v, p̄] and
          Rv
Φ(v) = p̄ (1 − J(x))dx ≤ 0 for all v > p̄ using the final condition. Therefore any function
ω(v) that is strictly decreasing on [v, p̄] and 0 at higher values of v maximizes the Lagrangian.
In particular, the semi-separating equilibrium is Pareto optimal.
    Conversely, suppose there is no pair (ψ1 , ψ2 ) satisfying these five conditions. If the first
condition failed, the Lagrangian would not have a maximum and so the semi-separating
equilibrium allocation would not maximize it. If any of the next three conditions failed,
any nondecreasing Pareto weight Λ(v) would have φ(v) = Λ(v) − Λ(v) − J(v) 6= 0 for some
v ∈ [v, p̄]; therefore not all v ∈ [v, p̄] would maximize Φ(v) and any solution to the Lagrangian
must have dω(v) constant at such v, inconsistent with the semi-separating equilibrium al-
location. And if the fifth condition failed, Φ(v) > 0 at some v > v̄, so again any solution
to the Lagrangian must have dω(v) = 0 at all v ≤ v̄, inconsistent with the semi-separating
equilibrium allocation.


                                                            49
       We use this proposition to prove the results in Section 5.3. As in the text, assume

                                         1+v
                                Γ(v) =       and H(v) = 1 − (α + 1)v −α + αv −α−1 .
                                          2
                                                                                       −1
First assume 0 < α ≤ 2.17 If β̂ < 2, set ψ1 = ψ2 = H(p̄) + p̄h(p̄) − Γ(p̄)h(p̄)            > 1. If
β̂ ≥ 2, set ψ1 = ψ2 = 1. It is easy to verify that J(v) is increasing with J(1) = 0 and
J(p̄) = 1. Proposition 6 implies that the semi-separating equilibrium is seller efficient.
    If instead α > 2 and β̂ ≥ 2 (so p̄ = ∞), then the semi-separating equilibrium is not seller
efficient. If ψ1 < ψ2 , J 0 (1) < J(1) = 0, which implies J(v) is negative at values of v slightly
above 1, inconsistent with a seller-efficient allocation. If ψ1 ≥ ψ2 , J(v) is decreasing at
sufficiently large values of v, again inconsistent with a seller efficient allocation when p̄ = ∞.
    To construct a Pareto improvement in this example, it is not enough to pool a single
group of sellers. That will always either reduce some sellers’ utility or raise costs in one of
the periods. Instead, we must pool investors within two separate intervals.
    We illustrate this with a concrete example. As in the text, assume α = 3 and β̂ = 2,
so that Θ(P (v)) = e1−v . First consider a pool with radius ε in the neighborhood of some
v > 1 + ε, setting ω(v) equal to the average value of Θ(P (v)) within this pool, ω(v) =
e1−v (eε − e−ε )/(2ε). By construction, this increases welfare relative to the semi-separating
equilibrium for all v 0 ∈ (v − ε, v + ε), while welfare is unchanged for other sellers; see
equation (22). Thus the pool is Pareto improving if it is cost feasible.
    Taking a Taylor expansion of costs in a neighborhood of ε = 0, we find that the first
period cost of the pool in excess of the cost of the semi-separating allocation, is
                  v+ε
                                                                8e1−v (3 − 2v) 3
              Z
                          ω(v) − Θ(P (x)) (H(x) + xH 0 (x))dx =               ε + O(ε4 )
                                         
               v−ε                                                    v5

which is negative if v > 3/2. The second period cost of this pool, again in excess of the cost
of the semi-separating allocation, is
                          v+ε
                                                                 4e1−v (3v 2 − 5) 3
                      Z
                                 ω(v) − Θ(P (x)) Γ(x)H 0 (x)dx =                 ε + O(ε4 ),
                                                
                  −
                      v−ε                                               v6
                        p
which is negative if v < 5/3. Since these regions do not overlap, any single pool must raise
costs in one of the two periods.
                                                                                     p
   But now consider two such pools, one with radius ε1 in a neighborhood of some v1 < 5/3
                                                              R∞
  17
    With α ≤ 1, total dividends held by sellers are infinite, 1 Γ(v)H 0 (v) dv = ∞, which might seem
worrisome for constructing an equilibrium.
                              R∞           Nevertheless, total dividends sold are bounded above by the
dividends of the worst asset: 1 Θ(P (v))Γ(v)H 0 (v) dv < 1 for any value of β̂, so the market clearing
condition can hold.


                                                         50
and the other with radius ε2 in a neighborhood of some v2 > 3/2. Manipulating the above
expressions, we find that for small values of ε1 and ε2 , the costs are negative in both periods
if                  1−v2                 1/3                              1/3
                            (2v2 − 3)v15
                                                       1−v2 2
                      e                          ε1    e     (3v2 − 5)v16
                                               >    >
                      e1−v1 (3 − 2v1 )v25        ε2    e1−v1 (5 − 3v12 )v26
Simplifying these inequalities, we find that if v1 ∈ (1, 10/9) and v2 > 5(3−2v
                                                                          10−9v1
                                                                                1)
                                                                                   , the inequalities
on ε1 /ε2 define a non-empty open interval on the nonnegative real line. This means that
in a neighborhood of such v1 and v2 , we construct two small pools. Each pool alone would
raise costs in one of the periods, but the two pools together reduce costs in both periods.
    We can also compute the expected price within such a pool, the ratio of the buyer’s cost
in period 1 to the amount of dividends he gets in period 2. Again using a Taylor expansion,
this is
                      ω(v + ε) + (v + ε)ω(v)          2(v 2 + 3v − 5) 2
                            R v+ε
                                        0 (x)dx
                                                = 2 +        2 − 1)
                                                                     ε + O(ε3 ),
                             v−ε  Γ(x)H
                        ω(v) H(v+ε)−H(v−ε)              3v(v
                                                      √
which is bigger than 2 when v is bigger than ( 29 − 3)/2 ≈ 1.19 and smaller than 2 at
lower values. In other words, buyers get a low price when they buy from the low pool,
v ∈ (v1 − ε1 , v1 + ε1 ), but they pay a high price when they buy from the high pool, v ∈
(v2 − ε2 , v2 + ε2 ). Randomizing between both pools allows them to make money in expected
value. The example in the text, with pools for v ∈ [1, 1.01] and v ∈ [8.3, 11.3], is based on
this calculation but does not use limits as the radius of the pools vanish.


C.4     Local Pareto Efficiency
In the previous two sections, we asked whether, starting from a semi-separating equilibrium,
it is possible to improve the welfare first of buyers and then of sellers without affecting the
other group of investors, i.e. taking the costs C1B , C2B , C1S , and C2S as given. This section
examines the possibility of achieving a Pareto improvement by moving costs across periods
in a manner consistent with the resource constraint.
     To understand the scope for this, we need to understand how buyers’ and sellers’ utility
is affected by changes in the costs. We focus here on marginal changes in the costs, again
starting from a semi-separating equilibrium. We say an allocation is locally Pareto efficient if
it is buyer- and seller-efficient and if no small resource-feasible change in the costs generates
a Pareto improvement.

Proposition 7 Impose Assumption 1 and Γ(v) > 0 and suppose that the semi-separating
equilibrium is seller efficient. If there exists a pair (ψ1 , ψ2 ) that not only satisfies all condi-


                                                 51
tions in Proposition 6 but also

                         Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)       ψ2        β̂ 2 gb (β̂)
                                               >      >                         ,
                               g(β̂)               ψ1   1 − Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)

then the semi-separating equilibrium is locally Pareto efficient. Otherwise it is not locally
efficient.

Proof of Proposition 7.         Proposition 5 describes the buyer efficient allocation. Buyers’
utility is                                     
                                               b − 1               if β < β̂
                                uB (β) =
                                               βb/β̂ − 1           if β ≥ β̂,

where b and β̂ depend on C1B and C2B through equation (27). Implicitly differentiating this
expression, we get that a change in (C1B , C2B ) of magnitude (dC1B , dC2B ) raises the utility of
buyers with β < β̂ if and only if

                                                 β̂ 2 gb (β̂)
                              dC1B +                                    dC2B > 0
                                        1 − Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)

The same change raises the utility of buyers with β > β̂ if and only if

                                       gb (β̂)
                                                       dC1B + dC2B > 0.
                                 Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)

Note that
                            Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)                   β̂ 2 gb (β̂)
                                                   ≥                               ,
                                   gb (β̂)             1 − Gb (β̂) + β̂gb (β̂)
as can be confirmed algebraically. This means that if buyers β < β̂ like the perturbation
(dC1B , dC2B ) with dC2B ≥ 0, all buyers like the perturbation. And if buyers β > β̂ like the
perturbation (dC1B , dC2B ) with dC2B ≤ 0, all buyers like the perturbation.
    Next, a feasible change in the costs satisfies dC1S = −dC1B and dC2S = −dC2B and so
in particular ψ1 dC1S + ψ2 dC2S = −ψ1 dC1B − ψ2 dC2B . Proposition 6 then implies that if
ψ1 dC1B + ψ2 dC2B < 0 for any (ψ1 , ψ2 ) consistent with the conditions in the Proposition, the
equilibrium is not locally Pareto efficient.
    Putting these results together, the equilibrium is locally Pareto efficient if there exists a
(ψ1 , ψ2 ) consistent with the conditions in Proposition 6 such that
                                     β̂ 2 gb (β̂)
  1. for any dC2B > 0, dC1B +     1−Gb (β̂)+β̂gb (β̂)
                                                      dC2B      < 0 or ψ1 dC1B + ψ2 dC2B ≥ 0, and


                                                       52
                                   gb (β̂)
   2. for any dC2B < 0,       Gb (β̂)+β̂gb (β̂)
                                                dC1B   + dC2B < 0 or ψ1 dC1B + ψ2 dC2B ≥ 0.

                                  ψ2          β̂ 2 gb (β̂)                                                     Gb (β̂)+β̂gb (β̂)
Part 1 holds if and only if       ψ1
                                       >   1−Gb (β̂)+β̂gb (β̂)
                                                               ,   while part 2 holds if and only if                 g(β̂)
                                                                                                                                   >
ψ2
ψ1
   .
    The Lagrange multipliers ψ1 and ψ2 give the marginal value of funds to the sellers in each
period, thus their ratio is the marginal rate of substitution of funds across the two periods.
The first ratio involving Gb (β̂) is the marginal rate of substitution for active buyers, those
with β > β̂. The last ratio is the marginal rate of substitution for inactive buyers, those
with β < β̂. If the marginal rate of substitution for sellers lies in between these two marginal
rates of substitution, there is no way to make all investors better off by reallocating resources
across periods.
    To see how to apply this Proposition, we build on our previous example with independent
Pareto distributions. Assume 0 ≤ αδ ≤ 1. For any ψ2 > ψ1 , J 0 (1) < 0, so there is no
associated seller-efficient allocation, while any ratio ψ2 /ψ1 ≥ 0 gives us valid Pareto weights
for the semi-separating equilibrium. Therefore the semi-separating equilibrium is locally
                                      2 g (β̂)
Pareto efficient if and only if 1−Gβ̂(β̂)+
                                         b
                                            β̂g (β̂)
                                                     < 1.18 Since these conditions hinge on the value
                                            b          b

of Gb (β̂) and gb (β̂), they may or may not hold in any particular economy.




  18
       If 1 < αδ ≤ 2, there is also a lower bound on the ratio ψ2 /ψ1 for generating valid Pareto weights, say
                                                                      Gb (β̂)+β̂gb (β̂)
ψ2 /ψ1 ≥ ψ̄, where ψ̄ ∈ (0, 1]. We therefore also require                   g(β̂)
                                                                                          > ψ̄ in order for the semi-separating
equilibrium to be locally Pareto efficient.


                                                              53
