                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                           BENCHMARKS IN SEARCH MARKETS

                                          Darrell Duffie
                                         Piotr Dworczak
                                         Haoxiang Zhu


                                       Working Paper 20620
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20620


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014



We are grateful for useful discussions with and comments from members of the Market
Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform (MPG), as well as Ana Babus, Bruno Biais, David
Bowman, Gregory Connor, Willie Fuchs, Will Gornall, Brett Green, Terry Hendershott, Gustavo
Manso, Jose Moraga-Gonzalez, Konstantin Milbradt, Paul Milgrom, Marzena Rostek, Ali
Shourideh, Andy Skrzypacz, Chester Spatt, Jeremy Stein, Gabor Virag, and Xavier Vives.
Helpful comments were offered by seminar and conference participants at Stanford University,
Princeton University, U.C. Berkeley, Harvard University, MIT, Finance Theory Group, SFS
Cavalcade, European Central Bank, Paul Woolley Centre Annual Conference, Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum, Western Finance Association annual meeting, Bonn Workshop on Information
Aggregation, Society for Economic Dynamics meeting, NBER Summer Institute Asset Pricing
meeting, Econometric Society World Congress, Philadelphia Fed Search and Matching
Conference, the 11th Central Bank Workshop on Microstructure of Financial Markets,
Conference on Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period, and
American Finance Association annual meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20620.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Darrell Duffie, Piotr Dworczak, and Haoxiang Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Benchmarks in Search Markets
Darrell Duffie, Piotr Dworczak, and Haoxiang Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 20620
October 2014, Revised September 2016
JEL No. D43,D47,D83,G12,G14,G18,G21,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

We characterize the price-transparency role of benchmarks in over-the-counter markets. A
benchmark can, under conditions, raise social surplus by increasing the volume of beneficial
trade, facilitating more efficient matching between dealers and customers, and reducing search
costs. Although the market transparency promoted by benchmarks reduces dealers' profit
margins, dealers may nonetheless introduce a benchmark to encourage greater market
participation by investors. Low-cost dealers may also introduce a benchmark to increase their
market share relative to high-cost dealers. We construct a revelation mechanism that maximizes
welfare subject to search frictions, and show conditions under which it coincides with announcing
the benchmark.


Darrell Duffie                                       Haoxiang Zhu
Graduate School of Business                          MIT Sloan School of Management
Stanford University                                  100 Main Street, E62-623
Stanford, CA 94305-7298                              Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                             and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu                                  zhuh@mit.edu

Piotr Dworczak
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA, 94305
dworczak@stanford.edu
1 Introduction                                                                                                  1


1       Introduction

An enormous quantity of over-the-counter (OTC) trades are negotiated by counterparties
who rely on the observation of benchmark prices. This paper explains how benchmarks affect
pricing and trading behavior by reducing market opacity, characterizes the welfare impact of
benchmarks, and shows how the incentives of regulators and dealers to support benchmarks
depend on market structure.
    Trillions of dollars in loans are negotiated at a spread to LIBOR or EURIBOR, benchmark
interbank borrowing rates.1 The WM/Reuters daily fixings are the dominant benchmarks in
the foreign exchange market, which covers over $5 trillion per day in transactions.2 There are
popular benchmarks for a range of commodities including silver, gold, oil, and natural gas,
among others.3 Benchmarks are also used to provide price transparency for manufactured
products such as pharmaceuticals and automobiles.4
    Among other roles, benchmarks mitigate search frictions by lowering the informational
asymmetry between dealers and their “buy-side” customers. We consider a market for an
asset in which dealers offer price quotes to customers who are relatively uninformed about
the typical cost to dealers of providing the asset. We provide conditions under which adding
a benchmark to an opaque OTC market can improve efficiency by encouraging entry by
customers, improving matching efficiency, and reducing total search costs.
    Recent major scandals over the manipulation of benchmarks for interest rates, foreign
currencies, commodities, and other assets have made the robustness of benchmarks a major
concern of international investigators and policymakers. This paper offers a theoretical
foundation for the public-policy support of transparent financial benchmarks. Section 5
discusses the manipulation of benchmarks in more detail.
    1
      LIBOR is the London Interbank Offered Rate. EURIBOR is the Euro Interbank Offered Rate. For
U.S. dollar Libor alone, the Market Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform (2014) (chaired by one of
the authors of this paper) reports that over 3 trillion dollars in syndicated loans and over 1 trillion dollars
in variable-rate bonds are negotiated relative to LIBOR. The MPG report lists many other fixed-income
products that are negotiated at a spread to the “interbank offered rates” known as LIBOR, EURIBOR, and
TIBOR, across five major currencies. As of the end of 2013, Bank for International Settlements (2014) report
a total notional outstanding of interest rate derivatives of 583 trillion U.S. dollars, the vast majority of which
reference LIBOR or EURIBOR. These swap contracts and many other derivatives reference benchmarks, but
are not themselves benchmark products. Other extremely popular benchmarks for overnight interest rates
include SONIA, the Sterling OverNight Index Average, and EONIA, the Euro OverNight Index Average.
    2
      See Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group (2014), which reports that 160 currencies are covered by the
WM/Reuters benchmarks. These benchmarks are fixed at least daily, and by currency pair within the 21
major “trade” currencies.
    3
      The London Bullion Market Association provides benchmarks for gold and silver. Platts provides
benchmarks for oil, refined fuels, and iron ore (IODEX). Another major oil price benchmark is ICE Brent.
ICIS Heren provides a widely used price benchmark for natural gas.
    4
      For a discussion of the Average Wholesale Price (AWP) drug-price benchmarks, see Gencarelli (2005).
The Kelly Blue Book publishes the “Fair Purchase Price” of automobiles, based on the average transaction
price by model and location.
1 Introduction                                                                                 2


    Our model works roughly as follows. In an OTC market with a finite number of dealers
and a continuum of investors that we call “traders,” the cost to a dealer of providing the asset
to a trader is the sum of a dealer-specific (idiosyncratic) component and a component that
is common to all dealers. (In practice the clients of financial intermediaries may be buying
or selling the asset. We take the case in which traders wish to buy. The opposite case is
effectively the same, up to sign changes.) The existence of a benchmark is taken to mean
that the common cost component is publicly announced. Each trader observes, privately,
whether her search cost is high or low. Traders are searching for a good price, and dealers
offer them price quotes that depend endogenously on the presence of a benchmark. Each
dealer posts an offer price, available for execution by any trader, anonymously. Traders,
who have a commonly known value for acquiring the asset, contact the dealers sequentially,
expending a costly search effort, or costly delay, with each successive dealer contacted. At
each point in time the trader, given all of the information available to her at that time
(including past price offers and, if published, the benchmark) decides whether to buy, keep
searching, or exit the market. All market participants maximize their conditional expected
net payoffs, at all times, in a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
    Under natural parameter assumptions, which vary with the specific result, we show that
publishing the benchmark is socially efficient because of the following effects. First, publi-
cation of the benchmark encourages efficient entry by traders, thus increasing the realized
gains from trade. The benchmark improves the information available to traders about the
likely price terms they will face. This assists traders in deciding whether to participate in the
market, based on whether there is a sufficiently large conditional expected gain from trade.
The increased transparency of prices created by the benchmark causes dealers to compete
more aggressively in their quotes. In this sense, publication of the benchmark mitigates the
hold-up problem caused by dealers’ incentives to quote less attractive prices once the search
costs of traders have been sunk.
    Second, benchmarks can improve matching efficiency, leading to a higher market share for
low-cost dealers. When the benchmark is not observed by traders, high-cost dealers exploit
the ignorance of traders about the cost of providing the asset and may conduct sales despite
the presence of more efficient competitors. The benchmark allows traders to decompose
a price offer into a common-cost component and a dealer-specific component for cost and
profit margin. As a result, if search costs are sufficiently small, customers trade with the
most efficient dealers. Third, benchmarks reduce wasteful search by (i) alerting traders that
gains from trade are too small to justify entry, and (ii) helping traders infer whether they
should stop searching because they have likely encountered a low-cost dealer.
    We also characterize cases in which the introduction of a benchmark lowers welfare. This
1 Introduction                                                                                         3


can happen when the market is already relatively efficient without the benchmark.5
    We embed the price-transparency problem, add a benchmark or not, into a broader
planning framework by characterizing a socially optimal revelation mechanism. Here, we
take the case in which dealers have the same costs, and show that whenever the realized
gain from trade between a dealer and a trader is lower than an endogenous threshold, an
optimal mechanism reveals the benchmark. If the realized gain from trade is below this
threshold, this mechanism reveals only this event, and not the benchmark itself. Publishing
the benchmark is always an optimal mechanism if there is an unbounded amount of potential
traders. In broad terms, publishing the benchmark approximates the optimal mechanism
whenever the market would otherwise generate low participation by traders.
    A related question is: Who implements a benchmark? Perhaps surprisingly, dealers often
have sufficiently strong incentives to add a benchmark. What matters is whether the resulting
reduction in dealer profit margin is more than offset by the increased volume of trade. This
helps explain why almost all existing benchmarks have been introduced by dealers without
regulatory pressure. On the other hand, there are cases in which benchmarks would enhance
welfare, but dealers lack the incentives to introduce them. Thus, there is scope for regulators
to promote benchmarks or other forms of price transparency in order to improve market
efficiency. The introduction by FINRA of post-trade transparency in the U.S. corporate
bond markets is a case in point. Recently, in succession, the United Kingdom, Japan, and
the European Union have introduced legislation in support of financial benchmarks. As of
this writing, the U.S. has no benchmark legislation.
    When dealers have heterogeneous costs for providing the asset, we show that the most
efficient dealers can use a benchmark as a “price transparency weapon” that drives inefficient
competitors out of the market and draws trades to dealers in the “benchmark club.” This
may help explain why benchmarks such as LIBOR were first introduced into the Eurodollar
loan market by large London-based banks.6
    Our results are consistent with a significant body of empirical literature on the impact
of adding post-trade transparency to the U.S. corporate bond market with the introduc-
tion of TRACE in 2003. Bid-ask spreads were usually (although not always) lowered by
TRACE, as shown by Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006), Edwards, Har-
ris, and Piwowar (2007), Goldstein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2007), and Asquith, Covert, and
Pathak (2013). However Asquith, Covert, and Pathak (2013) also show that TRACE lowered
transaction volumes in some less liquid segments of the market. They speculate that some
dealers may have reduced their commitment of capital to the market because the additional
   5
     This finding is consistent with the insight of Asriyan, Fuchs, and Green (2015) (in a very different
model) that welfare can be non-monotone in the degree of transparency.
   6
     See Hou and Skeie (2013).
2 The Role of Benchmarks in Over-the-Counter Markets                                                         4


price transparency reduced their intermediation rents.7 Consistent with this, we show that
improved price transparency squeezes the market share and profit of less efficient dealers.
    Our analysis draws upon techniques first used in search-based models of labor markets,
in a literature surveyed by Rogerson, Shimer, and Wright (2005). The framework that we
consider features mixed strategies in pricing (as modeled by Varian (1980), Burdett and Judd
(1983), and Stahl (1989), among others) and uncertainty about the distribution of prices,
as in Rothschild (1974). Our model builds on that of Janssen, Pichler, and Weidenholzer
(2011), with two important differences that allow us to study welfare implications. First, we
introduce endogenous entry to study efficient participation in the market.8 With endogenous
entry, we show that the result of Janssen, Pichler, and Weidenholzer (2011), that sellers never
wish to disclose their costs to the market, may fail. Indeed, in our model setting, the fact
that dealers often wish to publish a benchmark is consistent with the historical emergence
of dealer-supported financial benchmarks. Second, we permit heterogeneity in dealers’ costs.
We show that benchmarks promote trade with more efficient dealers.
    Section 4 of our paper on matching efficiency is related to Benabou and Gertner (1993),
who analyze the influence of inflationary uncertainty (similar in spirit to the effect of cost
uncertainty in our model) on welfare and on the split of surplus between consumers and
firms. The relationship between their approach and ours with regard to uncertainty can
be described as “local” versus “global.” Benabou and Gertner (1993) analyze the marginal
effect on welfare when uncertainty is reduced slightly, while the introduction of a benchmark
in our setting reduces this source of uncertainty significantly. A limitation of their model is
its restriction to only two sellers.


2       The Role of Benchmarks in Over-the-Counter Markets

A benchmark price is a measure of “the going price” of a standardized asset at a specified
time.9 Benchmarks are usually published on a daily or sometimes higher frequency, and are
used for at least10 three main purposes: (i) the settlement of contracts, such as forwards
    7
      Additional arguments for and against greater price transparency in the corporate bond market are
discussed by Bessembinder and Maxwell (2008).
    8
      Janssen, Moraga-González, and Wildenbeest (2005) model entry of buyers when sellers’ cost is common
knowledge but they do not focus on the effect of information disclosure about dealers’ costs.
    9
      The standardized asset may actually be a composite of several closely related assets, as for the case
of the Brent Oil benchmark, which is a “basket of physical oil cargoes in the North Sea—Brent, Forties,
Oseberg and Ekofisk (BFOE).” See Bank of England (2014), which states that “a ‘benchmark’ means an
index, rate or price that: (a) is determined from time to time by reference to the state of the market; (b) is
made available to the public (whether free of charge or on payment); and (c) is used for reference for purposes
that include one or more of the following: (i) determining the interest payable, or other sums due, under loan
agreements or under other contracts relating to investments; (ii) determining the price at which investments
may be bought or sold or the value of investments; (iii) measuring the performance of investments.”
   10
      For more discussion of these and other roles of benchmarks, see Duffie and Stein (2014).
2 The Role of Benchmarks in Over-the-Counter Markets                                             5


or options, whose payoffs depend formulaically on the benchmark price of the referenced
asset; (ii) the ex-post monitoring by non-dealer market participants of the quality of trade
execution that they have received; and (iii) price transparency in comparison shopping, that
is, for the purpose of comparing a quoted price to the benchmark price, as a signal of prices
that might be available elsewhere in the market, then deciding to accept the quoted price or
to look for a better one. When discussing the benefit of regulation of benchmarks, the Bank
of England (2014) refers to the price-transparency role of benchmarks as one of “determining
the price at which investments may be bought or sold.”
     All of these roles are important. In this paper, we focus on the third role, comparison
shopping in otherwise opaque OTC markets. This role also has some connection with the
second role of execution monitoring. Suppose, for example, that a firm normally relies on its
main relationship bank to convert its foreign-currency receivables into its own currency. With
the benefit of the published WM/Reuters daily foreign exchange benchmarks, the firm can
monitor whether its bank has actually achieved good execution prices on the firm’s behalf.
If not, the firm would eventually ask a different bank to perform the same service. Although
this suggests a different model than that offered in this paper, the economic impact of a
benchmark on market efficiency through its execution-monitoring role is obviously closely
related to its impact through its price transparency role in a search-based market.
     Benchmarks would be almost redundant, from the viewpoint of pre-trade price trans-
parency, if the best executable price quotes are published and accessible to all market par-
ticipants, for example on an open central limit order book. Markets with this high level
of pre-trade transparency include those for exchange-traded equities and derivatives. Our
model is instead more relevant to the case of an opaque OTC market, in which a high level
of pre-trade price transparency is not available. In opaque OTC markets, buy-side investors
are generally not aware of recent transaction prices, the range of quotes that dealers might
provide to them, or which dealers are providing better quotes at a given time. These OTC
markets cover standardized loans, foreign exchange, repurchase agreements, certain OTC
derivatives, and many types of commodities.
     Price transparency in some OTC markets is increased through benchmarks, multi-dealer
electronic trading platforms, or various forms of post-trade transaction reporting. For ex-
ample, some types of U.S. bond markets have post-trade transaction reporting through
TRACE.11 The Dodd-Frank Act, Japanese regulations, and the EU’s revised Markets in Fi-
nancial Instruments Directive (MiFID II) mandate post-trade transaction reporting for some
classes of OTC financial products. OTC markets that have less comprehensive transaction
reporting and rely more heavily on benchmarks for price transparency include those for large
  11
     See Bessembinder, Maxwell, and Venkataraman (2006), Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007), Gold-
stein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2007), and Asquith, Covert, and Pathak (2013).
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                              6


short-term bank loans, foreign exchange, and commodities.


3        A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool

This section describes a search-based model of an OTC market, the equilibrium behavior
of market participants, and its efficiency properties. The main results compare the social
surplus generated by a market that includes a benchmark with that of a market that does
not include a benchmark but is otherwise identical.


3.1       Model setup
This subsection introduces model primitives, including market participants, the trading pro-
tocol, and the definition of market equilibrium. The interpretation and further motivation
of the model primitives are discussed toward the end of this subsection.
    Market participants consist of a finite number N ≥ 2 of dealers and an infinite set of
traders, distributed uniformly on [0, 1]. All trades are for a unit amount of a given asset. For
concreteness, we model trader-dealer encounters in which a dealer sells and a trader buys.
The model can be equivalently formulated with the buying and selling roles reversed.12
The important distinction between the two types of agents is that dealers make markets
by offering executable price quotes, whereas traders contact dealers sequentially and accept
their quotes or not, in a manner to be described.
    Any dealer can supply the asset at a per-unit cost of c, a random variable with a cumu-
lative distribution function G whose support is [c, c̄], for some c ≥ 0 and c < c̄ < ∞.
    All traders have a known constant value v > 0 for acquiring the asset. We take the
non-degenerate case v ≤ c̄, so that the gain from trade (v − c)+ ≡ max(v − c, 0) is zero for
sufficiently high cost outcomes. Trader j ∈ [0, 1] incurs a search cost of sj for making each
contact with a new dealer. For tractability, we suppose that sj = 0 with some probability µ
in (0, 1), and that sj = s with probability 1 − µ, for some constant s > 0. Search costs are
independent across almost every pair of traders. By the exact law of large numbers of Sun
(2006), µ is also the fraction of traders with zero search cost, almost surely.13 The presence
of some traders with zero search cost overcomes the usual Diamond paradox.14 Because
    12
      In financial markets, “buy” and “sell” should not be interpreted literally as buying or selling a good,
like a car. For instance, in market for credit default swaps, a dealer can sell protection and the trader buys
protection, with zero market value of the contract. In loan market, the dealer who sells the asset may be
interpreted as a bank that provides a loan.
   13
      We adopt throughout Sun’s construction of the agent space and probability space, and the measurable
subsets of the product of these two spaces, so as to allow without further comment various applications of
the exact law of large numbers for a continuum of essentially pairwise-independent random variables.
   14
      The Diamond paradox (Diamond 1971) refers to cases in which all dealers charge the monopoly price
in a unique equilibrium with no search.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                              7


search costs in practice often arise from delay costs, we refer for simplicity and concreteness
to traders with zero search cost as “fast traders,” and to those with non-zero search cost as
“slow traders.”
    The presence of a benchmark is taken to mean the publication of the dealers’ cost c. We
will compare two market designs: the benchmark case and the no-benchmark case.
    The game proceeds as follows. If there is a published benchmark, then c is first revealed
to all traders. Each dealer i then posts a price pi that constitutes a binding offer to sell
one unit of the asset at this price to any trader. This offer price is observed only by those
traders who contact the dealer. The dealer is aware of whether a benchmark is published
when quoting the price pi . The dealer’s offer pi does not lapse if a trader initially declines it
and later returns to take the offer. This assumption is made for tractability.15
    Traders, without yet having observed the quotes of any dealers, make entry decisions.
Entry means contacting one of the dealers, chosen with equal likelihood across the N dealers,
and observing that dealer’s offer. Of course, the entry of a slow trader incurs the cost s. A
failure to enter the market ends the game for the trader. If a trader enters, he may accept
the first offer or continue searching by contacting another randomly selected dealer, again
with the uniform distribution over the yet-to-be-visited dealers. The order of dealer contacts
is independent across traders. At any point, a trader may choose to accept the offer from
any previously contacted dealer, in which case a transaction is made at the chosen dealer’s
offer and the trader leaves the market. A trader may exit the market at any point without
trading, even after having contacted all N dealers.
    Dealers observe neither the price offers posted by other dealers nor the order in which
traders contact dealers. Traders observe nothing about the searches or transactions of other
traders.
    A (mixed) strategy for dealer i is a measurable function mapping the dealer’s cost c to
a probability distribution over price offers. In the absence of a benchmark, a strategy for
trader j maps the trader’s search cost sj and any prior history of observed offers to a choice
from: (i) accept one of the observed offers, (ii) continue searching, or (iii) exit. (If the
trader has not yet visited any dealer, the decision to continue searching is equivalent to the
decision to enter the market.) In the presence of a benchmark, the strategy of a trader may
also depend on the published benchmark c. The payoff of dealer i is (pi − c)Qi , where Qi
is the total quantity of sales16 by dealer i. If trader j successfully conducts a purchase, say
  15
      Relaxing this “recall” assumption in Section 3 makes no difference to equilibrium behavior because,
as we will show, a slow trader accepts the first quote on the equilibrium path. (See, also Janssen and
Parakhonyak (2013).) In Section 4, the recall assumption substantially simplifies the analysis. Zhu (2012)
shows that without recall, revisiting a dealer is taken as a negative signal of a trader’s outside option and
leads to a worse updated quote.
   16
                      ´1
      That is, Qi = 0 1(i,j) dj, where 1(i,j) has outcome 1 if trader j accepts the offer of dealer i, and
otherwise has outcome 0. This integral is always well defined and, under our equilibrium strategies, satisfies
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                              8


from dealer i, then her payoff is v − pi − sj Kj , where Kj is the number of dealers that she
contacted. If she does not purchase the asset, then her payoff is −sj Kj .
    An equilibrium is a collection of strategies for the respective agents, possibly mixed
(allowing randomization), with the property that each agent’s strategy maximizes at each
time that agent’s expected payoff conditional on the information available to the agent at that
time, and given the strategies of the other agents. We focus on symmetric perfect Bayesian
equilibria. We also assume, essentially without loss of generality, that fast traders play
their weakly dominant strategy of always entering the market and contacting all dealers.17
As is conventional in the literature covering search-based markets, we restrict attention
to reservation-price equilibria unless otherwise indicated. These are equilibria in which a
trader’s decision to continue searching can be based at any time on a cutoff for the best offer
observed to that point.
    Our definition of the benchmark as the dealer cost c captures the essence of benchmark
practice in a range of OTC markets, those for which the benchmark is the inter-dealer price.
For example, LIBOR is the average lending rate in the inter-bank market. (In our model, all
banks have the same cost.) Banks then offer loans to their customers at spreads to LIBOR.
The LBMA Gold Price, the gold benchmark of the London Bullion Market Association, is
the market-clearing price set in an inter-dealer auction that is run every day for the express
purpose of determining the daily gold benchmark. Dealers then quote gold prices to their
customers, who are aware of the previously published fixing. (The LBMA Silver Price has
a similar daily fixing.) WM/Reuters foreign exchange benchmark for each major currency
pair is the average of transaction prices on two leading electronic trading platforms that
occur during a 5-minute fixing window.18 As with LIBOR, this implies that publishing the
FX benchmark still leaves some residual noise in customer assessments of dealer costs that
does not apply in our basic model. We consider this effect later in the paper. In general,
we avoid more complicated models of the benchmark simply for reasons of tractability and
conciseness. Section 3.6 provides conditions under which publishing the dealer cost c actually
provides the socially optimal level of pre-trade transparency.
the exact law of large numbers, using the Fubini property of Sun (2006).
   17
      This assumption is without loss of generality in that for every equilibrium in which fast traders do not
play this strategy, there exists a payoff-equivalent equilibrium in which they do. The only exception is the
degenerate Diamond-paradox equilibrium, in which all dealers quote the price v, fast traders contact no more
than one dealer, and slow traders do not enter.
   18
      The sampling window used to be one minute, but it was widened to five minutes following the recom-
mendation of Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group (2014) in September 2014.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                                           9


3.2       The benchmark case
We first characterize equilibrium in the benchmark case, that in which c is published before
trade begins. A considerable part of the analysis here draws upon the work of Janssen,
Moraga-González, and Wildenbeest (2005) and Janssen, Pichler, and Weidenholzer (2011).
     In the event that c > v, there are no gains from trade, and in light of the benchmark
information, slow traders do not enter. Obviously, there can be no trade in equilibrium. If
v − s ≤ c ≤ v, because dealers never quote prices below their costs, slow traders still do
not enter. Fast traders enter and buy from the dealer that offers the lowest price. It is easy
to show that the only equilibrium is one in which all dealers quote a price of c, amounting
to Bertrand competition among dealers. From this point we therefore concentrate on the
interesting case, the event in which c < v − s.
     We fix some candidate probability λc of entry by slow traders, to be determined in
equilibrium. Conditional on entry, the optimal policy of a slow trader is characterized by
Weitzman (1979): Search until she contacts a dealer whose offer is no higher than some cutoff
rc , which depends neither on the history of received offers nor on the number of dealers that
have not yet been visited.
     A standard search-theoretic argument—found, for example, in Varian (1980) and elab-
orated in Appendix A—implies that the only possible equilibrium response of dealers is a
mixed strategy in which offers are drawn from a continuous (non-atomic) distribution whose
support has rc as its maximum. Because, in equilibrium, a dealer’s price is never worse than
a slow trader’s reservation price, a slow trader buys from the first dealer that she contacts.
     Let Fc ( · ) be the equilibrium cumulative distribution function of a dealer’s price offer.
Given the traders’ strategies, a contacted dealer assigns the posterior probability
                                                                  µ
                                             q(λc ) =           1                                                     (3.1)
                                                          µ+      λ (1
                                                                N c
                                                                         − µ)

that the visiting trader is fast. Here, we used the property that a slow trader enters with
probability λc and visits this particular dealer with probability 1/N . Because, in equilibrium,
dealers must be indifferent between all price offers in the support [ pc , rc ] of the distribution,
we have
                                                

           (1 − q(λc ))          + q(λc ) (1 − Fc (p))N −1  (p − c) =             (1 − q(λc ))           (rc − c).   (3.2)
                                                          
      
           | {z }                  |          {z         }                         | {z }
       P (Sell to slow trader)        P (Sell to fast trader)                   P (Sell to slow trader)


We used the fact that a slow trader accepts a price p ≤ rc for sure, but a fast trader
accepts p if and only if all other dealers offer worse prices. Thus, the equilibrium cumulative
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                 10


distribution function Fc of price offers is given by
                                                                               N1−1
                                            λc (1 − µ) rc − p
                               Fc (p) = 1 −                                             .    (3.3)
                                                Nµ     p−c

The lowest price pc in the support is determined by the boundary condition Fc ( pc ) = 0.
    We can now calculate the optimal reservation price rc? of slow traders. Because traders
value the asset at v, we must have rc? ≤ v. The definition of reservation price implies that
after observing a quote of p = rc? , a trader must be indifferent between immediately accepting
the offer and continuing to search, so that
                                                                ˆ   rc?
                                  v−      rc?   = −s + v −                p dFc (p).         (3.4)
                                                                  pc


Substituting the solution for Fc (p) and conducting a change of variables yields

                                                                1
                                                rc? = c +              s,                    (3.5)
                                                            1 − α(λc )

where                                 ˆ                                      −1
                                            1   
                                                             Nµ
                        α(λc ) =                 1+                 z N −1         dz < 1.   (3.6)
                                        0                λc (1 − µ)
By direct calculation, the expected offer conditional on c is
                           ˆ   rc?
                                     p dFc (p) = (1 − α(λc ))c + α(λc )rc? .
                             pc


    Equation (3.5) states that the maximum price that a slow trader is willing to accept is the
cost of the asset plus a dealer profit margin equal to the trader’s search cost s multiplied by
a proportionality factor that reflects an entry externality, represented through the function
α. This entry externality arises as follows. If the slow-trader entry probability λc is low, the
market consists mainly of fast traders, and competition among dealers pushes the expected
profit margins of dealers to zero, in that limλ→0 α(λ) = 0. That is, the trading protocol
converges to an auction run by fast traders. On the other hand, if λc is close to 1, then slow
traders constitute a considerable part of the market, and the existence of search frictions
allows dealers to exert their local monopoly power and sell at prices bounded away from
their costs.
    To complete the description of equilibrium, we must specify the optimal entry decisions
of slow traders. Holding the entry probability λc fixed, the expected payoff of a slow trader
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                    11


conditional on c and on entry is
                                           ˆ   rc?
                                                                            1
                        π(λc ) = v − s −             p dFc (p) = v −               s − c.
                                            pc                          1 − α(λc )

It can be verified that π(λc ) is strictly decreasing in λc through the role of α(λc ).
    If π(λc ) is strictly positive at λc = 1, then the equilibrium slow-trader entry probability
  ?
λc must be 1. Because α is maximized at λc = 1, this happens if and only if

                                                              1
                                               c≤v−                s,
                                                            1 − ᾱ

where                                          ˆ                       −1
                                                     1   
                                                              N µ N −1
                              ᾱ = α(1) =                 1+      z        dz.                 (3.7)
                                                 0           1−µ
   If the profit π(λc ) is negative at λc = 0, then there is no entry by slow traders, that is,
λ?c= 0. Since α(0) = 0, this happens whenever c > v − s.
   Finally, if c ∈ (v − s, v − s/(1 − ᾱ)), then we have “interior entry,” in that λ?c ∈ (0, 1) is
uniquely determined by the equation

                                       s = (1 − α(λ?c ))(v − c).                               (3.8)

      We summarize these results with the following proposition.

Proposition 1. In the benchmark case, the equilibrium payoffs are unique, and there exists
a reservation-price equilibrium in which the following properties hold.

      1. Entry. In the event that c ≥ v − s, no slow traders enter. If
                                                       s
                                           v−               < c < v − s,
                                                     1 − ᾱ

         then slow traders enter with the conditional probability λ?c ∈ (0, 1) determined by equa-
         tion (3.8). If c ≤ v − s/(1 − ᾱ), then slow traders enter with conditional probability 1.

      2. Prices. In the event that c > v, dealers quote arbitrary offers no lower than c. If
         c ∈ [v − s, v], then dealers quote offers equal to c. If c < v − s, then every dealer quotes
         offers drawn with the conditional probability distribution function Fc given by (3.3).

      3. Traders’ reservation prices. In the event that c < v − s, conditional on entry, a slow
         trader’s reservation price rc? is given by (3.5).
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                                  12


   4. Social surplus. The conditional expected total social surplus given c is

                                       λ?c (1 − µ) (v − c − s) + µ(v − c)+ ,

        where (v − c)+ ≡ max(v − c, 0). The conditional expected profit of each dealer is

                                                λ?c (1 − µ)     s
                                                                        .
                                                     N      1 − α(λ?c )

    An immediate implication of Proposition 1 is that entry is inefficient. In equilibrium, if
c ∈ (v − s/(1 − ᾱ), v − s), the gain from trade for any slow traders is larger than the search
cost, but we do not observe full entry. This inefficiency can be understood as a hold-up
problem. Once traders enter, search costs are sunk and dealers make higher-than-efficient
price offers. Taking into account this hold-up problem, slow traders enter only if gains from
trade v − c are significantly higher.


3.3      The no-benchmark case
When the absence of a benchmark prevents traders from observing the common component
c, traders may face complicated Bayesian inferences based on the observed price offers in
order to assess the attractiveness of these offers. To keep the model tractable, we restrict
attention to equilibria in which traders, when on the equilibrium path, follow a reservation-
price strategy.19 That is, in the k-th round of search a slow trader has a reservation price
of the form rk−1 (p1 , p2 , . . . , pk−1 ), where (p1 , p2 , . . . , pk−1 ) is the history of prior price of-
fers. According to this reservation-price strategy, any offer pk > rk−1 (p1 , p2 , . . . , pk−1 ) is
not immediately accepted and any offer pk < rk−1 (p1 , p2 , . . . , pk−1 ) is immediately accepted.
An offer pk = rk−1 (p1 , p2 , . . . , pk−1 ) is accepted with some (mixing) probability that is de-
termined in equilibrium. For simplicity, from this point we describe an offer that is not
immediately accepted as “rejected,” bearing in mind that the trader retains the option to
later accept the offer.
    We first characterize reservation-price equilibria, assuming one exists. Then we provide
conditions under which a reservation-price equilibrium does exist. The following lemma is
an important step in characterizing a reservation-price equilibrium.
   19
     Although this restriction is standard in the literature, Janssen, Parakhonyak, and Parakhonyak (2014)
analyzed non-reservation-price equilibria in a consumer-search model with two firms. They assume that the
customer’s value is sufficiently high relative to the firms’ cost that there is no issue of entry efficiency, a key
focus of our model. They also assume that the two firms have identical costs, drawn with the same outcome
from a binomial distribution. This shuts down the matching efficiency on which we focus in the next section.
Because of these assumptions and the technical difficulties in solving non-reservation-price equilibria in our
setting, we follow the more usual convention in the literature of focusing on reservation-price equilibrium.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                               13


Lemma 1. In every reservation-price equilibrium in which slow traders enter with strictly
positive probability, (i) the first-round reservation price r0? is equal to v and (ii) for each
outcome of c strictly below v, the upper limit of the support of the conditional distribution of
price offers is v.

    Without the benchmark, a trader’s ignorance of the common component c of dealers’
costs makes it more difficult for her to evaluate the attractiveness of price offers. Lemma 1
states that this information asymmetry causes a slow trader to accept any price offer below
her value v for the asset, in a reservation-price equilibrium. Thus, only two things can
happen if a positive mass of slow traders enter. If c ≤ v, a slow trader buys from the first
dealer that she contacts. If c > v, then a slow trader will observe a price offer above her
value for the asset, conclude that there is no gain from trade, and exit the market. This
outcome—slow traders entering only to discover that there is no gain from trade—is a waste
of costly search that would be avoided if there were a benchmark. With a benchmark, as
seen in Proposition 1, slow traders do not enter unless the conditional expected gain from
trade exceeds the cost s of entering the market and making contact with a dealer.
    Using Lemma 1, we can describe the reservation-price equilibrium without the bench-
mark, analogously with Proposition 1. We define the expected gain from trade

                                 X = G(v) [v − E (c | c ≤ v)] ,                            (3.9)

that is, the probability of a positive gain from trade multiplied by the expected gain given
that it is positive. Let λ? denote the equilibrium probability of entry by slow traders.

Proposition 2. In the no-benchmark case, if a reservation-price equilibrium exists, it must
satisfy the following properties:

  1. Entry. If s ≥ X, no slow traders enter, that is, λ? = 0. If s ∈ ((1 − ᾱ)X, X), the
     fraction λ? of entering slow traders solves

                                         s = (1 − α(λ? ))X.                              (3.10)

      If s ≤ (1 − ᾱ)X, all slow traders enter with probability λ? = 1.

  2. Prices. In the event that c > v, dealers quote an arbitrary price offer no lower than c.
     If c ≤ v, dealers quote prices drawn with the cumulative distribution:
                                                                   N1−1
                                             λ∗ (1 − µ) v − p
                                             
                                Fc (p) = 1 −                               .             (3.11)
                                                 Nµ     p−c
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                               14


  3. Traders’ reservation prices. Conditional on entry, a slow trader has a reservation price
     of v at her first dealer contact. If this first dealer’s price offer is no more than v, the
     slow trader accepts it. Otherwise the slow trader rejects it and exits the market.

  4. Surplus. The expected total social surplus is λ? (1 − µ)(X − s) + µX, and the expected
     profit of each dealer is λ? (1 − µ)X/N .
    The markets with and without benchmarks, characterized by Propositions 1 and 2, re-
spectively, share some common features. In both, dealers’ strategies depend on the realization
of the benchmark c, and slow traders never contact more than one dealer on the equilib-
rium path. The distribution of quoted prices and the entry probability of slow traders are
characterized by functions whose forms, with and without a benchmark, are similar.
    That said, there are two crucial differences. First, slow traders’ entry decisions in the
presence of the benchmark depend on the realization (through publication of the benchmark)
of the gains from trade. By contrast, without a benchmark, entry depends only on the
(unconditional) expected gain from trade. Second, with the benchmark, the reservation
price of slow traders generally depends on the realization of the benchmark c. Absent the
benchmark, however, a slow trader’s reservation price is always v, so that an offer of v is in
the support of price offers regardless of the outcome of c.

Existence of reservation-price equilibria in the no-benchmark case

Before comparing welfare with and without the benchmark, it remains to characterize condi-
tions under which a reservation-price equilibrium exists without the benchmark. Providing
general conditions for existence in this setting is challenging. While significant progress on
existence has been made by Janssen, Pichler, and Weidenholzer (2011), their results do not
apply in our setting because they assume that a trader’s value v is so large that varying its
level has no effect on the equilibrium. We cannot make this assumption because the size of
gains from trade plays a key role in our analysis of entry. Benabou and Gertner (1993) also
provide partial existence results for the case of two dealers, but in a different setting.
    Appendix A provides a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of reservation-
price equilibrium in the case of two dealers, and an explicit sufficient condition for existence
with N > 2 dealers. The main conclusion is summarized as follows.
Proposition 3. There exists some s < X such that for any search cost s greater than s, a
reservation-price equilibrium in the no-benchmark case exists and is payoff-unique.
    Proposition 3 states that the equilibrium described in Proposition 2 exists if the search
cost is sufficiently large. The condition s < X ensures that there exists an equilibrium
with strictly positive probability of entry by slow traders. If s ≥ X there exists a trivial
reservation-price equilibrium in which slow traders do not enter.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                                   15


3.4     Welfare comparison
We now show that if search costs are high relative to the expected gain from trade, then
introducing the benchmark raises the social surplus by encouraging the entry of slow traders.
    As noted above, entry may be inefficiently low under search frictions due to the hold-up
problem and the negative externality in the entry decisions of slow traders. Because a search
cost is sunk once a slow trader has visited a dealer, a dealer can more heavily exploit its
local-monopoly pricing power. Expecting this outcome, slow traders may refrain from entry
despite the positive expected gain from trade. The hold-up problem is more severe when
more slow traders enter (because this raises the posterior belief of a dealer that he faces a
slow trader). These effects apply both with and without the benchmark. The question is
whether benchmarks alleviate or exacerbate this situation.
    We now state the main result of this section, giving conditions under which adding the
benchmark improves welfare by encouraging entry.

Theorem 1. Suppose that (i) s ≥ (1− ᾱ)(v −c) or (ii) s ≥ (1−ψ)X holds, where ψ ∈ (0, ᾱ)
is a constant that depends20 only on µ and N . Then a reservation-price equilibrium in the
no-benchmark case (if it exists) yields a lower social surplus than that of the equilibrium
in the benchmark case. Condition (i) holds if there are sufficiently many dealers or if the
fraction µ of fast traders is small enough.

    There are two key sources of intuition behind Theorem 1. First, the presence of a bench-
mark allows slow traders to make their entry decisions contingent on additional information
about magnitude of gains from trade. In equilibrium with the benchmark, entry is higher
precisely when gains from trade are larger. In other words, if the unconditional probabil-
ity of entry were the same across the two settings, then social surplus would be higher in
the benchmark case because, in the equilibrium with the benchmark, volume is positively
correlated with gains from trade. Second, adding the benchmark reduces the information
asymmetry between dealers and traders. Without the benchmark, a slow trader is not con-
fident whether an unexpectedly high price offer is due to a high outcome for the common
cost c of dealers, or is due to an unlucky draw from the dealer’s offer distribution. Dealers
exploit this informational advantage, which exacerbates the hold-up problem. By providing
additional information about dealers costs, benchmarks give more bargaining power to slow
traders.
    The proof of the theorem is illustrated in Figure 3.1, which depicts the dependence
of the benchmark-market social welfare function Wb (x) on the realized gain from trade
x = max{v−c, 0}. The proof first shows that the expected social surplus in the no-benchmark
                         hp                                              i
  20                 1
     We have ψ =     2     (1 − ᾱ + ᾱβ)2 + 4ᾱ(1 − ᾱ) − (1 − ᾱ + ᾱβ) , where β = N µ/(1 − µ), and ᾱ is defined
by equation (3.7).
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                               16



           Fig. 3.1: Conditional expected social surplus given the realized gain x from each trade.
 surplus




                                            x ! (1 ! 7)s




                             Wb (x)

                                                       supporting hyperplane at X

                                                                                                 Gain from
                                                                                                  trade x
  0
                      s                            X                y                s
                                                                                    1!7,   v!c



case is actually equal to Wb [E(x)]. We thus want to show that E[Wb (x)] ≥ Wb (E(x)). Because
slow traders increase their entry probability when the benchmark-implied gain from trade is
large, we can prove that Wb ( · ) is convex over the set of x for which the entry probability
is interior. Condition (i) ensures the convexity of Wb ( · ) on its entire domain, allowing
an application of Jensen’s Inequality. The alternative condition (ii) ensures that Wb ( · ) is
subdifferentiable at X = E(x), yielding the same comparison. Both conditions require that
the search cost s is sufficiently high.
    We emphasize that Theorem 1 is neither mechanical nor trivial. In fact, one can find
conditions under which the welfare ranking in Theorem 1 is reversed. That is, there are
cases in which adding a benchmark can harm welfare. The severity of the hold-up problem
decreases with the size of gains from trade. Without the benchmark, the expected size of
gains from trade determines entry. When the expected gains from trade are high relative
to search costs, all slow traders enter in the absence of benchmarks, overcoming the hold-
up problem. With the benchmark, however, the actual size of gains from trade determines
entry. Slow-trader entry is high when c is low, and entry is low when c is high. For some
parameters, it is more efficient to “pool” the entry decisions without the benchmark than to
let entry depend on the realized benchmark cost.

Proposition 4. Suppose that the equilibrium described by Proposition 2 exists. If (i) (1 −
ᾱ)(v − c̄) < s, (ii) s ≤ (1 − ᾱ)X, and (iii) G(v − s) is sufficiently close to one, then the
expected social surplus is strictly higher without the benchmark than with the benchmark.

      The condition s ≤ (1 − ᾱ)X ensures that there is full entry without the benchmark. (By
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                               17


Theorem 1, this condition fails if µ is small enough or N is large enough.) The condition
that s > (1 − ᾱ)(v − c̄) ensures that there are cost realizations for which we do not have full
entry with the benchmark. Finally, the condition that G(v − s) is close to one ensures that
the entry of slow traders is indeed socially desirable for nearly all cost realizations.
     The conditions of Proposition 4 are easily interpreted in Figure 3.1. If X > s/(1 − ᾱ)
(condition (ii )) and if we can safely ignore the region [0, s] (condition (iii )), then we can
place a hyperplane above the graph of Wb ( · ), tangent to it at X. That is, we get super-
differentiability rather than sub-differentiability, reversing the welfare inequality. Condition
(i ) guarantees that the inequality is strict.
     The reverse welfare ranking of Proposition 4 relies on the fact that there is a bounded
mass of slow traders. In an alternative model in which the potential mass of slow traders
is unbounded, “full entry” is impossible, and the function Wb ( · ) in Figure 3.1 is globally
convex. In this unbounded-entry model, a reservation-price equilibrium in the no-benchmark
case (if one exists) yields a lower social surplus than the equilibrium in the benchmark case.
A formal proof of this claim is omitted as it follows directly from the proof of Theorem 1.


3.5    Dealers’ incentives to introduce a benchmark
As we have seen so far, the introduction of a benchmark reduces the informational advantage
of dealers relative to traders. It might superficially seem that dealers have no incentive
to introduce the benchmark. In this subsection we show that the contrary can be true.
Under certain conditions dealers want to introduce a benchmark in order to increase their
volume of trade. We assume that dealers are able to commit to a mechanism leading to
truthful revelation of c, so the question of whether they prefer to have the benchmark
boils down to comparing dealers’ profits with and without the benchmark. We address the
implementability of adding a benchmark in Section 5.

Theorem 2. Suppose that (i) s ≥ (1 − ᾱ)(v − c) or (ii) s ≥ (1 − η)X, where η ∈ (0, ᾱ) is
a constant that depends only on N and µ. If all dealers have the same cost (that is, γ = 1),
then a reservation-price equilibrium in the no-benchmark case (whenever it exists) yields a
lower expected profit for dealers than in the setting with the benchmark. Condition (i) holds
if there are sufficiently many dealers or if the fraction µ of fast traders is small enough.

    The benchmark raises the profits of dealers by encouraging the entry of slow traders.
If search costs are large relative to gains from trade (assumption (i) or (ii) of Theorem
2), dealers benefit from the increased volume of trade arising from the introduction of the
benchmark. In order for dealers’ total profits to rise with the introduction of a benchmark,
entry by slow traders must be sufficiently low without the benchmark, for otherwise the
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                              18


benchmark-induced gain in trade volume does not compensate dealers for the reduction in
profit margin on each trade.
    A benchmark can be viewed as a commitment device, by which dealers promise higher
expected payoffs to traders in order to encourage entry. In particular, a benchmark partially
solves the hold-up problem by reducing market opaqueness, hence giving a better bargaining
position to traders.
    It can be shown that the conclusion of Theorem 2 implies the conclusion of Theorem
1. That is, whenever dealers would opt for the benchmark, it must be the case that the
introduction of the benchmark raises social surplus. The opposite is not true. There generally
exists a range of search costs in which the benchmark raises social surplus but dealers would
have no incentive to commit to it. This is intuitive. Whenever the gain from trade v − c
exceeds the search cost s, any increase in entry probability is welfare-enhancing. If, however,
this increase is too small to compensate for the reduction in dealers’ profit margins, dealers
would not opt to introduce the benchmark.


3.6    Under conditions, the benchmark is an optimal mechanism
We now consider socially optimal mechanisms for reporting information about dealer costs.
We show conditions under which, among a wide class of mechanisms, social welfare cannot be
improved by doing something other than simply publishing the benchmark. Throughout this
section, we assume that the mechanism designer knows the dealer cost c. The elicitation of c
from dealers is analyzed in Section 5. We also assume in this subsection that a reservation-
price equilibrium exists whenever we have occasion to discuss equilibrium behavior.
    To this point, our analysis has shown that the outcome of the market equilibrium, with
or without the benchmark, is fully efficient, conditional on entry by slow traders. The
entry decision itself, however, could be inefficient due to the hold-up problem that we have
described. Thus, the mechanism design should focus on providing information to traders
before they make their entry decisions.
    Formally, a revelation mechanism (Π, S) consists of a signal space S and a measurable
mapping Π from [c, c̄] to the set ∆(S) of probability measures on S. The mechanism sends
traders a signal s ∈ S drawn from the conditional probability distribution Π(c). Traders
observe the signal and make their entry decisions. The game then proceeds according to the
protocol described in Section 3.1.
    We impose no restrictions on the class of signals to be sent by the mechanism designer.
Announcing the benchmark is equivalent to a revelation mechanism given by S = [c, c̄] and
Π(c) = δ{c} , the dirac delta at c, meaning full revelation. Providing no information before
traders make their entry decisions is equivalent to a mechanism with a singleton signal space
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                      19


S = {0}. Using techniques from the literature on Bayesian persuasion,21 we provide the
following general characterization. Recall that x = max{v − c, 0} denotes the gain from
trade.

Theorem 3. Let
                                                                       s
                             y = argmin            E [x| x ≥ ỹ] −          .
                                  ỹ ∈ [0, v−c ]                     1 − ᾱ
That is, y solves the equation E [x| x ≥ y] = s/(1 − ᾱ) whenever there exists a solution, and
otherwise takes the boundary value 0 if E[x] > s/(1 − ᾱ), and the other boundary v − c if
v −c < s/(1− ᾱ). The following revelation mechanism maximizes the expected social surplus:

   1. When x < max{s, y}, announce the realization of c.

   2. When x ≥ max{s, y}, announce that v − c ≥ y (but nothing else).


    In order to gain intuition for Theorem 3, consider the case in which y is an interior
solution. Suppose that y ≥ s. We first explain why it is optimal to garble information about
the gain from trade when its realization is high (point 2 in the theorem). By announcing
that v − c ≥ y, the mechanism induces the posterior belief s/(1 − ᾱ) for the expected gain
from trade among slow traders. The equilibrium of the subsequent game is that specified
by Proposition 2, but with the unconditional expected gain X from trade replaced by the
conditional expected gain from trade given by s/(1 − ᾱ). Thus, there is full entry by slow
traders in this case, by point 1 of Proposition 2. If, instead, c were to be fully revealed, for
the entry probability of a slow trader to reach 1, the realization x of the gain from trade must
exceed s/(1 − ᾱ). (See Proposition 1.) We conclude that conflating realizations of x above
y into one message raises the entry probability whenever the realization of x is between y
and s/(1 − ᾱ). Finally, we note that the garbling region x ≥ y is the largest possible set of
realizations of x that yields full entry by slow traders. If any additional outcomes of x below
y were conflated into one message m, together with the event x ≥ y, then the conditional
gain from trade would fall below s/(1 − ᾱ), and the entry probability would decrease for all
realizations of x leading to the message m.
    To understand why it is optimal to fully disclose the cost c whenever x is to the left of the
garbling region (point 1 of Theorem 3), we note that the welfare function Wb (x) is convex
in that domain (see Figure 3.1). Therefore, the optimality of full disclosure of c follows from
the same forces that give rise to Theorem 1, that is, by disclosing the cost c, the mechanism
introduces a beneficial positive correlation between gains from trade and entry probability.
  21
     See Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) for the formulation of the Bayesian persuasion problem, and Dwor-
czak and Martini (2016) for the technique that we use in the proof of our theorem.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                               20


    Overall, the welfare-maximizing mechanism optimally trades off the benefits associated
with the two extreme revelation schemes that are compared in Section 3.4. For high cost
realizations (those with x < y), it is optimal to fully disclose the cost c. For low cost
realizations (those with x ≥ y), it is optimal to “pool” slow traders’ incentives to enter by
disclosing only that x ≥ y.
    The following result is a useful special case of Theorem 3.

Proposition 5. Suppose s ≥ (1 − ᾱ)(v − c) (Assumption (i) of Theorem 1). Fully disclos-
ing the cost c is a social-surplus-maximizing revelation mechanism. Any optimal revelation
mechanism fully discloses the cost c (almost surely) whenever x ∈ [s, v − c].

    Assumption (i) of Theorem 1 implies that the gain from trade is never above s/(1 − ᾱ).
In this case, y as defined in Theorem 3 is equal to v − c. It follows that Case 2 of Theorem
3 never applies, and thus the optimal mechanism is to fully disclose the benchmark c.
    Proposition 5 implies that a perfectly informative benchmark is an (essentially unique)
optimal mechanism if there are sufficiently many dealers or if the fraction µ of slow traders
is low enough; in these cases, ᾱ is sufficiently close to 1. Moreover, based on the remark at
the end of Section 3.4, we can show that when there is an unbounded pool of slow traders,
announcing the perfectly informative benchmark c is an optimal mechanism even without
Assumption (i) of Theorem 1.


3.7    The socially optimal mechanism is also optimal for dealers
In Section 3.5 we showed that the incentives of dealers to introduce a benchmark, or not, are
only partially aligned with social preferences. It turns out, however, that the socially optimal
revelation mechanism fully aligns the private preferences of dealers with social preferences.
(For the purposes of this section, as in Section 3.6, we assume the existence of a reservation-
price equilibrium.)

Theorem 4. The socially optimal mechanism of Theorem 3 also maximizes the expected
profit of dealers, within the set of feasible revelation mechanisms.

    Theorem 4 implies that dealers always prefer to introduce the optimal mechanism de-
scribed in Theorem 3. Whenever the optimal mechanism coincides with the benchmark, an
even stronger conclusion applies: there is no revelation scheme that dealers would prefer over
the benchmark.
    Why might dealers disagree with a benevolent regulator on the desirability of having a
benchmark, but always agree on the optimal mechanism? This is so because the optimal
mechanism discloses only enough information to induce entry by slow traders. When c is
fully disclosed and there is full entry, that is, when v − c ≥ s/(1 − ᾱ), slow traders use the
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                         21


information they are given about c to negotiate constant margins over dealers’ costs (that
is, the reservation price rc? changes one-to-one with c, according to formula 3.5). Under the
optimal mechanism, slow traders still enter with probability one, but they are uninformed
about the exact value of c. Dealers may exploit this information asymmetry and continue
to enjoy the higher profit margins that they achieve in the no-benchmark case.
     In light of Theorem 4, one may wonder why functioning OTC markets do not include
public reporting schemes that suppress dealer cost information precisely when those costs
turn out to be low enough. A possibility is that practical settings are approximately sum-
marized by model parameters for which the optimal mechanism coincides with a benchmark
(full revelation of dealer costs). It could also be that calculating the threshold level y for rev-
elation of c may be difficult in practice, and that a small error in this calculation could lead
to poor performance (especially if y is set too low). By comparison, a benchmark mechanism
is simple and more robust than the optimal mechanism.
     Finally, we note that the amount of information revealed by the optimal mechanism is
increasing (in the sense of Blackwell) in the search cost s. This implies that as search costs
decrease, dealers prefer increasingly opaque markets.


3.8     An Illustrative Example
We conclude the section with a numerical example. Our goal is to illustrate the magnitude
and direction of the modeled effects.22 A serious empirical calibration or structural estimation
is beyond our objectives.
    For the sake of illustration, we assume 20 dealers. One quarter of traders are fast. Any
trader’s value v of the asset is normalized without loss of generality to 1. The dealer cost c is
uniformly distributed on [0.9, 1.02]. Figure 3.2 shows how total welfare and entry vary with
the search cost s for three cases: no-benchmark, benchmark, and the optimal mechanism
shown in Section 3.6. Total surplus is expressed as percentage of the expected welfare in
a market with a centralized exchange, or equivalently, for an OTC market with no search
costs.23 Figure 3.3 depicts expected execution prices and expected quotes of dealers in the
no-benchmark case and in the benchmark case, for three levels of search costs.
    As shown in Figure 3.2, the no-benchmark case yields higher surplus than the benchmark
case only when search costs are low, consistent with Proposition 4. With low search costs,
however, the differences in expected surplus between all mechanisms are relatively small.
When search costs are larger, introducing the benchmark enhances surplus, as predicted by
Theorem 1. The gain can be quite significant (on the order of 30% of the expected surplus
  22
      In the numerical example we assume, as before, the existence of reservation-price equilibrium in the
no-benchmark case.
   23
      This expected welfare is equal to 0.0455 under the above parameters.
3 A Model of Benchmarks as a Transparency Tool                                                                                                                                                                                                                        22



Fig. 3.2: Total expected surplus (expressed as a percentage of expected welfare associated a centralized-
                                                         exchange market) and the probability of entry of slow traders (conditional on the event c < v − s)

                                                                             Total Expected Surplus                                                                                                     Expected Probability of Entry
                                            110
Percent of expected welfare from exchange




                                            100                                                                                                                                 1

                                             90




                                                                                                                                               Expected probability of entry
                                             80                                                                                                                                0.8

                                             70

                                             60                                                                                                                                0.6

                                             50

                                             40                                                                                                                                0.4

                                             30

                                             20                                                                                                                                0.2       No benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                                         Benchmark
                                             10                                                                                                                                          Optimal Mechanism
                                                                                                                                                                                         Exchange
                                              0                                                                                                                                 0
                                                   0          0.002        0.004           0.006    0.008            0.01          0.012                                             0       0.002       0.004          0.006         0.008          0.01          0.012
                                                                                    search cost s                                                                                                                search cost s




Fig. 3.3: Expected execution prices (first row) and expected quotes of dealers (second row) as functions
                                                         of c, for s = 0.001, s = 0.005, and s = 0.01 in the benchmark case (blue solid line) and the
                                                         no-benchmark case (red dotted line)
                                                              Expected price when s=0.001                                      Expected price when s=0.005                                                              Expected price when s=0.01
                                            1.02                                                            1.02                                                                                       1.02
  Expected transaction price




                                              1                                                                1                                                                                          1

                                            0.98                                                            0.98                                                                                       0.98

                                            0.96                                                            0.96                                                                                       0.96

                                            0.94                                                            0.94                                                                                       0.94

                                            0.92                                                            0.92                                                                                       0.92

                                             0.9                                                             0.9                                                                                        0.9
                                               0.9     0.92       0.94     0.96     0.98       1   1.02        0.9      0.92      0.94     0.96                                 0.98     1      1.02      0.9    0.92      0.94     0.96      0.98    1     1.02


                                                              Expected quote when s=0.001                                      Expected quote when s=0.005                                                              Expected quote when s=0.01
                                            1.02                                                            1.02                                                                                       1.02

                                              1                                                               1                                                                                          1
  Expected quote




                                            0.98                                                            0.98                                                                                       0.98

                                            0.96                                                            0.96                                                                                       0.96

                                            0.94                                                            0.94                                                                                       0.94

                                            0.92                                                            0.92                                                                                       0.92

                                             0.9                                                             0.9                                                                                        0.9
                                               0.9     0.92       0.94     0.96     0.98       1   1.02        0.9      0.92      0.94     0.96      0.98                                1      1.02      0.9    0.92      0.94     0.96      0.98    1     1.02
                                                                   Realization of cost c                                           Realization of cost c                                                                    Realization of cost c




associated with a centralized exchange), especially for intermediate levels of s. The slow-
trader entry probability is higher in the no-benchmark case when search costs are small. A
higher probability of entry does not necessarily lead to higher surplus because the benchmark
induces positive correlation between entry probability and realized gains from trade. This
positive correlation is reflected by higher price volatility in the benchmark case, as shown in
Figure 3.3. Quotes tend to be much lower (more attractive to traders) with a benchmark
than without, for low cost realizations. This is due to the associated reduction in information
asymmetry, which improves the bargaining position of traders. Finally, when search costs
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                                    23


are large, the benchmark is seen to be an optimal mechanism, consistent with Proposition
5. The difference between welfare with an optimal mechanism and with a benchmark is
largest with intermediate search costs, and is driven by the higher entry probability caused
by optimal information disclosure.


4        Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency

In this section we extend the model of Section 3 to incorporate heterogeneous dealers’ costs
and address matching efficiency. We show that the pre-trade price transparency afforded by
a benchmark improves the matching of traders to low-cost dealers. The beneficial impact of a
benchmark on entry efficiency, shown in Section 3, continues to apply in this heterogeneous-
cost setting, as shown in Appendix 7.


4.1       Setup
We adopt the model of Section 3 with one difference: Dealer i has the total cost ci = c+i for
supplying the asset to a trader, where 1 , ..., N are independent binomial random variables
whose outcomes are 0 and ∆, with respective probabilities γ ∈ (0, 1) and 1 − γ. Dealer i
observes c and i , but not j for j 6= i. The published benchmark is the common dealer cost
component c. As before, we can view c as the cost to dealers for acquiring the asset in the
inter-dealer market. The new cost component i is a private cost to dealer i for supplying the
asset. For instance, a dealer’s effective cost for supplying a particular asset could naturally
depend on the dealer’s current inventory and internal risk budget. To the extent that the
heterogeneity in dealers’ costs arises from private information of this sort, we expect that
customers are unable to distinguish, ex ante, high-cost dealers from low-cost dealers.
    Throughout this section we maintain the following two assumptions.24

Assumption A.1. Search is socially optimal, in that s < γ∆.

Assumption A.2. Gains from trade exist with probability 1. That is, c̄ < v − ∆.

   Together, these conditions imply full entry by slow traders in equilibrium, in the pres-
ence of a benchmark. This allows us to separately identify the welfare impacts associated
with matching efficiency. Assumption A.2 is adopted for expositional purposes only. We
give generalized statements (weakening Assumption A.2) of the results of this section in Ap-
pendix B. We will show that if search costs are relatively low then adding a benchmark raises
social surplus by making it easier for traders to find the efficient (that is, low-cost) dealers.
    24
      Appendix B provides the supporting analysis when Assumption A.1 fails. In that case, there will be no
search in the equilibrium with the benchmark. While the absence of search is socially optimal in this case,
this is not the case in which we are most interested.
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                           24


Assumption A.1 is motivated by the observation that finding a low-cost dealer improves
social welfare only if the search cost is lower than the potential improvement in matching
efficiency.


4.2    The benchmark case
In the presence of a benchmark, the key intuition for the equilibrium construction from Sec-
tion 3 generalizes to this heterogeneous-cost setting, but the supporting arguments are more
complicated, and several cases need to be considered. For that reason, we focus here on
parameter regions that are relevant for social-surplus comparisons, and relegate a full char-
acterization to Appendix B. Figure 4.1 summarizes pricing schemes that arise in equilibrium
as a function of the search cost s. We begin with the following result.

Proposition 6. In the presence of a benchmark, the equilibrium is payoff-unique and slow
traders use a reservation-price strategy.

    Proposition 6 is not surprising given the analysis of Section 3. There is, however, a
subtle but important difference. Under a reservation-price strategy, a trader is typically
indifferent between accepting an offer and continuing to search when the offer is equal to her
reservation price. In the setting of Section 3 it does not matter whether traders accept such
an offer or not because this event has zero probability. With idiosyncratic costs, however,
there are parameter regions in which the only equilibrium requires traders who face an offer
at their reservation price to mix between accepting and continuing to search. The mixing
probabilities are important when there is an atom in the probability distribution of offers
located at a trader’s reservation price. In equilibrium, these atoms may arise if the reservation
price is equal to the high outcome of dealer costs, as in Panel C of Figure 4.1. This affects
the inference made by dealers when they calculate the probability of facing a fast trader.
    To account for heterogeneous dealer costs, we need to adjust the probability that a
dealer’s counterparty is fast (as opposed to slow), from that given by equation (3.1). This
probability now depends on both the entry probability λc and the c-conditional probability,
denoted θc , that a slow trader rejects an offer from a high-cost dealer. As θc gets larger,
slow traders search more, and the posterior probability that a dealer is facing a fast trader
falls. We denote by q(λc , θc ) the probability that a contacting trader is fast. Accordingly,
the definition of the function α(λc ) from equation (3.6) is generalized to a two-argument
function α(λc , θc ) with values in (0, 1). Explicit formulas are provided by equations (B.5)
and (B.6) in Appendix B. The role of α(λc , θc ) is analogous to that of α(λc ) in Section 3.
Here, α(λc , θc ) is strictly increasing in both arguments. As λc and θc increase, the probability
that a counterparty is slow rises, leading dealers to quote higher prices in equilibrium. The
constant α(1, 1) is an analogue of ᾱ in Section 3, and bounds α(λc , θc ) from above. For the
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                                             25



Fig. 4.1: Price supports in different equilibrium regimes. Lines represent the non-atomic
          (“continuous”) portions of distributions. Dots represents atoms. Low-cost dealers
          are shown in blue. High-cost dealers are shown in red.
                prices                   prices                    prices                    prices

                                                                                                      r*c


                                                                        r*c                            c+Δ
                                              r*c


                      r*c
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                             s
                  A      κ(1-α(1,1))γΔ              (1-α(1,1))γΔ              (1-α(1,0))γΔ
                                          B                         C                          D



sake of simplifying upcoming expressions, we denote

                                                      α̂ = α(1, 1).

We now state the main result of this section.

Proposition 7. If s ≤ (1 − α̂)γ∆, then the equilibrium in the benchmark case leads to
efficient matching: slow traders always enter, and all traders buy from a low-cost dealer
in the event that there is at least one such dealer present in the market. Additionally, if
s ≥ κ(1 − α̂)γ∆, where κ < 1 is a constant25 depending only on γ, µ, and N , the equilibrium
with the benchmark achieves the second best, in the sense that each slow trader buys from the
first low-cost dealer that she contacts, minimizing search costs subject to matching efficiency.

    In order to understand how benchmarks lead to efficient matching and second-best per-
formance in the above sense, consider first the case in which the search cost s is in the
interval
                                (κ(1 − α̂)γ∆, (1 − α̂)γ∆).

This case is illustrated in Panel B of Figure 4.1. In equilibrium, slow traders follow a
       We have κ = (1 − γ)N −1 / µ(1 − γ)N −1 + (1 − µ)[1 − (1 − γ)N ]/(N γ) .
  25
                                                                           
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                          26


reservation-price strategy with a reservation price rc? that is below c + ∆. Low-cost dealers
quote prices according to a continuous probability distribution whose support is below this
reservation price. Thus, if there are any low-cost dealers in the market, slow traders buy
from the first low-cost dealer that they contact. In the unlikely event that there are only
high-cost dealers in the market, which happens with probability (1−γ)N , slow traders search
the entire market and then trade with one of the high-cost dealers at the price c + ∆. This
second-best equilibrium outcome is therefore fully efficient at matching.
    The key role of the benchmark in this case is to introduce enough transparency to permit
traders to distinguish between efficient and inefficient dealers. The benchmark not only
ensures that traders ultimately transact with the “right” sort of counterparty, but also
ensures that no search cost is wasted while looking for this transaction. This last conclusion
is true under the weaker condition that s ≥ κ(1 − α̂)γ∆.
    If s < κ(1 − α̂)γ∆, however, slow traders may search excessively. As the search cost s
get smaller, the equilibrium reservation-price rc? also gets smaller (closer to c), and low-cost
dealers are forced to quote very low prices if they want to sell at the first contact of any slow
trader. Because of their cost advantage, low-cost dealers always have the “outside option”
of trying head-on competition by quoting a price above the reservation price (and just below
c + ∆), hoping that all other dealers have high costs (in which case low-cost dealers win the
resulting effective auction, making positive profits). It turns out that low-cost dealers wish
to deviate to this strategy when s < κ(1 − α̂)γ∆. In the resulting equilibrium, which we
illustrate in Panel A of Figure 4.1 and describe formally in Appendix B.1, matching remains
efficient but we do not achieve the second best, because of the higher-than-efficient amount
of search.
    The intuition described above indicates that a low-cost dealer’s incentive to quote a high
price should disappear as the number N of dealers gets large. Indeed, as N becomes large
the probability that all other dealers have high costs goes to zero quickly. We confirm in
Appendix C.2 that an upper bound on the potential surplus loss (compared to first best)
goes to zero exponentially fast with N when s < κ(1 − α̂)γ∆. In sharp contrast, surplus
losses are potentially unbounded in N when s is close to (1 − α̂)γ∆. Hence, for practical
purposes, it is natural to focus on the case s ≥ κ(1 − α̂)γ∆.


4.3    The no-benchmark case
We now show that without the benchmark, it is impossible to achieve the second best.

Proposition 8. In the absence of a benchmark, if c̄ > c + ∆ there does not exist an equilib-
rium that achieves the second best.

   Our proof of the proposition explores the simple idea that when there is no benchmark
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                            27


for traders to observe, they cannot recognize a low-cost dealer when they contact one. In the
absence of a benchmark, traders can rely only on Bayesian inference based on the observed
price quotes. This Bayesian inference, however, can be relatively ineffective. With low real-
izations of the common cost component c, high-cost dealers may make offers that “imitate”
the offers that low-cost dealers would make at higher realizations of c. As a result, slow
traders buy from inefficient dealers or engage in socially wasteful search. The benchmark
adds enough transparency to allow traders to distinguish between high offers from low-cost
dealers and low offers from high-cost dealers.


4.4    Welfare comparison
As a corollary of Propositions 7 and 8, we obtain the following result, providing conditions
under which adding a benchmark improves welfare.

Theorem 5. If (i) κ(1 − α̂)γ∆ ≤ s ≤ (1 − α̂)γ∆ and (ii) c̄ > c + ∆ both hold, then the
equilibrium in the benchmark case yields a strictly higher expected social surplus than that of
any equilibrium in the no-benchmark case.

    The theorem does not cover the entire search-cost space. We discuss the remaining cases
in Online Appendix C.1, where we show in particular that the second best is not achieved if
s > (1 − α̂)γ∆, even if the benchmark is present. Nonetheless, with a benchmark, if search
costs are not too large, partial efficiency applies to the matching of traders to low-cost dealers.
The (unique) equilibrium supporting this outcome has an interesting structure. High-cost
dealers post a price c + ∆ equal to the reservation price rc? of slow traders, as in Panel C of
Figure 4.1. Slow traders accept that price with some nontrivial (mixing) probability that is
determined in equilibrium.
    When search costs are sufficiently high, as in Panel D of Figure 4.1, both types of dealers
sell at a strictly positive profit margin, and slow traders buy from the first encountered
dealer. Thus, in this case, matching is inefficient. To make welfare comparisons for this
parameter region, it is necessary to explicitly characterize the no-benchmark equilibrium,
which is difficult because traders can potentially search multiple times and their posterior
beliefs about c are intractable.
    That said, for the case of two dealers, we can provide a full characterization of reservation-
price equilibria in the no-benchmark case. Under the condition s ≥ κ(1 − α̂)γ∆, we show
that matching is more efficient with a benchmark than without, provided that traders use
a reservation-price strategy in equilibrium. Because the details are complicated, we relegate
them to Online Appendix C.3.
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                                            28


4.5     Introduction of benchmarks by low-cost dealers
This subsection analyzes the incentives of low-cost dealers to introduce a benchmark on
their own—despite opposition from high-cost dealers—as a powerful device to compete for
business. We show that under certain conditions the collective decision of low-cost dealers to
add a benchmark drives high-cost dealers’ profits to zero and forces them out of the market.
As a result, low-cost dealers make more profits, and the market becomes more efficient
overall. This may explain why emergent “benchmark clubs” are often able to quickly attract
the bulk of trades in some OTC markets, as was the case with LIBOR.
    In order to explain how “benchmark clubs” may emerge, we augment our search-market
game with an earlier stage in which dealers decide whether to introduce a benchmark and,
after calculating their expected profits, whether to enter the market themselves. To simplify
the modeling, we suppose that there are two types of environments, with respect to the
cross-sectional distribution of dealer cost efficiency. With some probability Γ ∈ (0, 1), there
is a relatively low-cost environment in which the number L of low-cost dealers is at least 2.
Otherwise, there are no low-cost dealers (L = 0). We rule out the case in which there is
exactly one low-cost dealer in the market because, for a high enough cost difference ∆, the
low-cost dealer would in that case be an effective monopolist, complicating the analysis. A
formal description of the game follows:

   1. Pre-trade stage: the introduction of a benchmark and entry by dealers.

        (a) Nature chooses the dealer-cost environment, whose outcome is not observed. With
            probability 1−Γ, all dealers have high costs. With probability Γ, the number L of
            low-cost dealers is drawn from a truncated binomial distribution with parameters
            (N, γ), where the truncation restricts the support to the set {2, 3, . . . , N }. Con-
            ditional on L, the identities of dealers with low costs are drawn independently of
            L and symmetrically.26 The idiosyncratic component i of dealer i is the private
            information of dealer i.
        (b) Dealers simultaneously vote, anonymously, whether to have a benchmark or not.
            If there are at least two votes in favor, the benchmark is introduced. (We explain
            in Section 5 how dealers could implement a benchmark, provided that there are
            at least two of them.) In this case, c immediately becomes common knowledge.
            If the number of votes in favor is zero or one, the benchmark is not introduced.
   26
     This implies that 1 , . . . , N are no longer i.i.d. Our results would hold under more general distributions
of dealer types. The only properties required of the unconditional distribution of L are (i) symmetry with
respect to dealer identities, (ii) that the events L = 0 and L ≥ 2 both have positive probability, and (iii)
that the event L = 1 has zero probability.
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                       29


       (c) Dealers make entry decisions. For simplicity, we adopt a tie-breaking rule that
           dealers enter if and only if their expected trading profits are strictly positive.
      (d) After dealers’ entry decisions, the number of dealers that enter, denoted M , be-
          comes common knowledge among dealers and traders.

  2. Trading stage. The game proceeds as before, but with N replaced by M .


We denote by
                          X∆ = G(v − ∆)E (v − c − ∆ | c ≤ v − ∆)

the expected gain from trade with high-cost dealers. The following theorem establishes con-
ditions that are sufficient to induce low-cost dealers to collectively introduce the benchmark
and drive their high-cost competitors out of the market.

Theorem 6. Suppose that s < (1 − ᾱ)(v − c̄). Then there is a constant ∆? such that, for
any dealer cost difference ∆ ≥ ∆? , the following are true.

   • There exists an equilibrium of the extended game in which all low-cost dealers vote in
     favor of the benchmark and all high-cost dealers vote against it. There are no profitable
     group deviations in the voting stage.

   • If the environment is competitive (that is, L ≥ 2), the benchmark is introduced, all
     high-cost dealers stay out of the market, all low-cost dealers enter the market, and all
     traders enter the market.

   • If the environment is uncompetitive (L = 0), the benchmark is not introduced, and
     high-cost dealers enter the market if and only if X∆ > s.

    A proof is provided in the appendix. Here, we explain the intuition of the result.
    To start, we note that the theorem makes economically significant predictions about the
role of the benchmark only in the case X∆ > s. This case arises if s is sufficiently small. In
the opposite case of X∆ < s, high-cost dealers earn zero profits regardless of whether the
benchmark is introduced, so they are indifferent between voting in favor of, or against, the
benchmark, and they never enter. In the discussion below, we focus on the interesting case
of X∆ > s, in which high-cost dealers can make positive profits and strictly prefer not to
introduce the benchmark.
    The benchmark serves as a signaling device for low-cost dealers to announce to traders
that the environment is competitive. The signal is credible because traders, expecting low
prices conditional on introducing the benchmark, set a low reservation price in equilibrium.
Therefore, high-cost dealers cannot imitate low-cost dealers by deviating and announcing
4 Heterogeneous Dealer Costs and Matching Efficiency                                           30


the benchmark. Instead, they prefer to trade in opaque markets without the benchmark and
with low participation by slow traders, which allows them to make positive profits.
    Low-cost dealers have two distinct incentives to add the benchmark. First, adding the
benchmark encourages the entry of slow traders. In addition to the intuition conveyed in
Section 3, in the setting of this section the benchmark plays the additional role of signaling the
types of active dealers, because the benchmark is added endogenously. On the equilibrium
path, once a benchmark is introduced, slow traders believe with probability one that all
active dealers have low costs. If a benchmark is not introduced, slow traders believe that all
dealers have high costs. As a consequence, the (correctly) perceived gain from trade by slow
traders goes up considerably if a benchmark is added. This channel encourages entry. The
condition s < (1 − ᾱ)(v − c̄) ensures full entry by traders if the benchmark is introduced.
    Second, low-cost dealers capture additional market share by adding the benchmark. With
a large enough dealer cost difference ∆, the expected gains from trade are small if the bench-
mark is not introduced. As a result, we show that slow traders who enter will set a reservation
price r? equal to v in the trading-stage subgame, and high-cost dealers inevitably capture a
large proportion of trades with slow traders. If, however, the benchmark is introduced, a suf-
ficiently large ∆ makes high-cost dealers’ quotes highly uncompetitive, which drives trades
to low-cost dealers. Thus, although the per-trade profit of low-cost dealers may be lower
with the benchmark, they capture an additional amount of trade. In fact, in equilibrium,
if the environment is relatively competitive, high-cost dealers drop out completely because
they cannot make any profit, and low-cost dealers handle all of the trades.
    The first part of Theorem 6 asserts that in the equilibrium that we construct there are no
profitable group deviations in the voting stage. In the usual Nash equilibrium of the voting
game, if everyone is voting against or in favor, no dealer is pivotal, and each outcome may
be supported in equilibrium. This arbitrariness is eliminated by allowing group deviations.


4.6    On optimal mechanisms with heterogeneous dealer costs
In the heterogeneous cost setting, the efficiency of the market is driven by (i) matching
efficiency and (ii) total search costs. (Recall that we have imposed parameter restrictions
that guarantee full entry.) Proposition 7 showed that when search costs are small, adding a
benchmark achieves full matching efficiency. Thus, any additional benefit from an optimal
mechanism must arise from reducing total search costs.
    In the previous subsection we showed that, under parameter conditions, with endogenous
entry by dealers, high-cost dealers stay out of the market after the benchmark is published.
The resulting market equilibrium is analogous to that of the model with homogeneous dealer
costs. When this happens, slow traders search only once, and publication of the benchmark
achieves the fully efficient outcome (subject to the institutional constraint that any trade
5 Benchmark Manipulation and Implementation                                                              31


must involve incurring the search cost s). The benchmark mechanism uses no information
beyond the common cost component c. Moreover, c can be elicited from dealers in an
incentive-compatible way (as will be shown in Section 5). At least under these parameter
conditions, the benchmark mechanism is implementable and there is no mechanism that can
improve upon it.
    For arbitrary parameters, it is difficult to characterize the optimal mechanism. Even
calculating the market equilibrium for any fixed mechanism (other than announcing the
benchmark) is intractable in most cases. Sections 3 and 4 show a range of potential impacts
of changing market transparency. Although it is not easy to formally analyze all trade-offs
in one model of optimal mechanism design, announcing the benchmark seems to be a simple
and robust mechanism that performs well in both versions of the model.


5        Benchmark Manipulation and Implementation

Recent scandals involving the manipulation of interest-rate benchmarks such as LIBOR and
EURIBOR, as well as currency price fixings provided by WM/Reuters, have shaken investor
confidence in financial benchmarks. Serious manipulation problems or allegations have also
been reported for other major benchmarks, including those for term swap rates, gold, silver,
oil, and pharmaceuticals.27 Major banks are now more reluctant to support these bench-
marks in the face of potential regulatory penalties and private litigation. For example, of
the 44 banks contributing to EURIBOR before the initial reports of manipulation, 18 have
already dropped out of the participating panel.28 Regulators have responded not only with
sanctions,29 but also by taking action to support more robust benchmarks. The Financial
Stability Board has set up several international working groups charged with recommending
reforms to interest-rate and foreign-exchange benchmarks that would reduce their suscepti-
bility to manipulation while maintaining their usefulness in promoting market efficiency.30
The United Kingdom now has a comprehensive regulatory framework for benchmarks.31
    27
      See, respectively, Patterson and Burne (2013), Vaughn (2014), Hurtado (2014), Scheck and Gross (2013),
and Gencarelli (2002).
   28
      See Brundsen (2014).
   29
      See Finch and Larkin (2014).
   30
      See Official Sector Steering Group (2014), Market Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform (2014),
and Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group (2014).
   31
      See Bank of England (2014). This report provides a list of over-the-counter-market benchmarks “that
should be brought into the regulatory framework originally implemented in the wake of the LIBOR mis-
conduct scandal.” (See page 3 of the report.) A table listing the benchmarks that are recommended for
regulatory treatment is found on page 15. In addition to LIBOR, which is already regulated in the United
Kingdom, these are the overnight interest rate benchmarks known as SONIA and RONIA, the ISDAFix
interest-rate-swap index, the WM/Reuters 4pm closing foreign exchange price indices (which cover many
currency pairs), the London Gold Fixing, the LBMA Silver Price, and ICE Brent (a major oil price bench-
mark).
5 Benchmark Manipulation and Implementation                                                          32


   So far, we have assumed that dealers can credibly commit to the truthful revelation of
c. In this section we outline a simple and explicit mechanism that truthfully implements
a benchmark, provided there are at least two dealers, and provided that a benchmark ad-
ministrator can impose transfers, in the form of fees and subsidies among them for their
cost-related submissions.32 For simplicity, we assume that γ = 1 throughout (the results can
be generalized to the heterogeneous case in a straightforward way).
   Suppose that there exists a benchmark administrator who can design an arbitrary “bench-
mark announcement” mechanism with transfers. Here, a mechanism is a pair (M, g), where
M = (M1 × · · · × MN ) is the product of the message spaces of the N respective dealers, and
where g : M → [c, c̄] × RN . The function g maps the dealers’ messages (m1 , . . . , mN ) to an
announced benchmark c̃ and to transfers t1 , . . . , tN from the respective dealers to the mecha-
nism designer. Each mechanism induces a game in which dealers first submit messages. The
second stage of the game is the trading game presented in Section 3 of this paper, in which
traders assume that the announced benchmark c̃ is a truthful report of the actual cost c.
   In this setting, “Nash implementability” means that there exists a mechanism whose
associated game has a Nash equilibrium in which the announced benchmark c̃ is the true
cost c. “Full implementability” adds the requirement that this is the unique equilibrium of
the mechanism-induced game.

Proposition 9. Truthful revelation of c is Nash implementable, but is not fully Nash-
implementable.

Proof. The first part of the proposition follows from the observation that the administrator
can ask all dealers to report c and punish them (with a high enough transfer) if the reports
disagree. The benchmark may be then made equal (for example) to the average of the
reports. The second part follows from the fact that the choice rule to be implemented is not
monotonic. (See Maskin 1999 for the definition of monotonicity and the relevant result.)

    The proposition states that each dealer wants to report a message supporting the an-
nouncement of a benchmark that is the true cost c, provided that he believes that all other
dealers report in this manner. However, for the mechanism that we construct, there is also
an equilibrium in which all dealers report the same, but false, common cost level. The second
part of Proposition 9 asserts that this cannot be avoided. That is, there exists no mechanism
with a unique equilibrium in which dealers report truthfully. Informally, this means that it
is impossible to elicit information about c in a way that is not susceptible to collusion.
   32
      Again, the benchmark in our setting is the common component of the dealers’ costs. For comparison,
in a cheap-talk model, Lubensky (2014) derives conditions under which a supplier voluntarily reveals his
idiosyncratic (or private) production cost by publishing a non-binding price recommendation. Thus, our
model and Lubensky (2014) are complementary to each other.
6 Concluding Remarks                                                                                     33


    That said, a benchmark administrator could use post-trade transaction reporting to as-
sist with the detection of collusion. For example, if the reported cost c implies a distribution
of transaction prices that differs substantially from the empirically observed distribution of
transaction prices, there could be scope for further investigation by the benchmark admin-
istrator.
    Specifying and solving an equilibrium model of manipulation is beyond the scope of
this paper. Explicit models of benchmark manipulation in different settings are offered by
Coulter and Shapiro (2014) and Duffie and Dworczak (2014).33


6        Concluding Remarks

Benchmarks underlie a significant fraction of transactions in financial and non-financial mar-
kets, particularly those with an over-the-counter structure that rules out a common trading
venue and a publicly announced market-clearing price. This paper provides a theory of the
effectiveness and endogenous introduction of benchmarks in search-based markets that are
opaque in the absence of a benchmark. Our focus is the role of benchmarks in improv-
ing market transparency, lowering the informational asymmetry between dealers and their
customers regarding the true cost to dealers of providing the underlying asset.
    In the absence of a benchmark, traders have no information other than their own search
costs and what they learn individually by “shopping around” for an acceptable quote. Dealers
exploit this market opaqueness in their price quotes. Adding a benchmark alleviates infor-
mation asymmetry between dealers and their customers. We provide naturally motivated
conditions under which the publication of a benchmark raises expected total social surplus
by encouraging greater market participation by buy-side market participants, improving the
efficiency of matching, and reducing wasteful search costs.
    In some cases, dealers have an incentive to introduce benchmarks despite the associated
loss of local monopoly advantage, because of a more-than-offsetting increase in the trade
volume achieved through greater customer participation. When dealers have heterogeneous
costs for providing the asset, those who are more cost-effective may introduce benchmarks
themselves, in order to improve their market share by driving out higher-cost competitors.
    Under homogeneous dealers’ cost, adding the benchmark is a socially optimal mechanism
    33
     Coulter and Shapiro (2014) solve a mechanism design problem with transfers in a setting that incorpo-
rates important incentives to manipulate that are absent from our model. They reach a similar conclusion
in that it is possible to implement a truthful benchmark, but their mechanism can also be “rigged” for false
reporting through collusion by dealers. Duffie and Dworczak (2014) consider a different model of benchmark
design and manipulation, showing that, without transfers, an optimizing mechanism designer will not in
general implement truthful reporting. Instead, considering a restricted class of mechanisms, they character-
ize a robust benchmark that minimizes the variance of the “garbling,” meaning the difference between the
announced benchmark and the true cost level.
6 Concluding Remarks                                                                            34


if the realized dealers’ cost, or the benchmark, is above an endogenous threshold. Precisely
when the benchmark level is below this threshold, the optimal mechanism discloses a range
of the benchmark but not its exact level. This mechanism also turns out to be optimal for
dealers.
    Which markets have a benchmark is not an accident of chance, but rather is likely
to be an outcome of conscious decisions by dealers, case by case, when trading off the
costs and benefits of the additional market transparency afforded by a benchmark. Our
analysis also suggests that there may be a public-welfare role for regulators regarding which
markets should have a benchmark, and also in support of the robustness of benchmarks to
manipulation.


References
Asquith, P., T. R. Covert, and P. Pathak, 2013, “The Effects of Mandatory Transparency in
  Financial Market Design: Evidence from the Corporate Bond Market,” Working paper, MIT.

Asriyan, V., W. Fuchs, and B. Green, 2015, “Information Spillovers in Asset Markets with Corre-
  lated Values,” Working paper.

Bank for International Settlements, 2014, “OTC Derivatives Statistics at End-December 2013,”
  Monetary and Economic Department, Statistical Release.

Bank of England, 2014, “Recommendations on Additional Financial Benchmarks to be Brought into
  UK Regulatory Scope,” Fair and Effective Markets Review, Report to Her Majesty’s Treasury.

Benabou, R., and R. Gertner, 1993, “Search with Learning form Prices: Does Increased Inflationary
  Uncertainty Lead to Higher Markups?,” The Review of Economic Studies, 60(1), 69–93.

Bessembinder, H., and W. Maxwell, 2008, “Transparency and the Corporate Bond Market,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), 217–234.

Bessembinder, H., W. Maxwell, and K. Venkataraman, 2006, “Market transparency, liquidity ex-
  ternalities, and institutional trading costs in corporate bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  82, 251–288.

Brundsen, J., 2014, “ECB Seeks Rules to Stem Bank Exodus from Benchmark Panels,” Bloomberg,
  June 19.

Burdett, K., and K. L. Judd, 1983, “Equilibrium Price Dispersion,” Econometrica, 51(4), 955–969.

Coulter, B., and J. Shapiro, 2014, “A Mechanism for LIBOR,” Working Paper, University of Oxford.

Diamond, P., 1971, “A Model of Price Adjustment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 3, 156–168.

Duffie, D., and P. Dworczak, 2014, “Robust Benchmark Design,” Working Paper, Stanford Univer-
  sity.
6 Concluding Remarks                                                                            35


Duffie, D., and J. Stein, 2014, “Reforming LIBOR and Other Financial-Market Benchmarks,”
  Working Paper.

Dworczak, P., and G. Martini, 2016, “A Duality Approch to Bayesian Persuasion,” Working paper.

Edwards, A. K., L. E. Harris, and M. S. Piwowar, 2007, “Corporate Bond Market Transaction
  Costs and Transparency,” Journal of Finance, 62(3), 1421–1451.

Finch, G., and N. Larkin, 2014, “U.K. Seeks to Criminalize Manipulation of 7 Benchmarks,”
  Bloomberg, September 25.

Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group, 2014, “Foreign Exchange Benchmarks – Final Report,” Fi-
  nancial Stability Board.

Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole, 1991, Game Theory. MIT Press.

Gencarelli, D., 2002, “Average Wholesale Price for Prescription Drugs: Is There a More Appropriate
  Pricing Mechanism,” NHPF Issue Brief, 775, 1–19.

      , 2005, “One Pill, Many Prices: Variation in Prescription Drug Prices in Selected Govern-
  ment Programs,” National Health Policy Forum, Issue Brief, 807, 1–20.

Goldstein, M. A., E. S. Hotchkiss, and E. R. Sirri, 2007, “Transparency and Liquidity: A Controlled
  Experiment on Corporate Bonds,” Review of Financial Studies, 20(2), 235–273.

Hou, D., and D. Skeie, 2013, “LIBOR: Origins, Economics, Crisis, Scandal and Reform,” The New
  Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Online Edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence
  E. Blume.

Hurtado, P., 2014, “Deutsche Bank, HSBC Accused of Silver Fix Manipulation,” Bloomberg, July
  25.

Janssen, M., and J. L. Moraga-González, 2004, “Strategic Pricing, Consumer Search and the Num-
  ber of Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 1089–1118.

Janssen, M., J. L. Moraga-González, and M. R. Wildenbeest, 2005, “Truly costly sequential search
  and oligopolistic pricing,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 23, 451–466.

Janssen, M., and A. Parakhonyak, 2013, “Consumer search markets with costly revisits,” Economic
  Theory, 55(2), 481–514.

Janssen, M., A. Parakhonyak, and A. Parakhonyak, 2014, “Non-Reservation Price Equilibria and
  Consumer Search,” Working paper, Basic Research Program.

Janssen, M., P. Pichler, and S. Weidenholzer, 2011, “Oligopolistic Markets with Sequential Search
  and Production Cost Uncertainty,” RAND Journal of Economics, 42(3), 444–470.

Kamenica, E., and M. Gentzkow, 2011, “Bayesian Persuasion,” American Economic Review, 101(6),
  2590–2615.

Lubensky, D., 2014, “A Model of Recommended Retail Prices,” Working paper.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                         36


Market Participants Group on Reference Rate Reform, 2014, “Final Report,” Financial Stability
 Board.

Maskin, E., 1999, “Nash Equilibrium and Welfare Optimality,” Review of Economic Studies, 66,
 23–38.

Official Sector Steering Group, 2014, “Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks,” Financial
  Stability Board.

Patterson, S., and K. Burne, 2013, “CFTC Probes Potential Manipulation,” Wall Street Journal,
  April 8.

Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright, 2005, “Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor Market: A
  Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 43, 959–988.

Rothschild, M., 1974, “Searching for the Lowest Price When the Distribution of Prices is Unknown,”
  Journal of Polictical Economy, 82(4), 689–711.

Scheck, J., and J. Gross, 2013, “Traders Try to Game Platts Oil-Price,” Wall Street Journal, June
  19.

Stahl, I. D. O., 1989, “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” The American
  Economic Review, 79(4), 700–712.

Sun, Y., 2006, “The Exact Law of Large Numbers via Fubini Extension and Characterization of
  Insurable Risks,” Journal of Economic Theory, 126, 31–69.

Varian, H. R., 1980, “A Model of Sales,” American Economic Review, 70(4), 651–659.

Vaughn, L., 2014, “Gold Fix Study Shows Signs of Decade of Bank Manipulation,” Bloomberg,
  February 8.

Weitzman, M. L., 1979, “Optimal Search for the Best Alternative,” Econometrica, 47(3), 641–654.

Zhu, H., 2012, “Finding a Good Price in Opaque Over-the-Counter Markets,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 25(4), 1255–1285.



Appendix

A     Proofs for Section 3

A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
We fill in the gaps in the derivation of the equilibrium in the benchmark case. We focus on
the non-trivial case c ≤ c < v − s.
   As argued in Section 3, regardless of the price distribution that dealers use in a symmetric
equilibrium, slow traders play a reservation-price strategy with some reservation price rc . Fast
traders play their weakly dominant strategy of searching the entire market. (Thus, if the
trader is a fast trader, the dealers are essentially participating in a first-price auction.)
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                                37


   Given this strategy of traders, the following Lemma establishes the properties of the
equilibrium response of dealers.
Lemma 2. If slow traders enter with a strictly positive probability, the equilibrium price
distribution cannot have atoms or gaps, and the upper limit of the distribution is equal to rc .
Proof. Suppose there is an atom at some price p in the distribution of prices Fc ( · ) for some
cost level c ∈ (c, v − s). Suppose further that p > c. In this case a dealer quoting p
can profitably deviate to a price p − , for some small  > 0 (because slow traders play
a reservation-price strategy, the probability of trade jumps up discontinuously). Because
dealers never post prices below their costs, we must have p = c. But that is also impossible,
because a dealer could then profitably deviate to rc (clearly, rc ≥ c+s in equilibrium). Thus,
there are no atoms in the distribution.
    Second, suppose that p̄c > rc . In this case the dealer posting p̄c makes no profits, so she
could profitably deviate to rc . On the other hand, if p̄c < rc , a dealer can increase profits by
quoting rc instead of p̄c as this does not effect the probability of selling. Thus p̄c = rc .
    Third, suppose that there is an open gap in the support of the distribution of prices
conditional on some cost level c, that is, an interval (p1 , p2 ) ⊂ [pc , p̄c ] \ supp (Fc ( · )). Take
this interval to be maximal, that is, such that p1 is infimum and p2 is a supremum, both
subject to being in the support of Fc ( · ). Then we get a contradiction because the probability
of selling is the same whether the dealer posts p1 or p2 .
   The rest of the equilibrium characterization follows from the derivation in Section 3.

A.2     Proof of Lemma 1
Let r0? be the equilibrium first-round reservation price for slow traders. Note that, unlike in
the benchmark case, r0? is a number, not a function of c.
      We take c < r0? . Such a c exists because r0? ≥ c + s. Suppose that the upper limit of the
support of the distribution Fc of offer prices, p̄c , is (strictly) larger than r0? . Since traders
follow a reservation-price strategy, and because fast traders visit all dealers, there can be no
atoms in the distribution of prices (otherwise a dealer could profitably deviate by quoting a
price just below the atom). Thus, a dealer setting the price p̄c never sells in equilibrium, and
hence makes zero profit. However, she could make positive profit by setting a price equal to
r0? . Thus, p̄c ≤ r0? . Because we took an arbitrary c < r0? , it follows that whenever c < r0? ,
traders do not observe prices above r0? on the equilibrium path.
      Suppose that r0? < v. Whenever the realization of c lies above r0? , the offer in the first
round must be rejected by a slow trader (dealers cannot offer prices below their costs). In
particular, a slow trader must reject the price p? ∈ supp (Fc ( · )) with r0? < p? ≤ inf{p ∈
supp(Fc ( · ) : c > r0? } + δ < v, for a sufficiently small δ > 0.34 This is a contradiction. Indeed,
by the previous paragraph, conditional on observing a price p > r0? in the first round, the
trader believes that c must lie above r0? with probability 1. But in this case, the price p? is
within δ of the best possible price that the trader can ever be offered, so this offer should be
accepted by a slow trader (if δ < s), contrary to p? > r0? . This shows that r0? = v.
  34
    Such p? exists. As long as c < v, in equilibrium dealers must be posting prices below v with positive
probability.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                       38


   Finally, suppose that p̄c < v for some c < v. Then a dealer quoting the price p̄c could
profitably deviate by posting a price v (the probability of trade is unaffected). This justifies
the second claim.

A.3     Proof of Proposition 2
Fix a fraction λ of slow traders that enter. By Lemma 1 and the arguments used in the
derivation of equilibrium prices in the benchmark case, the cdf of offered prices must be
                                                               N1−1
                                              λ(1 − µ) v − p
                                 Fc (p) = 1 −                                             (A.1)
                                                Nµ p − c

with support [pc , v], where pc = ϕ(λ)v + (1 − ϕ(λ))c and

                                                   λ(1 − µ)
                                      ϕ(λ) =                   .
                                                N µ + λ(1 − µ)

We note that the only difference with the equilibrium pricing under the benchmark is that
the reservation price and probability of entry are constants, not functions of c.
   We can now calculate the expected profits of slow traders if they choose to enter:
                           ˆ "ˆ  v    v
                                                  #
              π(λ) = −s +                 (v − p) dFc (p) dG(c) = −s + (1 − α(λ))X,
                             c       pc


where
                                     X = G(v) [v − E [c| c ≤ v]]
is the expected gains from trade. By reasoning analogous to that in the benchmark case, we
determine that:

   • If s ≤ (1 − ᾱ)X, there must be full entry by slow traders (λ? = 1).

   • If s ≥ X, there cannot be entry by slow traders (λ? = 0).

   • If s ∈ ((1 − ᾱ)X, X), then the entry of slow traders is interior, with probability λ?
     determined uniquely by the equation (3.10).

A.4     Proof of Proposition 3
Given Proposition 2, in order to prove existence in our setting we need only show that a
slow trader does not want to search after observing a price p ≤ v in the first round. After
observing a price p, the slow trader forms a posterior probability distribution of c, given by
the cdf                                     ´c
                                              c y
                                                  f (p) dG(y)
                                 G(c | p) = ´ c̄p              ,
                                             c
                                                  fy (p) dG(y)
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                               39


where fc (p) denotes the density of the distribution defined by the cdf (3.11), and

                                                        1            ϕ(λ? )
                                      c̄p =                    p −            v
                                                    1 − ϕ(λ? )     1 − ϕ(λ? )

is the upper limit of the support of the posterior distribution.
    With two dealers, it is easy to provide a sufficient and necessary condition for existence.
A price p is accepted in the first round if and only if
                          ˆ "ˆ c̄p         p
                                                                        #
            v − p ≥ −s +                       (v − ρ)fc (ρ) dρ + (v − p)(1 − Fc (p)) dG(c | p),
                           c              pc

or                                   ´ c̄p ´ p
                                      c        pc
                                                    Fc (ρ)dρ(v − c)(p − c)−2 dG(c)
                           s≥                   ´ c̄p                                .             (A.2)
                                                    c
                                                        (v − c)(p − c)−2 dG(c)
Thus, a reservation-price equilibrium with two dealers exists if and only if inequality (A.2)
holds for all p ∈ (pc , v).The condition can be easily verified, as the expression on the right
hand side of (A.2) is directly computable.
    With more than two dealers, an additional difficulty arises because it is not easy to
calculate the continuation value when an offer p is rejected in the first round. We can
nevertheless provide a sufficient condition based on the following argument. Suppose that
after observing p and forming the posterior belief about c, the slow trader is promised to
find, in the next search, an offer equal to the lower limit of the price distribution. This
provides an upper bound on the continuation value; thus, if the trader decides not to search
in this case, she would also not search under the actual continuation value. Thus, a sufficient
condition for existence is that
                                             ´ c̄p                    N

                                           ?   c
                                                   (v − c)2 (p − c)− N −1 dG(c)
                   s ≥ (p − v) + (1 − ϕ(λ )) ´ c̄p                              ,        (A.3)
                                                                  − NN
                                                c
                                                    (v − c)(p − c)    −1 dG(c)




for all p ∈ (pc , v). Again, inequality (A.3) can be directly computed and verified.
      The last step in the proof is to show that inequality (A.3) holds for s in some range below
X. To this end, we analyze the behavior of the posterior distribution of costs G(c | p) after a
price p is observed by a slow trader in the first round when probability of entry λ? is small.
As λ? & 0, conditional on p, the upper limit of the support of the posterior cost distribution,
c̄p , converges to p. Thus G(c | p) converges pointwise to 0 for c < p and to 1 for c > p. By one
of the (equivalent) definitions of weak? convergence of probability measures, the posterior
distribution converges in distribution to an atom at p. Thus, in the limit, inequality (A.3)
becomes
                               s ≥ (p − v) + (1 − ϕ(0))(v − p) = 0,
and is thus vacuously satisfied. By continuity of the right-hand side of inequality (A.3), the
inequality holds if λ? is smaller than some λ > 0. Recall that λ? is determined uniquely by
equation (3.10). Moreover, it is continuous and strictly decreasing in s for s ∈ ((1− ᾱ)X, X),
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                                               40


and equal to zero at s = X. Thus, there exists s < X such that for all s > s, λ? is smaller
than λ.

A.5      Proof of Theorem 1
We first outline the main steps of the argument, and leave the technical details for the two
lemmas that follow. To make the proof concise, we make a change of variables by defining
x = (v − c)+ ≡ max(v − c, 0) as the realized gain from a trade given the common cost c.
    Note first that conditions (i) and (ii) both imply that s > (1 − ᾱ)X. The case s ≥ X is
trivial to analyze as there is no entry of slow traders without the benchmark (see Proposition
2). Thus, we focus on the range (1 − ᾱ)X < s < X, within which Proposition 2 implies
interior entry in the absence of the benchmark.
    The total expected surplus in the no-benchmark case is

                                  Wnb ≡ [λ? (1 − µ) + µ] X − λ? (1 − µ)s.

With the benchmark, we let λ(x) denote the probability of entry by slow traders conditional
on a realized gain from trade of x. By Proposition 1,
                          
                           = 0,
                                                       if x ≤ s,
                   λ(x)      solves s = (1 − α(λ(x)))x, if s < x < 1−s ᾱ ,
                          
                             = 1,                       if x ≥ 1−s ᾱ .
                          

The conditional expected social surplus in the benchmark case conditional on x is

                               Wb (x) ≡ [λ(x)(1 − µ) + µ] x − λ(x)(1 − µ)s.

The crucial observation, demonstrated in Lemma 3 below, is that Wb is a convex function
on [0, s/(1 − ᾱ)]. Figure 3.1 depicts a typical shape of that function.
   Under condition (i), Wb is convex on its entire domain. (This corresponds to cutting off
the part of the domain that upsets convexity, as shown in Figure 3.1.) We can thus apply
Jensen’s Inequality to obtain
                                           ˆ c̄               
                                                        +
            E [Wb (x)] ≥ Wb [E (x)] = Wb         (v − c) dG(c) = Wb (X) = Wnb .
                                                        c

To justify the last equality, one notes that λ? is precisely λ(X), by equations (3.8) and (3.10).
(This inequality is actually strict because G is a non-degenerate distribution and because
λ(x) > 0 with positive probability under G.)
   Under condition (ii), Wb may fail to be convex on its entire domain. However, an in-
spection of the proof of Jensen’s Inequality shows that all that is required to achieve the
inequality is that the function Wb is subdifferentiable35 at E(x). The slope of Wb is increas-
   35
      A function f : [a, b] → R is said to be subdifferentiable at x0 if there exists a real number ξ such that,
for all x in [a, b], we have f (x) − f (x0 ) ≥ ξ(x − x0 ). If Wb is convex, then it is subdifferentiable on the interior
of its domain, by the Separating Hyperplane Theorem.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                                                     41


ing on [0, s/(1 − ᾱ)] and equal to 1 on (s/(1 − ᾱ), v − c]. Thus, a sufficient condition for
existence of a supporting hyperplane of Wb at X is that Wb0 (X) ≤ 1. We thus want to solve
the equation Wb0 (x0 ) = 1 for x0 ∈ (s, s/(1 − ᾱ)) and impose X ≤ x0 . (See Figure 3.1.) An
explicit solution is not available, so instead we show in Lemma 4 below (by approximating
the functions α and λ) that this condition is implied by s ≥ (1 − ψ)X.
    Finally, a simple application of the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem shows
that ᾱ converges (monotonically) to 1 when either N → ∞ or µ → 0. Thus, condition (i)
holds if N is large enough or if µ is small enough.

Lemma 3. Wb (x) and λ(x) are convex functions on [0, s/(1 − ᾱ)].

Proof. First we prove that λ(x) and Wb (x) are convex on (s, s/(1 − ᾱ)]. By the Implicit
Function Theorem λ is twice differentiable on this interval and we have
                                                  ∂λ   (1 − α(λ))
                                                     =            > 0,
                                                  ∂x     α0 (λ)x

and                                                           h                          i
                         2
                        ∂ λ     −α0 (λ)(1 − α(λ)) − (1 − α(λ)) α0 (λ) + α00 (λ) (1−α(λ))
                                                                                   0
                                                                                  α (λ)
                            =                                                                                  .
                        ∂x2                                             [α0 (λ)x]2
         ∂2λ
Hence,   ∂x2
               ≥ 0 for all x ∈ (s, s/(1 − ᾱ)) if and only if, for all λ ∈ (0, 1),
                                                      2
                                        2 [α0 (λ)] + α00 (λ)(1 − α(λ)) ≤ 0.                                              (A.4)

Letting β = N µ/(1 − µ), and computing the derivatives of α(λ), we rewrite (A.4) as
              ˆ    1                        2       ˆ          1                         ˆ   1
                           βz N −1                                       βz N −1                        βz N −1
                                                                                                                    
                                        dz        ≤                                   dz                          dz .
                0       (λ + βz N −1 )2                       0       (λ + βz N −1 )3         0       λ + βz N −1

Hölder’s Inequality states that for all measurable and square-integrable functions f and g,
kf gk1 ≤ kf k2 kgk2 . By letting
                             s                             s
                                  βz N −1                       βz N −1
                     f (z) =                 3 and g(z) =                ,
                               (λ + βz N −1 )                λ + βz N −1

we have proven inequality (A.4) and thus the convexity of λ(x).
   Now it becomes straightforward to check that Wb (x) is convex on [s, s/(1 − ᾱ)]. Notice
that Wb (x) and λ(x) are trivially convex on [0, s] (because, on this interval, λ(x) is identically
zero and Wb (x) is affine). Therefore, to finish the proof it is enough to make sure that
λ(x) and Wb (x) are differentiable at s. We can verify this by computing the left and right
derivatives: ∂− Wb ([s]) = µ = ∂+ Wb ([s]), and ∂− λ ([s]) = 0 = ∂+ λ ([s]).

                                                              hp                                                     i
                               s                          1
Lemma 4. If x ≤               1−ψ
                                  ,   where ψ =           2
                                                                       (1 − ᾱ + ᾱβ)2 + 4ᾱ(1 − ᾱ) − (1 − ᾱ + ᾱβ) and
      Nµ
β=    1−µ
          ,   then Wb0 (x) ≤ 1.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                            42


Proof. The claim is true for x ≤ s, and since ψ ≤ ᾱ, we can focus on the region where λ(x)
is defined as the solution to the equation (3.8) which can be written as
                                                             s
                                                α(λ(x)) = 1 − .
                                                             x
Since α( · ) is a strictly increasing function, if we replace α( · ) in the above equation by a lower
bound, any solution of the new equation will be an upper bound on λ(x). Because Wb (x) is
convex in the relevant part of the domain (by Lemma 3), to make sure that Wb0 (x) ≤ 1, it’s
enough to require that x ≤ x0 , where x0 solves Wb0 (x0 ) = 1 (such x0 exists and is unique).
We have
                      Wb0 (x0 ) = µ + λ0 (x0 )(1 − µ)(x0 − s) + λ(x0 )(1 − µ) = 1.              (A.5)
We cannot solve this equation explicitly, so we will provide a lower bound on the solution.
Because Wb0 (x) is increasing, we need to bound Wb0 (x) from above. Since α(λ) ≥ λᾱ, by the
above remark, the solution of the equation
                                                                 s
                                                 ᾱλ̄(x) = 1 −
                                                                 x
provides an upper bound on λ(x). That is,
                                                              1   s1
                                        λ(x) ≤ λ̄(x) =          −     .
                                                              ᾱ ᾱ x
Moreover,
                                                          1          s
                                           λ0 (x) =                      ,
                                                      α0 (λ(x))) x2
and we have, for all λ ∈ [0, 1],
                 ˆ 1                             ˆ 1
                          βz N −1                     λ + βz N −1
                                                                            
          0                                   1                     λ
        α (λ) =                        dz ≥                       −           dz
                               N −1 )2      λ + β 0 λ + βz N −1 λ + βz N −1
                   0 (λ + βz

                                          1               1 − ᾱ
                                    =        (1 − α(λ)) ≥        .
                                         λ+β              λ+β
Plugging these bounds into equation (A.5) and rearranging, we obtain
                               1        s 1
                          β+        −
                                                                      
                               ᾱ       ᾱ x0   s      s    1       s
                                                   (1 − ) +      1−      = 1.
                              1 − ᾱ            x0     x0   ᾱ      x0

Denoting y = 1 − s/x0 , bounding the left hand side from above one more time, and rear-
ranging, we get
                          y 2 + (1 − ᾱ + ᾱβ)y − ᾱ(1 − ᾱ) = 0.
The relevant solution is ψ.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                        43


A.6     Proof of Proposition 4
This result follows directly from Propositions 1 and 2.

A.7     Proof of Theorem 3
First, we reformulate the problem as a Bayesian-persuasion problem with infinite type and
action spaces. A Sender (mechanism designer) who observes the state of the world (cost
c) sends a signal under commitment to an uninformed Receiver (trader) who then takes an
action based on the posterior belief of the state. (See Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011, along
with their Online Appendix, for details.)
    Given an arbitrary distribution function H of costs c, let XH = EH [(v − c)+ ] be the
associated expected gain from trade. In a reservation-price equilibrium (which is assumed to
exist in Section 3.6), the entry probability of slow traders is λ(XH ), and the social surplus is
Wb (XH ). If the mechanism induces posterior belief H conditional on slow traders observing
the signal, then the value of the objective function is Wb (XH ). In particular, the objective
function depends on the posterior belief of the cost H only through the expectation of the
conditional gain from trade XH .
    We can first simplify the problem by noting that it is always optimal to reveal c whenever
x = (v − c)+ < s. Indeed, fixing a mechanism, suppose the probability of entry by slow
traders conditional on the event x < s is strictly positive. We can then construct a new
mechanism that is identical to the old one, except that it discloses c whenever x < s. In
the new mechanism, when x < s and c is revealed, slow traders do not enter. This raises
social surplus because not entering yields 0, whereas entering yields at most x − s, which is
strictly negative. When x ≥ s, any signal from the new mechanism induces a weakly higher
posterior mean gain from trade than that of the original mechanism. Because social welfare
Wb (XH ) is increasing in the posterior mean XH , the new mechanism does better than the
old one.
    Hence, we can focus on the case x ≥ s. Because there is a one-to-one correspondence
between x and c in this region, we can treat x as the primitive state. Let G̃ be the distribution
of x conditional on x ≥ s, which can be computed from the original distribution G of costs.
Dworczak and Martini (2016) provide a method for constructing optimal signals for Bayesian
persuasion problems in which the objective function depends on the posterior beliefs of the
underlying random variable only through the posterior mean. Optimization can be performed
directly in the space of distributions over posterior means. By applying duality methods,
Dworczak and Martini (2016) prove the following result which we restate for the convenience
of the reader. (The function p below can be thought of as a Lagrange multiplier.)

Lemma 5. Suppose that F is a cumulative distribution function on [s, v − c] and p : [s, v −
c] → R is a convex function. If F and p satisfy

  1. supp(F ) ⊆ argmax x ∈ [s, v−c] {Wb (x) − p(x)} ,

  2. EF [p(x)] = EG̃ [p(x)],

  3. G̃ is a mean-preserving spread of F ,
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                      44


then F is the distribution of the posterior means of x associated with the welfare-maximizing
revelation mechanism.
      In order to exploit Lemma 5, we construct the function p as:
                             (
                              Wb (x)                                if x ≤ y
                      p(x) =           Wb (s/(1−ᾱ))−Wb (y)
                              Wb (y) +      s/(1−ᾱ)−y
                                                            (x − y) if x ≥ y,

where recall that y is defined by E [x | x ≥ y] = s/(1 − ᾱ).

                                 Fig. A.1: Functions Wb (x) and p(x).




                                       p(x)


                   slope 1
                                                                                   Wb (x)

  0
                             s                   y                       s
                                                                        1!,7



    The functions Wb and p are illustrated in Figure A.1. Note that p(x) coincides with
Wb (x) for x ≤ y. To the right of y, p is linear and p(x) is equal to Wb (x) at exactly one
point x = s/(1 − ᾱ). By the properties of Wb analyzed in Section A.5, the slope of the linear
component of p must be larger than 1, and the slope of Wb at x ≥ s/(1 − ᾱ) is equal to 1.
Moreover, Wb is strictly convex on [s, s/(1 − ᾱ)]. It follows that

                     argmaxx ∈ [s, v−c] {Wb (x) − p(x)} = [s, y] ∪ {s/(1 − ᾱ)}.

We define the distribution F by
                             (
                              G̃(x),                                    x ≤ y,
                     F (x) =
                              G̃(y) + (1 − G̃(y))1{x≥s/(1−ᾱ)} ,        x ≥ y.

F is the distribution that coincides with G̃ for x ≤ y, and assigns the rest of its mass to an
atom at s/(1 − ᾱ). F satisfies condition 1 of Lemma 5 with equality. By the choice of y, F
is a distribution of conditional means of G̃. This implies that G̃ is a mean-preserving spread
of F , thus implying condition 3 of Lemma 5. To verify condition 2, we note that F and G̃
coincide on [s, y]. In the remaining interval [y, v − c], F and G̃ have the same mean and p
is linear, leading to equal expectations of the value of function p.
A Proofs for Section 3                                                                     45


    Hence, we can apply Lemma 5 to conclude that F is the distribution of posterior means
of x associated with a welfare-maximizing revelation mechanism. By direct calculation, the
mechanism described in Theorem 3 leads to distribution of posterior means F, and is thus a
welfare-maximizing revelation mechanism.

A.8     Proof of Proposition 5
The first part of the proof follows directly from Theorem 3. To prove the necessity of
disclosing x in the interval [s, v − c], note that under Assumption (i), the function Wb (x)
is globally convex, and strictly convex on [s, v − c]. If there were an optimal mechanism
that does not disclose x fully in some set of non-zero measure in [s, v − c], then it would be
dominated by a mechanism that does, by (the strict version of) Jensen’s inequality.

A.9     Proof of Theorem 2
The proof of Theorem 2 is very similar to the proof of Theorem 1, so we skip some of the
details. Denote the expected profits of a dealer in the benchmark case conditional on x
(where x = (v − c)+ ) by χb (x) and in the case with no benchmark by χnb . Recall from
Propositions 1 and 2 that

                                         λ(x)(1 − µ)      s
                              χb (x) =
                                             N       1 − α(λ(x))

and χnb = Xλ? (1 − µ)/N .
    Assume that condition (i) holds. Then, using the fact that λ(x) is given by s = (1 −
α(λ(x)))x in the relevant range, we can write χb (x) = (1 − µ)λ(x)x/N. By Lemma 3, λ(x)
is increasing and convex, so χb (x) is also convex. Therefore, applying Jensen’s Inequality we
get
                            E [χb (x)] ≥ χb (E [x]) = χb (X) = χnb .
    Now assume that condition (ii) holds. As in the proof of Theorem 1 we want to find a
condition on X that would guarantee that the profit function χb is subdifferentiable at X.
Using the reasoning from the proof of Theorem 1, we can establish existence of a constant
η ∈ (0, ᾱ), that depends only on µ and N , and such that X ≤ s/(1 − η) guarantees existence
of a supporting hyperplane at X (thus allowing us to apply Jensen’s Inequality).

A.10     Proof of Theorem 4
The proof of Theorem 4 is analogous to the proof of Theorem 3. In a reservation-price
equilibrium, as shown in Section 3, the expected profit function for a dealer, conditional on
the gain from trade, x, is given by
                                 
                                 0
                                               if x ≤ s,
                                    λ(x)(1−µ)
                        χb (x) =        N
                                              x if s/(1 − ᾱ) > x > s,
                                  1−µ s
                                 
                                     N 1−ᾱ
                                                if x ≥ s/(1 − ᾱ).
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                                46


Moreover, the properties of χb (x) coincide with the properties of the function Wb (x) used in
the proof of Theorem 3. Most importantly, χb (x) is convex for x ≤ s/(1 − ᾱ) (convexity of
λ(x) was established by the proof of Theorem 1), and has a kink at x = s/(1 − ᾱ). We can
apply Lemma 5 with Wb (x) replaced by χb (x) and use the same Lagrange multiplier p and
distribution F defined in the proof of Theorem 3. (See, also, Figure A.1.) Because the rest
of the argument is identical to the proof of Theorem 3, we omit the remaining details.


B        Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4

B.1       Proof of Proposition 6 and equilibrium characterization in the
          benchmark case
Because the distribution of costs is i.i.d. across dealers conditional on observing the bench-
mark, slow traders must follow a reservation-price strategy with some reservation price rc .
A stationary36 reservation-price strategy of slow traders will now be characterized by three
numbers: λc , the probability of entry; rc , the reservation price; and θ̂c , the probability of
rejecting an offer equal to the reservation price rc . Fixing the strategy of the dealers and
the reservation price rc , the rejection probability θ̂c determines the probability θc that a slow
trader rejects an offer from a high-cost dealer, and vice versa. Given the one-to-one corre-
spondence between θc and θ̂c , for convenience we will abuse the notation for the strategy of
a slow trader, denoting it by the triple (rc , λc , θc ). Again without loss of generality, we can
assume that fast traders play their weakly dominant strategy of always entering and visiting
all dealers. We ignore the issue of off-equilibrium beliefs, as it is fairly trivial to deal with.
    Fixing c and a strategy (rc , λc , θc ) we will characterize the equilibrium best-response of
dealers. We start with two technical lemmas.

Lemma 6. In equilibrium, conditional on c (for c < v), if dealers of a certain type (high-cost
or low-cost) make positive expected profits, then the probability distribution of price offers for
that type is atomless. If high-cost dealers make zero expected profits, then in equilibrium they
must quote a price equal to their cost, provided that c + ∆ < v.

Proof. The first part of the Lemma can be proven using the argument from the proof of
Lemma 2. To prove the second part, suppose that, for some c < v − ∆, a price above c + ∆ is
in the support of the equilibrium strategy of high-cost dealers. The probability of selling at
that price (or some lower price above c + ∆) must be positive since with probability (1 − γ)N
only high-cost dealers are present in the market. Thus, we get a contradiction with the
assumption that high-cost dealers make zero expected profits.

Lemma 7. In equilibrium, conditional on c, if c < v, for any equilibrium price pl of a
low-cost dealer, and any equilibrium price ph of a high-cost dealer, we have pl ≤ ph .
    36
     Requiring stationarity, that is, the same mixing probability at every search round, simplifies the expo-
sition and is without loss of generality. Without stationarity, there is an indeterminacy in specifying the
probability of rejecting the reservation price in equilibrium. Traders can use different mixing probabilities in
every search round, as long as they lead to the same posterior beliefs of dealers. This indeterminacy does not
change expected equilibrium payoffs, so without loss of generality we get rid of it by requiring stationarity.
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                           47


Proof. The claim is true by a standard “revealed-preference” argument. Suppose that pl >
ph . Fix an equilibrium, and let %(p) (for some fixed c ≤ v) be the probability that a dealer
sells the asset when posting the price p. Since dealers are optimizing in equilibrium, we must
have
                                %(pl )(pl − c) ≥ %(ph )(ph − c),                          (B.1)
                               %(ph )(ph − c − ∆) ≥ %(pl )(pl − c − ∆).                             (B.2)
We have, if %(ph ) 6= 0,

                               %(ph )(ph − c − ∆) < %(ph )(pl − c − ∆).

If pl > c + ∆, then %(ph ) > %(pl ). From inequality (B.1),

                           %(pl )(pl − c) + ∆(%(ph ) − %(pl )) > %(ph )(ph − c)

which contradicts inequality (B.2).
   We are left with two cases. First, suppose that pl ≤ c + ∆. Then ph < c + ∆ which is
impossible in equilibrium. Second, suppose that %(ph ) = 0. Then it must be the case that
%(pl ) = 0 as well, which is a contradiction if c < v.
   Finally, we prove a lemma about the possibility of gaps in the distribution of prices. Let
pic
  and p̄ic denote the lower and upper limit of the support of the distribution of prices for
dealer of type i ∈ {l, h}.

Lemma 8. In equilibrium, conditional on c (for c < v), there can be no gaps in the dis-
tribution of prices except for the case in which the support of the distribution of prices of
low-cost dealers consists of two intervals, [plc , rc ] and [p̂lc , min{c + ∆, v}], and in which either
(i) high-cost dealers post c + ∆, or (ii) c > v − ∆.

Proof. Suppose that there is a gap in the distribution of prices conditional on some cost level
c for some type of dealers, that is, an interval (p1 , p2 ) ⊂ [pic , p̄ic ] \ supp (Fci ( · )), i ∈ {l, h}.
We take this interval to be maximal, that is, such that p1 and p2 are in the support of Fci ( · ).
It must be the case that probability of selling is strictly larger at p1 than at p2 , and thus, in
a reservation-price equilibrium, p1 ≤ rc ≤ p2 (we made use here of Lemma 7). It cannot be
that p1 < rc because then the dealer posting p1 could profitably deviate to rc . Thus p1 = rc .
     By Lemma 7, p̄hc is the highest price that can be observed on equilibrium path, and it lies
above rc . It follows, using Lemma 6, that high-cost dealers make zero expected profits (if the
price distribution for high-cost dealers were atomless, the probability of selling at the price
p̄hc > rc would be zero). Moreover, either (i) high-cost dealers post c + ∆, or (ii) c > v − ∆.
In either case we can conclude that i = l, i.e. the gap occurs in the price distribution of
low-cost dealers.
     By the above, if there is a gap, then the support of the distribution for low-cost dealers
consists of two intervals, the first of which must be [plc , rc ]. To prove that p̄lc = min{c+∆, v},
we use the fact that p̄lc > rc , and thus if p̄lc < min{c + ∆, v}, the dealer quoting p̄lc would
want to deviate to min{c + ∆, v}.
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                 48


    Using the above observations, we can now show, case by case, that the equilibrium
pricing strategies are uniquely pinned down when there are gains from trade. (We assume
throughout that c < v; the opposite case is trivial.) We let Fcl (p) denote the cdf of prices
for low-cost dealers, and Fch (p) the cdf of prices for high-cost dealers. In most cases it is
a routine exercise to rule out the possibility of a gap in the distribution, using Lemma 8.
We will therefore only comment on this possibility explicitly in the two cases when a gap
actually occurs in equilibrium.

    Case 1: λc = 0. When λc = 0, only fast traders enter. In this case, we have a standard
first-price auction between dealers. There are two subcases.
    When c > v − ∆, high-cost dealers cannot sell in equilibrium, and the specification of
their strategy is irrelevant (they can choose any price above c + ∆). In this case low-cost
dealers randomize according to a distribution Fcl (p) that solves the equation
           "N −1                                       #
            X N − 1                                 k
                                   N −1−k
                           k
                          γ (1 − γ)             l
                                          1 − Fc (p)      (p − c) = (1 − γ)N −1 (v − c).
             k=0
                    k
Let us define the function
                                          N −1     
                                 1        X     N −1 k k
                   Φ(z) =                            z γ (1 − γ)N −1−k ,                   (B.3)
                          1 − (1 − γ)N −1 k=1     k

which can be viewed as a generalization of the function z N −1 that appears in the definition
(3.6). It is easy to see that Φ(z) is a (strictly) increasing polynomial with Φ(0) = 0, Φ(1) = 1,
and Φ(z) = z N −1 when γ = 1. Moreover, using the binomial identity, we can write Φ(z)
alternatively as
                                       (zγ + 1 − γ)N −1 − (1 − γ)N −1
                              Φ(z) =                                  .                     (B.4)
                                                1 − (1 − γ)N −1
Using definition (B.3), we can write

                                                       (1 − γ)N −1 v − p
                                                                            
                                            −1
                           Fcl (p)   =1−Φ
                                                     1 − (1 − γ)N −1 p − c

with upper limit p̄lc = v, and lower limit plc = (1 − γ)N −1 v + 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 c.
                                                                                  

    When c ≤ v − ∆, high-cost dealers can sell in equilibrium, but a standard result from
auction theory (see for example Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991) says that in the unique equi-
librium they will make zero profit by bidding c + ∆. In this case, the distribution Fcl (p)
solves     "N −1                                             #
            X N − 1
                            (1 − Fl (p| c))k γ k (1 − γ)N −1−k (p − c) = (1 − γ)N −1 ∆,
            k=0
                      k
and thus we get
                                                  (1 − γ)N −1 (c + ∆) − p
                                                                                
                                       −1
                       Fcl (p)   =1−Φ
                                                1 − (1 − γ)N −1  p−c
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                   49


with upper limit p̄lc = c + ∆, and lower limit plc = c + (1 − γ)N −1 ∆.

    Case 2: λc > 0. From now on, we assume λc > 0, that is, slow traders enter with positive
probability. There are again two subcases.
    When c > v − ∆ (case 2.1), high-cost dealers cannot sell in equilibrium, and the spec-
ification of their strategy is irrelevant. Low-cost dealers mix according to a continuous
distribution Fcl (p) on an interval with upper limit p̄cl = rc , or on a union of two intervals as
in Lemma 8.
    When c ≤ v − ∆ (case 2.2), using Lemmas 6, 7, 8, and the argument from the proof of
Lemma 2, we can show that only two subcases are possible:

   • If rc ≤ c + ∆, (case 2.2.1), high-cost dealers make zero profit; they post a price c + ∆
     with probability 1, while low-cost dealers mix according to a continuous distribution
     on an interval with upper limit p̄lc = rc , or on a union of two intervals as in Lemma 8.

   • If rc > c + ∆ (case 2.2.2), high-cost dealers make positive profits, and in equilibrium
     both low-cost and high-cost dealers mix according to continuous distributions with
     adjacent supports (p̄lc = phc ), and with rc being the upper limit of the distribution of
     prices of high-cost dealers (p̄hc = rc ).

Below we analyze these cases in detail and characterize the optimal search behavior of slow
traders. We first define some key functions that generalize their equivalents from Section 3
to the case of idiosyncratic component in the costs. Let q(λc , θc ) be the posterior probability
that a customer is a fast trader, conditional on a visit, given the strategy (rc , λc , θc ). That
is,
                                                      Nµ
                            q(λc , θc ) =      1−θcN (1−γ)N
                                                                      .                       (B.5)
                                          N µ + 1−θc (1−γ) λc (1 − µ)
This definition generalizes formula (3.1). We also generalize the definition of the function α
from equation (3.6), which now becomes a function of two arguments:
                               ˆ                                                 !−1
                                            q(λc , θc ) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1
                                   1
                                                                        
               α(λc , θc ) =           1+                                    Φ(z)    dz,     (B.6)
                               0          1 − q(λc , θc ) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 )

where Φ(z) is defined in formula (B.3). Finally, we let α̂ = α(1, 1), which corresponds to
formula (3.7).
   To emphasize the point that we will now deal with equilibrium rather than just best
response of dealers to some generic strategy of traders, we add star superscripts to symbols
denoting the strategy of traders.

   Case 2.1: λ?c > 0, c > v − ∆. In this case, we clearly have θc? = 1. We first suppose that
the support of the distribution for low-cost dealers is an interval. Then Fcl (p) must satisfy
        "                             N −1                                    #
                                      X     N − 1               k
          1 − q(λ?c , 1) + q(λ?c , 1)              1 − Fcl (p) γ k (1 − γ)N −1−k (p − c)
                                                              
                                      k=0
                                              k
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                50


                        = 1 − q(λ?c , 1) + q(λ?c , 1)(1 − γ)N −1 (rc? − c).
                                                               

Solving for Fcl (p), we obtain
                                                                                !
                                         1 − q(λ?c , 1) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 rc? − p
                                                                        
                  Fcl (p) = 1 − Φ−1
                                           q(λ?c , 1) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 ) p − c

with p̄lc = rc? , and lower limit

            plc = 1 − q(λ?c , 1) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 rc? + q(λ?c , 1) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 c.
                                                                             


We can determine rc? in this case from the fact that it must solve the following equation (spec-
ifying that the trader must be indifferent at rc? between buying and searching), analogous to
equation (3.4),
                                     "    ˆ ?       rc
                                                        #
                    v − rc? = −s + γ v −                 pdFcl (p) + (1 − γ)(v − rc? ).
                                                  plc


Using a change of variables, we can transform this equation into the form
                         "     ˆ rc?           #
                   s = γ rc? −       p dFcl (p) = (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ(rc? − c).
                                   plc


Thus we have
                                                         s
                                   rc? = c +                        .
                                                  (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ
The last thing to determine is the probability λ?c of entry by slow traders. The profit of a
slow trader conditional on entry is equal to
                                                            N
                                                                                        !
                                                            X
πc = 1 − (1 − γ)N (v − α(λ?c , 1)rc? − (1 − α(λ?c , 1))c) −   (1 − γ)k−1 γk + (1 − γ)N N s
                   
                                                                        k=1
                                                                               
                                          N
                                                                    s
                         = 1 − (1 − γ)             v−c−                           .
                                                              (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ
When profit is strictly positive, we must have entry with probability one. That is, we have
λ?c = 1 if
                                                 s
                                   c≤v−                   .
                                           (1 − α(1, 1))γ
When profit is strictly negative, we must have entry with probability zero, meaning that
λ?c = 0 if
                                               s
                                  c≥v−                  .
                                         (1 − α(0, 1))γ
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                      51


This takes us back to case 1 analyzed before. Finally, if
                                          s                    s
                              v−                   <c<v−                ,
                                    (1 − α(1, 1))γ       (1 − α(0, 1))γ

then we must have interior entry λ?c ∈ (0, 1), where λ?c is the unique solution of the equation

                                           s = (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ(v − c).

In this case, slow traders have zero profits and we have rc? = v.
    To check whether the above strategies constitute an equilibrium, we need to verify that
the support of price offers by low-cost dealers is indeed an interval, that is, these dealers
cannot profitably deviate from posting prices in the range [plc , rc? ]. The only deviation that
we need to check is bidding v in the case rc? < v.37 This leads to the condition

                                   1 − (1 − γ)N
                                               
                    N −1                                s
           µ(1 − γ)      + (1 − µ)                               ≥ (1 − γ)N −1 (v − c),
                                        Nγ        (1 − α(1, 1))γ

where the left hand side is the expected profit from bidding rc? , and the right hand side is
the expected profit from bidding v (a dealer quoting v can only sell if all other dealers have
high costs). We define
                                          (1 − γ)N −1
                            κ=                                 N .                       (B.7)
                                 µ(1 − γ)N −1 + (1 − µ) 1−(1−γ)
                                                           Nγ

Thus, we have an equilibrium when
                                                             s
                                            c≥v−                      .
                                                      κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ

Note that κ < 1, and thus
                                             s                  s
                                v−                    <v−                .
                                      κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ     (1 − α(1, 1))γ

   When c < v − s/(κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ), by Lemma 8, we must have an equilibrium in which
the support for low-cost dealers consists of two intervals: [plc , rc? ] and [p̂lc , v]. Let ζc be the
conditional probability that a low-cost dealer posts a price in the lower interval. Then, in
particular, the dealer must be indifferent between rc? and v which pins down ζc , in that

                                    1 − (1 − γζc )N
                                                   
                     N −1
          µ(1 − γζc )     + (1 − µ)                   (rc? − c) = (1 − γ)N −1 (v − c).           (B.8)
                                         N γζc

We define
                                                        (1 − γ)N −1
                                ϑ(ζc ) =                                       N   .            (B.9)
                                           µ(1 − γζc )N −1 + (1 − µ) 1−(1−γζ
                                                                        N γζc
                                                                              c)



  37
       If there is a profitable deviation, this one is the most profitable.
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                        52


Note that ϑ(1) = κ. Then, equation (B.8) becomes

                                              rc? = (1 − ϑ(ζc ))c + ϑ(ζc )v.                      (B.10)

We can now determine the exact distribution of prices. In the upper interval we must have
        "N −1                                          #
         X N − 1                                     k
                      γ k (1 − γ)N −1−k 1 − Fcl (p)       (p − c) = (1 − γ)N −1 (v − c),
                                                    
         k=0
                k

so we get
                                                                    (1 − γ)N −1 v − p
                                                                                         
                                                        −1
                                Fcl (p)       =1−Φ                                            .
                                                                  1 − (1 − γ)N −1 p − c
In the lower interval, the distribution must satisfy
    " N −1                                              k                            #
       X N − 1                                    l                                 N
                                             
                                                 F   (p)      1 − µ 1 − (1 −   γζ c )
     µ               (γζc )k (1 − γζc )N −1−k 1 − c         +                            (p − c)
       k=0
               k                                   ζ c          N         γζ c


                                                          1 − µ 1 − (1 − γζc )N
                                                                               
                                               N −1
                      = µ(1 − γζc )                     +                         (rc? − c),
                                                            N         γζc
which gives
                                                           (1 − γ)N −1       1 rc? − p
                                                                                            
                                               −1
                  Fcl (p)   = ζc − ζc Φ                                                  ; ζc ,
                                                        1 − (1 − γζc )N −1 µϑ(ζc ) p − c
where
                                             N −1     
                                  1          X     N −1 k
              Φ(z; ζc ) =                               z (γζc )k (1 − γζc )N −1−k .
                          1 − (1 − γζc )N −1 k=1     k
That is, Φ(z; ζc ) is the analogue to Φ(z) when replacing γ with γζc .
  Finally, the reservation price is determined by
                                   "    ˆ rc?     l #
                                                  Fc (p)
               v − rc? = −s + γζc v −         pd          + (1 − γζc )(v − rc? ).                 (B.11)
                                         pl        ζc
                                                          c


Using a change of variable z = (ζc − Fcl (p))/ζc , we obtain
                           ˆ rc?     l 
                                     Fc (p)
                                 pd            = c + (rc? − c)α̃(ζc ),
                            pl         ζ c
                                          c


where                            ˆ                                               −1
                                      1
                                              1 − (1 − γζc )N −1
                                          
                   α̃(ζc ) =               1+                    µϑ(ζc )Φ(z; ζc )    dz.
                                  0              (1 − γ)N −1
Note that α̃(1) = α(1, 1). From this we can calculate the optimal reservation price, deter-
mined by equation (B.11), as
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                  53



                                                       s
                                   rc? = c +                     .                          (B.12)
                                                (1 − α̃(ζc ))γζc
Equations (B.10) and (B.12) together pin down rc? and ζc . Combining them, we get a single
equation that pins down ζc , in the form

                                s = ϑ(ζc )(1 − α̃(ζc ))γζc (v − c).

A unique solution ζc? ∈ (0, 1) exists if and only if 0 < s < κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ(v − c) which is
precisely our assumption for that case.
   Note that in this range the equilibrium level ζc? will be close to 1 when s is close to
κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ(v − c) and will converge to 0 as s goes to 0.

  Case 2.2.1: c ≤ v − ∆, rc? ≤ c + ∆. In this case, high-cost dealers offer the price c + ∆.
We have two cases to consider, and call them (a) and (b).

Case (a). When rc? < c + ∆, we must have θc? = 1. Suppose that low-cost dealers mix on an
interval. Then the distribution of prices is
                                                                               !
                                                                N −1
                                              ?
                                                                     
                                    1  − q(λ    , 1) 1 − (1 − γ)         ?
                                              c                        r   − p
                 Fcl (p) = 1 − Φ−1                                      c
                                                                                 ,
                                       q(λ?c , 1) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 ) p − c

just as in the previous case. What differs from the previous case is the profit of a slow trader
conditional on entry. In the event that there are no low-cost dealers in the market, a trader
buys from a high-cost dealer instead of exiting. Accordingly, the profit now becomes
                                                                             s
                 πc = v − c − (1 − γ)N ∆ − 1 − (1 − γ)N
                                                                  
                                                                                        .
                                                                      (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ

We can have strictly positive entry by slow traders only if
                                                        
                                N              s                    s
               v ≥ c + (1 − γ) ∆ −               ?
                                                           +                   .            (B.13)
                                        (1 − α(λc , 1))γ     (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ

Recall that we have
                                                       s
                                   rc? = c +                      .
                                                (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ
Thus, given that we assumed rc? < c + ∆, we have an equilibrium with positive entry if
inequality (B.13) holds and
                                            s
                                ∆>                     .
                                     (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ
Notice that we have
                                                             s
                    v − c − (1 − γ)N ∆ − 1 − (1 − γ)N
                                                              
                                                      (1 − α(λ?c , 1))γ

                   > v − c − (1 − γ)N ∆ − 1 − (1 − γ)N ∆ = v − c − ∆ ≥ 0,
                                                      
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                             54


which means that profits are always strictly positive in this case. Thus we must have full
entry, meaning λ?c = 1, and this can be an equilibrium only if s < (1 − α(1, 1))γ∆.
   Finally, we verify the supposition that low-cost dealers mix on an interval. We need to
check the deviation to (just below) c + ∆, analogous to deviation to v in the previous case.
We require

                                     1 − (1 − γ)N
                                                 
                      N −1                                s
             µ(1 − γ)      + (1 − µ)                               ≥ (1 − γ)N −1 ∆.
                                          Nγ        (1 − α(1, 1))γ

Thus, the above strategies are an equilibrium if s ≥ κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ∆.
   In the case s < κ(1 − α(1, 1))γ∆, we will have an equilibrium with low-cost dealers
mixing on two intervals [plc , rc? ] and [p̂lc , c + ∆]. The analysis is analogous to the one in the
previous case 2.1 so we skip some details. First, the indifference condition between rc? and
c + ∆38 is
                                          (rc? − c) = ϑ(ζc )∆.                               (B.14)
The upper part of the distribution is given by

                                            (1 − γ)N −1 c + ∆ − p
                                                                 
                       l             −1
                      Fc (p) = 1 − Φ                                ,
                                          1 − (1 − γ)N −1 p − c

while the lower part is

                                                        (1 − γ)N −1       1 rc? − p
                                                                                         
                                            −1
                    Fcl (p)   = ζc − ζc Φ                                             ; ζc .
                                                     1 − (1 − γζc )N −1 µϑ(ζc ) p − c

The reservation price is determined by equation (B.11). Simplifying as before, we obtain
                                                                 s
                                            rc? = c +                      .
                                                          (1 − α̃(ζc ))γζc

Combining with equation (B.14) ζc is pinned down by the equation

                                        s = ϑ(ζc )(1 − α̃(ζc ))γζc ∆.

The equation does not depend on c, so neither does the solution. That is, ζc? is independent
of c and solves
                                s = ϑ(ζ)(1 − α̃(ζ))γζ∆.
This equation has a unique solution in (0, 1) precisely when 0 < s < κ(1−α(1, 1))γ∆, which
was our assumption for this case.

Case (b). We now look at the second possibility: rc? = c + ∆. We can now have θc? ∈ (0, 1),
and this will matter for equilibrium pricing through the impact on the posterior beliefs of
  38
     Note that c + ∆ is the upper limit of the support but prices posted by a low-cost dealer are below c + ∆
with probability one. Thus, when we say that the dealer must be indifferent between posting rc? and c + ∆,
we really mean c + ∆ −  for arbitrarily small  → 0 which leads to the formula below.
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                       55


dealers. The probability Fcl (p) of an offer of p or less by a low-cost dealer solves
        "                                   N −1                                    #
                                            X     N − 1               k
          1 − q(λ?c , θc? ) + q(λ?c , θc? )              1 − Fcl (p) γ k (1 − γ)N −1−k (p − c)
                                                                    
                                            k=0
                                                    k

                         = 1 − q(λ?c , θc? ) + q(λ?c , θc? )(1 − γ)N −1 (rc? − c).
                                                                      

The profit of a slow trader is the same as in the previous case. The condition rc? = c + ∆
means that we must have
                                           s
                                                         = ∆.
                                    (1 − α(λ?c , θc? ))γ
This implies that we must again have entry with probability one. Thus, we have an equilib-
rium with full entry and the probability of rejecting an offer of rc? given by θc? that solves

                                           s = (1 − α(1, θc? ))γ∆.

Note that θc? = θ? (the equation, and hence the solution, is independent of c). An interior
solution exists if and only if (1 − α(1, 1))γ∆ < s < (1 − α(1, 0))γ∆. Notice that θ? is close
to 1 when s is close to (1 − α(1, 1))γ∆, and close to 0 when s is close to (1 − α(1, 0))γ∆.

   Case 2.2.2: c ≤ v − ∆, rc? > c + ∆. This is the case when high-cost dealers make positive
profits and mix according to a continuous distribution Fch (p) with upper limit rc? . We must
have θc? = 0. The cdf Fch (p) solves

 1 − q(λ?c , 0) + q(λ?c , 0)(1 − γ)N −1 (1 − Fch (p))N −1 (p − c − ∆) = [1 − q(λ?c , 0)] (rc? − c − ∆).
                                                        


Simplifying, we obtain
                                                                                   N1−1
                                                   1 − q(λ?c , 0)      rc? − p
                                          
                        Fch (p)   =1−
                                               q(λ?c , 0)(1 − γ)N −1 p − c − ∆

with upper limit p̄hc = rc? , and lower limit

                          1 − q(λ?c , 0)                 q(λ?c , 0)(1 − γ)N −1
        phc =                                    r ?
                                                     +                                (c + ∆).
                1 − q(λ?c , 0) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 ) c 1 − q(λ?c , 0) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 )

To simplify notation, let us denote

                                                    1 − q(λ?c , 0)
                               φ(λ?c ) =                                      .                  (B.15)
                                            1 − (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 ) q(λ?c , 0)

Next, Fcl (p) must solve
         "                               N −1                                     #
                                         X       N −1               k
           1 − q(λ?c , 0) + q(λ?c , 0)                 1 − Fcl (p) γ k (1 − γ)N −1−k (p − c)
                                                                  
                                         k=0
                                                   k
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                          56


                         = 1 − q(λ?c , 0) + q(λ?c , 0)(1 − γ)N −1 (phc − c).
                                                                

Solving for Fcl (p) we get
                                                                                      !
                                               1 − q(λ?c , 0) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 phc − p
                                                                              
                  Fcl (p) = 1 − Φ−1                                                     ,
                                                 q(λ?c , 0) (1 − (1 − γ)N −1 ) p − c

with p̄lc = phc and lower limit

           plc = 1 − q(λ?c , 0) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 phc + q(λ?c , 0) 1 − (1 − γ)N −1 c.
                                                                            


We need to define one more function, analogous to α(λ, θ), and corresponding to the distri-
bution of prices used by high-cost dealers. Let
                                    ˆ     1                               −1
                                                  q(λ, 0)(1 − γ)N −1 N −1
                                              
                        αh (λ) =               1+                   z         dz.
                                      0              1 − q(λ, 0)

Then, using a change of variables, we get
                      ˆ
                         p dFch (p) = (1 − αh (λ?c ))(c + ∆) + αh (λ?c )rc? ,

and                          ˆ
                                 p dFcl (p) = (1 − α(λ?c , 0))c + α(λ?c , 0)phc .

As always, rc? is determined by the indifference condition
                             "    ˆ p̄lc          #         "    ˆ             p̄h
                                                                                 c
                                                                                              #
                   ?                         l
            v − rc = −s + γ v −          p dFc (p) + (1 − γ) v −                     p dFch (p) .
                                               plc                            ph
                                                                               c


From this we can obtain
                                                 s − (1 − α(λ?c , 0))γ∆
                  rc? = c + ∆ +                                                        .
                                     γ(1 − φ(λ?c )α(λ?c , 0)) + (1 − γ)(1 − αh (λ?c ))

Next, we consider entry decision of slow traders. The profit conditional on entry is simply
v − rc? . Thus, we have entry with probability one if and only if

                                                 s − (1 − α(1, 0))γ∆
                     c<v−∆−                                                      .
                                        γ(1 − φ(1)α(1, 0)) + (1 − γ)(1 − αh (1))

Since we have assumed that rc? > c + ∆, we additionally require s > (1 − α(1, 0))γ∆.
   Interior entry requires λ?c to solve

                                       s − (1 − α(λ?c , 0))γ∆
                   v =c+∆+                                                   .                      (B.16)
                           γ(1 − φ(λ?c )α(λ?c , 0)) + (1 − γ)(1 − αh (λ?c ))
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                                                                     57


An interior solution exists if and only if

          s − (1 − α(0, 0))γ∆                                  s − (1 − α(1, 0))γ∆
                                         < v−c−∆ <                                             .
γ(1 − φ(0)α(0, 0)) + (1 − γ)(1 − αh (0))              γ(1 − φ(1)α(1, 0)) + (1 − γ)(1 − αh (1))
                                                                                     (B.17)
Noticing that αh (0) = 0 and that φ(0) = 0, we can simplify the inequality on the left to
s − (1 − α(0, 0))γ∆ < v − c − ∆.
   Finally, since we have assumed that rc? > c + ∆, we require s > (1 − α(λ?c , 0))γ∆. This
condition is satisfied vacuously when equation (B.16) holds.
   When s − (1 − α(0, 0))γ∆ ≥ v − c − ∆, we must have entry with probability zero which
brings us back to case 1.

This concludes the analysis of all cases. By direct inspection, we check that for any given
pair (s, c), there is exactly one equilibrium (up to payoff-irrelevant changes in equilibrium
strategies). Figure B.1 summarizes our conclusions by depicting the equilibrium
correspondence in the (s, c) space. “Full entry” means that λ?c = 1 in the relevant range.
“Interior entry” means that λ?c ∈ (0, 1). When we say that “only low-cost dealers sell,” we
mean that if there is at least one low-cost dealer in the market, then all customers trade
with low-cost dealers. When we say that “all dealers sell” or that “high-cost dealers sell
with probability θ,” we refer to the probability of selling to a slow trader upon a visit.
Finally, the trapezoidal area denoted by “(gap)” corresponds to the case in which low-cost
dealers have a gap in the support of their offer distribution.


                              Fig. B.1: The benchmark case: Equilibrium correspondence

    7c

                                                                             NO ENTRY
    v


                                                                          ONLY FAST TRADERS ENTER
                                                                                             (Case 1)

                                          INTERIOR ENTRY,
             (Case 2.1)
                                          ONLY LOW-COST
                      FULL ENTRY,         SELLERS SELL    (Case 2.1)
                      ONLY
 v!"
             (gap)    LOW-COST
                      SELLERS SELL
                                                                                                                      INTERIOR
                                                   FULL ENTRY,
                                                                                                                      ENTRY, ALL
                                                   HIGH-COST
                                                                                                                      SELLERS SELL
                                                   SELLERS
                                                   SELL WITH                           FULL ENTRY, ALL                         (Case 2.2.2)
                 (Case 2.2.1 (a))
                                                   PROB. θ                             SELLERS SELL
                                                                                                   (Case 2.2.2)
                                                       (Case 2.2.1 (b))

    c
         0                          (1 ! ,(1, 1)). "                      (1 ! ,(1, 0)). "                  (1 ! ,(0, 0)). "                  S
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                58


B.2        Proof of Proposition 7
Generalized statement (without assuming A.2): If s ≤ (1 − α̂)γ min{∆, v − c}, then
equilibrium in the benchmark case leads to efficient matching. That is, slow traders always
enter, and all traders buy from a low-cost dealer, in the event that there is at least one such
dealer present in the market. Additionally, if s ≥ κ(1− α̂)γ min{∆, v −c}, where κ < 1,39 the
equilibrium with the benchmark achieves the second best, in the sense that each slow trader
buys from the first low-cost dealer that she contacts, thus minimizing search costs subject to
matching efficiency.
Proof. The theorem follows directly from the derivation above (cases 2.1 and 2.2.1 (a)).
When
                κ(1 − α̂)γ min{∆, v − c} ≤ s ≤ (1 − α̂)γ min{∆, v − c},
we are in the region in which the equilibrium achieves the second best. Slow traders always
enter, and search until they find the first low-cost dealer (low-cost dealers always post prices
below the reservation price, and high-cost dealers always post prices above the reservation
price). If there are no low-cost dealers in the market and c > v − ∆, then traders exit
without trading. When c < v − ∆, they buy from a high-cost dealer. When s < κ(1 − α̂)γ∆,
low-cost dealers post prices below the reservation price with probability ζc? ∈ (0, 1). Because
high-cost dealers still post prices above the reservation-price (and above the prices posted
by low-cost dealers), the matching of traders to low-cost dealers is efficient.

B.3        Proof of Proposition 8
Generalized statement (not assuming A.2): In the absence of a benchmark, if min{v, c̄} >
c + ∆, there does not exist an equilibrium achieving the second best.
Proof. In an equilibrium in which the second-best is achieved under the condition s < γ∆,
high-cost dealers can only sell when there are no low-cost dealers in the market, and the
slow trader searched the entire market. Thus, if an equilibrium like this exists, high-cost
dealers quote prices as if they participated in an auction with all other high-cost dealers. A
standard result in auction theory says that in this case they must bid their costs, that is,
they must offer to sell for c + ∆.
    Consider a situation when a slow trader enters and the first dealer has low costs, for
some c < v. If the second-best is achieved, that offer needs to be accepted by a slow trader.
Under the assumption of the Proposition, we can find a c? that satisfies v > c? > c + ∆. By
the above observation, (almost) all prices in the support of the distribution of the low-cost
dealer at c = c? must be accepted by a slow trader in the first search round. This leads to
a contradiction. Since high-cost dealers post a price of c + ∆ conditional on c, they make
zero profits. They can profitably deviate at c = c by quoting a price in the support of the
distribution of a low-cost dealer at c = c? .
       κ = (1 − γ)N −1 / µ(1 − γ)N −1 + (1 − µ)[1 − (1 − γ)N ]/(N γ) .
  39
                                                                   
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                59


B.4       Generalized statement of Theorem 5 (not assuming A.2)
Theorem: If (i) κ(1 − α̂)γ min{∆, v − c} ≤ s ≤ (1 − α̂)γ min{∆, v − c̄} and (ii) c̄ > c + ∆
both hold, then the equilibrium in the benchmark case yields a strictly higher social surplus
that any equilibrium in the no-benchmark case.

B.5       Proof of Theorem 6
To prove the Theorem, we first describe the equilibrium path, and then show the optimality
of dealers’ strategies under a sufficiently high ∆.
    If the environment is competitive, the benchmark is introduced, only low-cost dealers
enter and we have a reservation-price equilibrium in the trading-stage subgame described
in Section 3.2 (with the exception that N is now replaced by M, which is equal to L in
equilibrium). Because s < (1 − ᾱ)(v − c̄), we have full entry in this case, and the reservation
price of slow-traders is
                                                     s
                                        rc? = c +         ,
                                                  1 − ᾱL
where the subscript L in ᾱL indicates that N is replaced by L in the definition of ᾱ given
by equation (3.7).
    If the environment is uncompetitive all dealers have high costs), the benchmark is not
introduced, and high-cost dealers enter if and only if X∆ > s. To see this, note that in
this case, we can apply the analysis of Section 3.3 with the exception that c is replaced by
c + ∆ (correspondingly, X is replaced by X∆ ). In particular, high-cost dealers make strictly
positive expected profits if and only if X∆ > s because this condition guarantees that there
is positive probability of entry by slow traders, according to Proposition 2. Existence follows
from Proposition 3 for all ∆ ≥ ∆?1 for some ∆?1 with X∆?1 > s. Indeed, the inspection of
the proof shows that a sufficient condition is that X∆ − s is sufficiently small which we can
achieve by taking high enough ∆.
    On the equilibrium path in the pre-play stage, low-cost dealers vote in favor of the
benchmark, and enter if the benchmark is introduced or if the benchmark is not introduced
and X∆ > s. High-cost dealers vote against the benchmark and enter if and only if the
benchmark is not introduced and X∆ > s.
    We now verify the optimality of these dealer strategies.
    Set ∆?0 = s/(1 − ᾱ), and suppose that ∆ ≥ ∆?0 so that s < (1 − ᾱ)∆.
    First, we show that a high-cost dealer does not want to deviate and enter when the
benchmark is introduced. Indeed, when the benchmark is observed, slow traders follow a
reservation-price strategy with
                                                   s          s
                                    rc? = c +           ≤c+        ,
                                                1 − ᾱM     1 − ᾱ

using the fact that ᾱM is increasing in M .40 Since s ≤ (1 − ᾱ)∆ for ∆ ≥ ∆?0 , we conclude
that c + ∆ ≥ rc? . Thus, using familiar arguments from previous sections, we show that a
high-cost dealer cannot make positive profits after entering the market, regardless of the
  40
       This is shown in Janssen and Moraga-González (2004).
B Proofs and Supporting Content for Section 4                                                         60


identities of other dealers in the market.41
    Second, we show that a high-cost dealer does not want to deviate and stay out of the
market when the benchmark is not introduced and X∆ > s. By the remark above, high-cost
dealers make strictly positive profits on the equilibrium path in that case.
    Third, low-cost dealers cannot deviate by changing their entry decision because, by the
specification of their strategy, they enter if and only if their expected profits are strictly
positive.
    Fourth, we show that any coalition of high-cost dealers does not want to deviate by voting
in favor of the benchmark. By what we established above, if the benchmark is introduced, a
high-cost dealer finds it optimal not to enter and hence earns no profits. Thus, this cannot
be a strictly profitable deviation.
    Fifth, we show that any coalition of low-cost dealers does not want to deviate by voting
against the benchmark. Note that L ≥ 2 is common knowledge among low-cost dealers.
In equilibrium, the benchmark is introduced, high-cost dealers stay out, and the low cost
dealer’s expected profit is equal to
                                          1−µ s
                                                     > 0,
                                           L 1 − ᾱL
which does not depend on ∆. If the benchmark is not introduced, slow traders believe with
probability one that only high-cost dealers are present in the market. By taking ∆ high
enough we can make X∆ − s arbitrarily small, so the equilibrium probability of entry by slow
traders is arbitrarily small without the benchmark (see the analysis in Section 3.3). Because
L ≥ 2, the expected profits of low-cost dealers in this case converge to zero as the posterior
probability of meeting a slow trader approaches zero. Because the profit on equilibrium path
is bounded away from zero, low-cost dealers do not want to deviate in this way if ∆ is above
some cutoff level ∆?2 .
    We conclude the proof by defining ∆? = max{∆?0 , ∆?1 , ∆?2 }.
    Note that ∆?1 and ∆?2 can be chosen so that X∆ > s if ∆ is close to max{∆?1 , ∆?2 }. If
additionally s is sufficiently small, we can guarantee that X∆ > s for all ∆ in some right
neighborhood of ∆? .




  41
     Note that off-equilibrium path traders may observe offers above their reservation price, something
that never happens on equilibrium path. We specify off-equilibrium beliefs of traders by saying that this
off-equilibrium event does not change the belief of any trader about the types of active dealers. This is
consistent with a perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
