NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOURCES OF FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS:
DIFFERENTIATING SIZE VS. AGE EFFECTS
Lorenz Kueng
Mu-Jeung Yang
Bryan Hong
Working Paper 20621
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20621

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

The usual disclaimer applies. An earlier version of results of this paper were circulated under the title
"The Age Dynamics of Productivity, Management Practices and Organizational Capital." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lorenz Kueng, Mu-Jeung Yang, and Bryan Hong. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sources of Firm Life-Cycle Dynamics: Differentiating Size vs. Age Effects
Lorenz Kueng, Mu-Jeung Yang, and Bryan Hong
NBER Working Paper No. 20621
October 2014
JEL No. D2,D22,D23,D24,D9,D92,E20,E24,E32,F23,G3,G32,M1,M5,O3,O4,O47,O51
ABSTRACT
What determines firm growth over the life-cycle? Exploiting unique firm panel data on internal organization,
balance sheets and innovation, representative of the entire Canadian economy, we study recent theories
that examine life-cycle patterns for firm growth. These theories include organizational capital accumulation
and management practices, financial frictions, learning about demand, and recent endogenous growth
models with incumbent innovation. We emphasize the importance of differentiating between pure
age effects of these theories and effects on size conditional on age. Our stylized facts highlight both
empirical successes and shortcomings of current theory. First, models of organizational capital and
innovation are broadly consistent with firm size correlations conditional on age but have difficulties
matching the life-cycle dynamics of firm organization and innovation. Second, among theories we
analyze, organizational capital and management practices are the most important determinants to explain
intensive margin firm growth over the life-cycle. Third, although less important to explain intensive
margin firm growth, financial frictions are an important determinant of firm exit, conditional on firm
age.

Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Mu-Jeung Yang
University of Washington
Department of Economics
Savery Hall, 327
Seattle, WA 98195-3330
mjyang@uw.edu

Bryan Hong
Western University
bhong@ivey.ca

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

1

1

Introduction

A large empirical literature has documented important age effects in firm growth
and exit patterns.1 Moreover, recent empirical evidence suggests that these age dynamics are crucial for understanding aggregate outcomes. For instance, firm age
dynamics account for a major part of employment growth, as shown by Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2013), while Hsieh and Klenow (2014) argue that
they are also important for understanding cross-country differences in aggregate
productivity. Not surprisingly, a large theoretical literature has proposed a variety
of mechanisms to relate firm outcomes to age effects, such as organizational capital
accumulation, financial frictions, learning about demand, and innovation. Although
these theories are successful in capturing firm growth patterns over the life-cycle,
empirical evidence of the validity of these models remains rare.
In this paper, we assess those theories in a unified empirical framework by estimating new reduced-form moments that are informative for those theories, using a
representative sample of Canadian establishments.2 More specifically, we construct
variables capturing the main mechanism of those theories of firm life-cycle dynamics
and provide stylized facts that highlight both empirical successes and shortcomings
of current theories. Our approach emphasizes the distinction between age and size
effects both in our survey of the theoretical literature as well as in our empirical
analysis, as suggested by recent studies such as Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2013). Indeed, the firm life-cycle dynamics of many models are driven by the
fact that older firms are typically larger and not necessarily by the fact that older
firms have been active for a longer time span. Size effects, in other words, describe
mechanisms through which young firms should run into the same scale effects as old
firms of comparable size. We identify the most important mechanisms explaining
firm dynamics suggested by recent theoretical contributions and determine whether
they mainly operate through size or age effects, or both.3 Since we construct direct
proxies for the mechanisms in recent models of firm life-cycle dynamics, we will be
able to distinguish age dynamics from size effects.
To our knowledge, this is the first empirical study to systematically construct
proxy variables for a wide range of firm life-cycle theories and to contrast age dynamics and size effects of these theories in the data. This empirical progress is
made possible by the availability of a relatively long firm panel dataset with com1

See for example the empirical facts provided by Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson (1989) and
the survey by Sutton (1997).
2
More than 90% of businesses in our data are single-establishment firms. Unless noted otherwise,
we therefore use the terms “establishment” and “firm” interchangeably, and we include a multiestablishment indicator in all our empirical analysis.
3
Our selection of theoretical mechanisms is necessarily incomplete and partly driven by the
necessity to map the theory to our data, although we believe that we cover the most important
mechanisms.

Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2511069

2

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

prehensive information on internal organization, balance sheets and innovation. In
contrast to other studies in the literature, our data is representative of the entire
Canadian economy—including the large service sector—and does not only capture
specific industries such as manufacturing or pharmaceuticals.
We construct measures of mechanisms at the heart of four classes of firm lifecycle theories. First, we measure firm organization as emphasized in recent models
of organizational capital accumulation such as Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2012)
and Akcigit, Alp and Peters (2014) as well as management practices as highlighted
by recent empirical work such as Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2012) and Bloom,
Eifert, McKenzie, Mahajan and Roberts (2013a). Second, variables such as financial
leverage and term structure of debt capture main mechanisms of theories of financial
frictions and firm dynamics as in Cooley and Quadrini (2001). Third, dynamic markups play a crucial role in “learning about demand” as in Foster, Haltiwanger and
Syverson (2013). Fourth, we measure innovation activity as emphasized by models
of endogenous growth with incumbent innovation as in Klette and Kortum (2004).
We highlight a key set of findings that are informative for these theories of firm
life-cycle dynamics. First, models with organizational capital accumulation such as
Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2012) and models of endogenous innovation such as
Klette and Kortum (2004) predict that the number of organizational layers and the
likelihood to innovate increase monotonically as firms grow. While the age profiles of
our theory-driven measures of organizational layers and innovation do not increase
monotonically, these theories perform much better when we analyze size correlations
controlling for firm age, which is the relevant statistic implied by those models. For
instance, larger firms have systematically more organizational layers as predicted
by Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2012).4 Similarly, larger firms are also systematically more likely to innovate conditional on age as predicted by Klette and Kortum
(2004). We argue both that this contrast between age and size effects is important
to take into account in empirical work and that it can be fruitful for further theory
development. Similarly, when analyzing size effects, we find support for the few theories that differentiate between product and process innovations, such as Klepper
(1996). Consistent with those models, we find that larger firms tend to innovate and
improve processes instead of products. However, in contrast to theoretical predictions, the likelihood of product and process innovations is systematically declining
with age. Our results suggest that examining the emergence of precess and product
innovations within firms is likely to be a fruitful area for future research.
Second, models of optimal delegation of real decision authority can have very
different life-cycle predictions. For instance, if information acquired by employees
becomes more important in larger firms, then theories of optimal delegation such as
Aghion and Tirole (1997) would predict that firms decentralize decision-making as
4

This result is also consistent with recent findings by Caliendo, Monte and Rossi-Hansberg
(2014), who use a measure of organizational layers that is slightly different than ours.

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

3

they grow. On the other hand, stricter monitoring and centralization of decisions is
the optimal response to firm growth in recent models such as Akcigit et al. (2014).
While the life-cycle profile of our centralization measure does not offer uniform
support for either mechanism, the more relevant effect on size conditional on age
strongly supports models like Aghion and Tirole (1997).
Third, performance pay can be adopted to counter increased moral hazard arising
from hiring more employees. In addition to this conditional size effect, Holmstrom
(1989) conjectures that small firms focus on hard-to-monitor tasks such as innovation, while large firms need to mix innovation tasks with routine tasks such as
production and distribution. One implication from a changing composition of tasks
at firms could be that younger firms are more likely to adopt performance pay since
they specialize in innovation, while older firms do not implement performance pay
since a larger fraction of their tasks are easier to monitor than innovation. We find
support for both channels in the data. The life-cycle profile of performance pay
adoption is indeed downward sloping, and we also estimate an economically and
statistically significant positive size effect conditional on firm age.
Fourth, we find evidence complementary to recent work on management practices by Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), which links management practices to firm
productivity. In particular, firms are more likely to hire professional managers as
they grow in size, which might either reflect the causal effect on firm performance
from hiring professional managers who implement better management practices, or
it could reflect the fact that larger firms are more likely to pay a fixed cost to implement professional management. In this context, an additional analysis of age profiles
becomes instructive, since recent empirical evidence by Bloom et al. (2013a) has
identified an additional age effect via learning about structured management. We
find strong support for the learning channel and size effects of implementing professionalized management. The life-cycle profile of adopting professional management
is strongly monotonically increasing, while we also find a large and significant size
effect conditional on age.
Fifth, our analysis of firms’ decision to outsource tasks speaks to theories of firm
boundaries such as Williamson (1975) and Grossman and Hart (1986). Centering
on relationship-specific investments as the main source of frictions generates the
prediction that firms can reduce hold up problem by supplier diversification or by
learning how to standardize inputs. Both channels imply that firms outsource more
activities as they age and grow. We find strong evidence for this mechanism in the
data, which shows a steeply increasing age profile as well as significant size effects
of outsourcing, conditional on age.
Sixth, we find mixed evidence for models of financial frictions and firm growth.
While the estimated life-cycle profile of leverage is flat, consistent with models such
as Buera (2009) and Moll (2014), the positive size effect conditional on age is inconsistent with dynamic models of costly debt financing such as Cooley and Quadrini

4

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

(2001). At the same time, we find that financial frictions are important for explaining the extensive margin. While financial variables capturing financial frictions such
as leverage and the maturity of firm debt are relatively unimportant in explaining
intensive margin firm growth, they turn out to be the most important predictors
of firm exit once we control for firm age. We therefore conclude that our results
support theories of financial frictions that primarily focus on extensive margin effects, and that there is a need for both new theory explaining the positive relation
between the intensive margin and leverage as well as for more empirical analysis of
the effect of financial frictions on the intensive margin of firm growth.
Seventh, recent work by Foster et al. (2013) stresses the importance of pure
age effects via a learning about demand channel in which young firms accumulate
a customer basis by initially choosing low mark-ups when young before gradually
increasing them with increased demand for their products. We do find support
for this mechanism, as the life-cycle profile of mark-ups is indeed upward sloping.
This is an important extension to Foster et al. (2013), since our data covers the
entire economy and not only a few manufacturing industries with homogeneous,
commodity-like goods.
Finally, we investigate which theory is most important for explaining firm lifecycle dynamics. We include our proxies for the various theories in a non-parametric
regression of firm size including a full set of age effects as well as additional controls.
We find that measures of organizational capital or management practices are the
most important determinants of firm life-cycle dynamics conditional on firm survival.
As mentioned before, financial frictions in turn are the most important predictors
of firm exit conditional on age. However, while we find strong support for many
theories, we also document that a large part of firm growth over the life-cycle as
well as firm death still remains unexplained, even after controlling for all proxies of
firm life-cycle theories. Much more research on the determinants of the life-cycle
pattern of firm growth is need.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews recent theories of firm
life-cycle dynamics, which will guide our measurement and empirical analysis. We
emphasize whether the main mechanism at the heart of different firm life-cycle
theories is operating mainly through firm size or indeed firm age effects. Section
3 lays out the framework of our empirical approach, describing data sources and
the baseline econometric model employed. We also compare our baseline results on
firm growth over the life-cycle with empirical studies of the same age effects in other
countries. Section 4 discusses the estimated age profiles and size effects conditional
on firm age on the sample of surviving firms in the context of the models discussed in
section 2 and using the methodology outlined in section 3. To facilitate exposition,
we discuss the detailed construction of proxy variables right before presenting the
results in this section. Section 5 discusses our results for the extensive margin.
Section 6 concludes.

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

2

5

Theories of Firm Life-Cycle Dynamics

As background for our empirical analysis, we start by providing an overview of
recent theories of firm age dynamics. As such, this review extends Atkeson and
Kehoe (2005), who describe life-cycle dynamics of plants in US manufacturing and
use this data to quantify the aggregate importance of organizational capital. In
contrast to Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), we focus on theories of the actual mechanisms
behind the accumulation of organizational capital. This review is not intended to be
comprehensive, but will rather reflect availability of direct measures of these theories
in our data.
One can roughly classify these theories into two groups, which are not mutually
exclusive. The first set of theories centers around constraints to firm growth and the
way firms overcome these constraints as they accumulate organizational or physical
capital. This class of explanations includes theories of changes in firms’ organizational or management practices, which center around internal firm constraints.
More broadly, it also includes models of financial frictions in which firms overcome
external constraints over time. The second set of theories of firm age dynamics focus
on active knowledge accumulation at firms. These theories include models of firms’
“learning about demand” as well as models of endogenous innovation.
Throughout our review, we will emphasize the difference between pure age effects
and size effects. For the latter, the current size of a firm should be a sufficient statistic
to predict what type of constraints to growth the firm is facing. In contrast, pure
age effects require information beyond current size and are often related to learning
mechanisms.

2.1

Firm Organization and Management Practices

Most firms start out as small organizations in which ownership and control are
unified in the person of an entrepreneur. However, entrepreneurial firms eventually
run into internal diseconomies of scale and therefore have to reorganize to sustain a
larger firm size. This is a key idea of models relating firm age dynamics to internal
firm organization and management practices. While early elaborations of this idea
in Penrose (1959) or Lucas (1978) rely on unspecified “scarce managerial inputs” or
“limited span of control,” the recent literature analyzes the role of reorganization in
helping to sustain a larger firm size.
Decision layers A natural source of diseconomies of scale is the business owner’s
time constraint as in Garicano (2000) and Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2012).
In these models, a firm economizes on the business owner’s time by introducing
division of labor across organizational layers within the firm. Lower layers solve
simple problems and report more complicated problems to higher layers, which in

6

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

turn specialize in solving only complex problems. Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg
(2012) describes a dynamic equilibrium model of exploration of new ideas and the
exploitation of profits associated with existing ideas. When new technologies are first
introduced or firms are founded, only the solution to the most common problems
is known. Over time, as the organization faces more and more issues related to
the commercialization of the new technology, managers learn more about complex
problems and the firm adds more organizational layers. This addition of layers
requires “time to build organizations,” which is why the model in Garicano and
Rossi-Hansberg (2012) introduces an age effect that is separate from the size effect
due to the diseconomies of scale. An important prediction from this class of models
is that the number of organizational layers increases over time as firms age and get
larger, reflecting deeper knowledge specialization and division of labor.
Centralization A second form of internal constraints to growth is the presence of
decentralized information. As a firm grows larger, employees hired by the business
owner are likely to acquire knowledge during the conduct of day-to-day operations
delegated to them. Since the business owner does not naturally have access to the
same knowledge, decisions in larger firms can be based on worse information. To
exploit this information, firms can decentralize decision making as emphasized by
Aghion and Tirole (1997), thereby trading off the loss of control by the business
owner against the utilization of information acquired by their employees. Because
this type of information might become more important as firms get larger, the
prediction would be that firms tend to decentralize as they grow in size. In contrast,
recent work by Akcigit et al. (2014) focuses on the opposite site of this trade-off. As
firms get larger, employees need to be monitored since they otherwise abuse their
decision authority for personal gain. Akcigit et al. (2014) show that this leads to
the prediction that firms should optimally centralize decision making as they grow.
It is important to note that the mechanisms of both Aghion and Tirole (1997) and
Akcigit et al. (2014) are in effect operating primarily through firm size instead of
firm age.
Performance pay A third internal constraint to growth is moral hazard when
hiring employees. To counter these moral hazard problems, firms can adopt performance pay to induce efficient decision making. Whether performance pay at firms
is adopted early or late in the firm life-cycle depends on several factors. First, larger
and older firms might naturally be subject to more moral hazard problems, since it
is harder for business owners to monitor a large number of employees. A first prediction might therefore be that adoption of performance pay is more likely for old
firms, which also tend to be larger. This first mechanism primarily operates through
firm size, so that one might expect it applies also to young but large firms. Second,
the composition of tasks conducted by employees might change over time. Harder-

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

7

to-monitor tasks such as innovation and creative activities as in Holmstrom (1989)
might be more important for younger firms, while older firms might focus more on
relatively standardized tasks associated with the production and distribution of their
established products. In this alternative view, performance pay adoption is more
likely for young firms than for older firms. Since the task composition in this theory
is a function of firm age and not primarily of size, the prediction that younger firms
might be more likely to adopt performance pay is a pure age effect.
Presence of professional management An alternative way to deal with moral
hazard of employees in large firms is to hire managers to monitor employees or
to implement structured management practices that allow the implementation of
a more effective employee incentive system. Theories of hierarchies as an optimal
response to moral hazard issues as surveyed by Mukherjee (2012) predict that hiring
of professional managers becomes more likely as firms expand in size. Similar to the
implementation of performance pay, the introduction of managerial hierarchies in
response to moral hazard can be considered a size effect. The predictions of this
monitoring view of management are qualitatively similar to theories of the optimal
implementation of management practices, as emphasized in work by Bloom and
Van Reenen (2007) and Bloom et al. (2013a). In particular, we have two distinct
mechanisms in mind.
First, firms that implement structured management practices might become more
efficient, as shown by Bloom et al. (2013a). In this view, the correlation of size and
the presence of professional management would reflect a causal effect of management
on firm size. Second, implementing structured management practices might require
a fixed cost so that only large firms hire professional managers to implement these
practices. In this view, similar to the moral hazard view of managerial hierarchies,
the installation of professional management is primarily driven by firm size.
A complementary view to these size effects is presented by learning mechanisms
emphasized in the empirical work of Bloom et al. (2013a). As firms age, their owners
learn about more structured management practices and hire professional managers
to implement them. This last mechanism captures an age effect that is going beyond
the firm size effects discussed before.
Outsourcing A final potential form of internal diseconomies of scale are customized activities that require firm-specific investments, which make firms vulnerable to hold up problems as in Williamson (1975) and Grossman and Hart (1986). In
contrast to the factors analyzed thus far, firms might eventually be able to grow out
of these constraints. The idea is that young firms start with many customized and
firm-specific labor services or intermediates and therefore face severe inefficiencies
implied by corresponding hold up problems. However, as firms age and standardize
most of their activities, these inputs are more likely to be available in spot markets.

8

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Older firms are therefore more likely to outsource activities and purchase labor services or intermediate inputs from other firms instead of providing them in-house.
Note that this firm boundary mechanism might potentially be both a size and an
age effect. On the one hand, it is potentially a size effect since higher demand by
large firms is more likely to support multiple suppliers, which then mitigates hold up
problems and makes outsourcing more likely. On the other hand, it can be an age
effect since standardization might require time to optimally redesign the value chain
inside the firm as well as time for suppliers to learn how to produce intermediates.

2.2

Financial Frictions

While the analysis of firm organization and management focuses on internal constraints to firm growth, theories of financial frictions emphasize external constraints
such as the availability of credit to finance firm expansions.
One central indicator that differentiates theories of financial constraints and the
life-cycle of firms is financial leverage. In limited commitment models of financial
frictions, such as Buera (2009) and Moll (2014), leverage is constant across firms,
so that the value of debt is constrained by the value of a firm’s assets. These
models would predict the absence of any particular systematic leverage dynamics
as firms age and expand. In contrast, models of costly debt financing and default,
such as Cooley and Quadrini (2001), predict that larger and more productive firms
prefer to internally finance more of their operations to avoid costly credit. In this
model, leverage systematically declines as firms grow and age. Since it is really
firm profitability that drives the interaction of leverage and age, and profitability
is proportional to size, Cooley and Quadrini (2001) can be considered to capture a
size effect.
Another important friction that prevents young firms from acquiring credit on
financial markets is private information about a firm’s productivity and profit opportunities. Information about a firm’s products and profitability might only diffuse
to a wider public as it is active for a number of years. Diamond (1993) presents a
model where banks, which specialize in acquiring information on firms, also optimally focus on providing short-term loans. On the other hand, for firms for which a
large amount of public information is available, issuing long-term bonds is optimal.
From this logic, one can see that as firms age and information about their business
model becomes more public, older firms might switch their financing from obtaining
short-term bank loans to issuing long-term bonds. This type of mechanism has no
implications for overall leverage, but instead predicts that the debt maturity structure should lengthen as firms age. As learning by outside lenders takes time, this
mechanism implies an age effect rather than a size effect.

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

2.3

9

Learning about Demand

Recent empirical work by Foster et al. (2013) suggests that firm age dynamics in
homogeneous good industries cannot be driven by improvements in cost efficiency.
Foster et al. (2013) instead suggest that firm age dynamics might be driven by active
learning of firms about demand. In their model, firms can influence future demand
by expanding demand today. This leads producers to dynamically set mark-ups,
starting with low mark-ups to encourage more sales today which leads to demand
accumulation tomorrow. As demand accumulation runs into diminishing returns,
firms optimally increase their mark-ups eventually to maximize profits.
The key prediction for age dynamics is therefore that firms’ mark-ups should
systematically increase as firms become older. Furthermore, as Foster et al. (2013)
show, one requires the past history of sales to credibly estimate this mechanism
in contrast to pure size effects for which current firm size is mostly sufficient. We
therefore classify the “learning about demand” channel as pure age effect.

2.4

Innovation

A classic form of knowledge accumulation as the result of purposeful investments
are theories of endogenous innovation. Recent advances in this class of models generate a number of implications for firm life-cycle dynamics. Specifically, starting
with work by Klette and Kortum (2004), endogenous innovation models generate
realistic firm dynamics combining innovation by entrants with innovation by incumbents. The basic logic of models following in the tradition of Klette and Kortum
(2004) is that firms are modeled as the sum of products for which a particular innovator has found the most productive technology. Firms expand by finding the
new frontier technology in new product lines and shrink by losing product lines to
other innovators. Through the lens of Klette and Kortum (2004), large firms are
less likely to lose all product lines and exit and will therefore become older. At the
same time, more products are not only a measure of firm size but also a measure
of the knowledge accumulated at the firm, which makes future innovations more
likely. Therefore, larger firms are more likely to innovate, since they accumulated
more knowledge. In the model of Klette and Kortum (2004) if one would follow a
cohort of firms as they age, older firms would be larger and more likely to innovate,
but this is primarily a size effect.
Akcigit and Kerr (2010) offer an extension of the Klette and Kortum model
in which young and small firms explore radical innovations while older and larger
firms concentrate on non-radical innovations that focus on exploiting existing profit
opportunities. In contrast to Klette and Kortum (2004), the model by Akcigit and
Kerr makes predictions about the composition of the types of innovations generated
by firms. As a result, the likelihood to generate radical innovations should decline

10

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

with firm age and size, while the likelihood to generate non-radical, incremental
innovations should increase. It should be noted that similar to the effects in Klette
and Kortum (2004), these predictions are primarily driven by size effects. That is,
the reason young firms tend to be more likely to pursue radical innovations is related
to their size rather than the fact that they are not very old.
Innovations in Klette and Kortum (2004) and related models can be understood
either as process innovations that imply a reduction in marginal production costs or
as quality improvements of existing products. While these models are typically silent
on the difference between product and process innovations, Klepper (1996) provides
a theory of firm age dynamics that explicitly models this dimension. Young and
small firms are more likely to generate product innovations, while old and large
firms focus on process innovations. Klepper (1996) therefore provides additional
predictions about the type of innovations likely to result as firms age. As in the case
of endogenous innovation models discussed before, the theory of Klepper (1996)
works primarily through firm size instead of age effects per se. The reason is that
profits from process innovations scale with firm size, while profits from product innovations do not. This is the main reason older and larger firms specialize in process
innovations, while smaller and younger firms specialize in product innovations.

3
3.1

Stylized Facts About Firm Age Dynamics
Data

The source of our data is the Workplace and Employee Survey (WES), which
is a random stratified panel of establishments with the universe of Canadian firms
as the target population and is conducted by Statistics Canada. The survey has a
cross-sectional dimension of approximately 6500 firms per year over the time period
from 1999 to 2006. Of these 6500 firms, we focus on the sample of around 5500
for-profit business firms. As in other government-sponsored surveys, response to the
WES was mandatory, so that the overall response rate was typically close to 90%.
A particularly attractive feature of the WES survey implementation is that
Statistics Canada invested considerable effort in ensuring the precise measurement of
firm exit decisions. In typical establishment-level surveys, especially in the developing world, it is often unclear whether sample attrition is driven by firm exit or simply
non-response. For the WES survey, Statistics Canada followed up non-respondents
even up to a year later to find out whether the firm had indeed gone out of business.
If not, every effort was made to convert non-respondents into respondents, which
explains the very low attrition rate in the survey.
The WES provides various measures of firm organization and management practices as well as detailed measures of organizational change and innovation activity.
Furthermore, in cooperation with Statistics Canada and with support of Industry

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

11

Canada, we linked the survey data to balance sheet information available from administrative tax records, the General Index of Financial Information (GIFI), which
forms the basis for the calculation of profit taxes. We therefore create a comprehensive dataset not only of firms’ management practices but also of their performance
as reported to tax authorities.
Our combined dataset has several advantages compared to currently available
empirical work on firm age dynamics, such as Foster et al. (2013) and Hsieh and
Klenow (2014). First, our combined dataset is representative of the entire Canadian economy including the large service industry, rather than being limited to a
few sectors such as manufacturing. Since the major part of economic activity in
advanced economies such as Canada or the US takes place outside of manufacturing, we consider this a major advantage. Second, the scope of variables we are able
to pool together from both the WES and firm balance sheet information surpasses
anything available in current empirical studies, which are mostly based on sales and
employment data, but typically cover neither internal firm organization nor balance
sheet variables such as financial leverage or gross margins.
Finally, for measuring firm birth it might seem that our use of a representative
survey is a disadvantage relative to Census-based studies such as Foster et al. (2013)
and Hsieh and Klenow (2014). While by using Census data one can measure the
birth year of firms as the first time a firm enters a Census, this strategy requires that
the Census data have a very long time dimension. While the WES was conducted
only for eight consecutive years, we can rely on birth year information that was
directly asked in the survey and that we checked for consistency and validated with
similar age information from the Canadian Annual Survey of Manufacturing.

3.2

Methodology

For our baseline empirical methodology, we follow Deaton (1997) to decompose
age dynamics into cohort, time and age effects. In contrast to just analyzing crosssectional size distributions by age, this approach has the advantage of separating age
effects from cohort effects and possible aggregate shocks captured in time effects.
We follow the literature in assuming that these three types of effects do not interact
with each other, but take a (log) linear form:
ln(yc,a,t ) = µ +

A
X
a=1

αa · Da +

T
X
t=1

τt · Dt +

C
X

κc · Dc + controls + error

(1)

c=1

where Da , Dt , Dc are dummy variables for firm age, time period, and cohort, respectively. We define firm cohorts by their birth year and calculate each firm’s age as the
difference between the current year and the birth year. As is well known, the unrestricted linear model (1) is not identified, since each cohort dummy is by definition

12

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

collinear to a combination of an age and a time dummy. We therefore impose four
restrictions on the linear model to solve this collinearity problem and accommodate
the constant term µ. We drop the first age and cohort effects to accommodate the
constant µ, and we normalize
P time effects so that the time effects sum to zero in
order to accommodate µ, Tt=1 τt = 0, and we require that those time effects are
P
also orthogonal to a linear time trend, Tt=1 t · τt = 0.
The logic of the Deaton methodology is that time effects can be interpreted as
capturing business cycle movements, since they are orthogonal to any log linear time
trend and sum to zero. A key advantage of the Deaton methodology is that the age
dummies are flexible enough to pick up any form of non-monotonicities without
imposing any particular functional form, while we are still able to plot the results.
The primary use of the Deaton methodology has typically been to construct synthetic panel data by tracking the same cohorts in different cross-sectional datasets
over time. While one of the advantages of Deaton’s method is the applicability to
repeated cross sections, one might ask what specific advantages this method has in
panel data. We would like to stress from the outset that for our object of interest –
namely age effects – panel data does not necessarily address key identification issues
such as the separation of age, cohort and time effects; see Hall, Mairesse and Turner
(2007) and Schulhofer-Wohl (2013). Additionally, we argue that there are two particularly attractive features of the Deaton decomposition. First, since the age effects
group together different establishments of the same age, it will naturally reduce attenuation due to two forms of noise prevalent in business micro-data: measurement
error and temporary, mean-reverting shocks. As described in the data section, since
age data is reported by survey respondents, it is prudent to safeguard against measurement error in this variable. Furthermore, it is well known since Baily, Hulten
and Campbell (1992) that mean-reverting, temporary shocks are an important part
of establishment dynamics. The Deaton method naturally reduces the impact of
both forms of noise by calculating a mean for age effects across a number of establishments. Second, a key advantage of the availability of panel data is information
about firm exit. This is particularly useful when considering age dynamics, since
these age dynamics could often be driven by selection instead of, say, learning within
establishments. Fortunately, the Deaton method allows us to exploit this feature of
the panel data in a simple way by calculating age effects for non-exiting firms.
We also include a number of control variables in the vector controls. These
are 4-digit NAICS sector fixed effects and dummies for multi-establishment firms as
well as for exporter status. These controls help to make the estimated age patterns
more representative for the entire economy.

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

3.3

13

Unconditional Firm Age Dynamics

We begin our empirical analysis by reporting results of age dynamics based on the
Deaton decomposition discussed in section 3.2. This section serves several purposes.
First, we quantitatively compare the age dynamics in our data with known crosscountry empirical results from manufacturing reported by Hsieh and Klenow (2014).
To facilitate comparability, we discuss the age effects on employment for the age
classes 10 to 14 and 30 to 34 with the employment size for establishments with age
0 to 4, while showing the full set of age effects in the corresponding figures. Second,
we document the same basic age dynamics for revenue as an alternative measure
of establishment size and contrast the results of age dynamics in revenue with age
dynamics in employment. Third, since results of the age dynamics in establishment
employment and size are conditional on surviving firms, we explicitly analyze age
patterns in exit dates.
Let us start by considering how well estimates of age effects in employment size
based on the Deaton decomposition compare with age effects reported in Hsieh and
Klenow (2014), which are constructed by following cohorts over time. Figure 2(a)
shows our estimated age effects using the Deaton decomposition. They indicate that
for the entire Canadian economy, the employment size advantage by age 10-14 is a
factor of 1.56, while establishments by age 30-34 are on average 2.36 times larger than
entrants, which are defined to be of age 0-4. The life-cycle patterns in the general
economy are somewhat steeper for older establishments than the age dynamics of
manufacturing plants. In manufacturing, establishments age 10-14 are 70% bigger
than plants of age 0-4, while plants age 30-34 are 2.1 times bigger than entrants.5
Putting these results into international perspective by comparing them with results
from the US, Mexico and India—the main countries of the empirical study by Hsieh
and Klenow (2014)—shows that Canada is between the extreme cases of the US and
Indian manufacturing and has similar age dynamics to manufacturing in Mexico.
Specifically, the age advantage of 10-to-14-year-old manufacturing plants in the US
is 2.4, which is already larger than the Canadian manufacturing plants are at age
30-34, at which age US plants are 8 times bigger than the typical entrants of age 0-4.
In contrast, Indian manufacturing plants barely grow, and even if they survive until
the age of 30-34, are only around 40% bigger than the typical entrant. Mexican
plants, on the other hand, behave similarly in their age dynamics to Canadian
manufacturing plants. By age 10-14, the representative surviving Mexican plant
is about 40% bigger than an entrant, compared to 70% in Canada. These are
significant differences, but not as stark as between the US and Canada. What is
more, this difference in age effects disappears by age 30-34, since both Mexican
and Canadian manufacturing plants at this age are around 2.1 times bigger than a
5

Manufacturing results are similar whether we use the Deaton decomposition or follow cohorts
over time.

14

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

typical entrant.
Hsieh and Klenow (2014) also report age effects for an even broader set of countries, showing that most countries are somewhere between the extreme cases of India
and the US in terms of their age dynamics. From this perspective, an analysis of
the determinants of age dynamics in the Canadian economy could be considered
quite representative of the mechanisms of such age dynamics in other countries.
Furthermore, note that our age dynamics results for the entire Canadian economy
are in the same ballpark as results for manufacturing. This might indicate that
some of the same forces determining manufacturing age dynamics are at work in
other sectors of the economy. This reinforces the value added of our analysis to the
previous empirical literature that primarily focused on manufacturing due to data
limitations.
A major part of the previous literature not only focused on manufacturing, but
also used employment as the preferred measure of size. We will also consider revenue
as an alternative measure of size since it has several attractive conceptual features.
First, unlike inputs such as employment or capital, it is not likely to be subject
to internal adjustment frictions, which make it possible that a firm’s expectations
of future profitability or uncertainty enter size measures. Second, revenue is a key
outcome for theories of learning about demand such as Foster et al. (2013). Third,
it provides an alternative measure of size dynamics with which we can check the
robustness of the results using employment. Figure 2(b) displays the age dynamics
for Canadian establishments, estimated using the Deaton methodology. As can
already be seen when comparing figure 2(b) with figure 2(a), the age dynamics in
revenue are much steeper than the age dynamics calculated using employment. An
establishment of age 10-14 is approximately 2.6 times bigger in terms of revenue than
an establishment of age 0-4. This revenue advantage becomes huge and is very slow
to close. By age 30-35, surviving establishments are 11 times bigger than entering
establishments. What is more, age effects in revenue show nearly no tendency to
run into diminishing returns, in contrast to age effects in employment. Figure 2(a)
shows that 35-year-old establishments are only marginally larger than 25-year-old
establishments. In contrast, the same 35-year-old establishments are significantly
larger in terms of revenue compared to 25-year-old establishments.
Our estimates of the age effects in employment and revenue focus on establishments that are surviving to minimize the impact of selection effects on the age
dynamics. Yet, we know from previous studies that age has an important effect on
firm exit decisions, especially of young firms. To prepare the analysis of correlation
patterns of determinants of age dynamics with firm exit, we start by reporting in
figure 3 exit patterns as a function of firm age. We used a linear probability model
for these exit regressions. As the figure shows, there is a strong and significant
decline in the probability of exit up to age 15-20. Past the age of 20, however, exit
probabilities do not seem to be systematically related to establishment age. These

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

15

patterns suggest that the determinants entering the age dynamics of employment
and revenue are unlikely to be of similar importance for exit decisions.

4

Quantifying Sources of Firm Dynamics

In this section, we confront the different theories of firm life-cycle patterns outlined in section 2 with new stylized facts about age and size effects. Each subsection
starts by describing a specific set of empirical measures related to the theories and
then shows the age profiles of those measures. Throughout this section, age profiles
reported are conditional on the sample of non-exiting firms, and we will analyze
the effect of the various mechanisms on the extensive margin in the next section.
Importantly, as emphasized in section 2, one should be careful to differentiate between size effects and pure age effects. Therefore, we also estimate the size effect of
those measures conditional on controlling flexibly for age effects. Finally, we assess
the success of those measures to explain the age profile of firm size. We do this by
showing the “residual” age profile after partialling out on all measures jointly, and
we also analyze the marginal explanatory power of each measure separately as well
as all of them jointly. All in all, we believe that this new set of stylized facts will be
informative for future theory development.

4.1

Firm Organization and Management Practices

Before we report the empirical results of firm organization and management practices, it should be emphasized that for our first three measures of firm organization,
some interpolation is needed. The reason is that measures of decision layers, centralization and performance pay rely on data that is reported only every other year. To
allow for maximum transparency, we choose to simply linearly interpolate data for
the missing years. Data on the presence of professional management, outsourcing
and organizational changes, on the other hand, are reported every year and require
no adjustment.
4.1.1

Measurement and Age Profiles

Decision layers The WES includes detailed information regarding real decision
authority on tasks across layers in the organizational hierarchy, which is the basis
for our measures of decision layers and the degree of centralization.
In contrast to formal reporting patterns summarized in organizational charts, real
decision authority avoids measurement issues that emerge if managers with formal
authority merely “rubberstamp” decisions of subordinates; see Aghion and Tirole
(1997). The survey questions are similar to measures of worker autonomy in Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) and Bloom, Garicano, Sadun and Van Reenen

16

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

(2013b) in that they allow us to measure to what degree principals vs. agents are
making decisions across 12 potential tasks. Specifically, the survey question is,
“Who normally makes decisions with respect to the following activities?” The respondent is then given a choice of 12 possible activities, from “Daily planning of
individual work” to “Quality control” to “Product and service development.” There
are six possible responses to the question of who makes decisions: non-managerial
employees, work group, work supervisor, senior manager, individual/group outside
the workplace—typically headquarters for multi-establishment firms—and business
owners.
Our measure of decision layers counts the number of layers that are involved in
any decision task among the 12 possible tasks in the survey. If a decision layer is not
involved in any decision among those tasks, we infer that it is effectively not present.
This strategy has both advantages and disadvantages when measuring organizational
layers. One possible disadvantage is that our measure provides only a lower bound
on the number of decision layers in the organizational hierarchy. Additional layers,
which effectively do not play any role in decision-making even for very routine tasks
such as “daily planning of work.” could in principle exist in the organization and
would be observed in organizational charts. At the same time, we also view this
potential disadvantage as a unique advantage of our measure of layers. Specifically,
it is likely that additional layers with no decision authority among any relevant tasks
are simply a result of office politics and an inefficient growth of bureaucracy rather
than an indicator of the division of labor within the organization. And while the
growth of inefficient bureaucracy might be an interesting additional dimension to
consider, we are much more interested in recent theories of knowledge hierarchies
and the division of labor within organizations.
As outlined in the theory review section, the growth model of Garicano and
Rossi-Hansberg (2012) would predict that young and innovative firms start out with
few organizational layers and add more organizational layers as they commercialize
and exploit their innovations. This would suggest that one observes an increase
in the number of layers as firms age. But as figure 3(a) shows, no such pattern
emerges from the data. The number of decision layers remains relatively constant
up to age 30, at which point it significantly declines. One reason could be that our
measure of organizational layers picks up de-layering at older establishments, which
attempt to cut costs as they age to remain competitive. Yang, Kueng and Hong
(2014) show that de-layering is more likely to happen at firms with low-cost business
strategies, and Guadalupe and Wulf (2010) provide evidence of de-layering at US
firms in response to trade shocks.
These results seem to stand in contrast to recent empirical work by Caliendo
et al. (2014), who show that as firms grow in terms of value added, they increase
the number of layers within the organization. It is here where a clear distinction
between size and age effects is helpful. The focus of Caliendo et al. (2014) is not

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

17

on the age dynamics, but on the correlation of the number of layers with firm size
and wages. Indeed as we show below, within age classes, larger firms exhibit more
organizational layers; see also Yang et al. (2014).
Centralization The measure of centralization is based on the same data of real
decision authority described above, but it exploits more of the variation in tasks.
Specifically, we separate decision layers into “managers” on the one hand, which include business owners, senior management and work supervisors, and “non-managerial
employees” on the other hand. We focus on the difference between “managers” and
“non-managers” for several reasons. First, data that allows us to differentiate between senior managers and business owners is only available for around half of the
sample. Second, the model of Akcigit et al. (2014) seems to apply equally for the
difference between managers and non-managerial employees, although it is stated in
terms of business owners vs. managers.
Given this difference between managers and non-managerial employees, our measure of centralization counts the number of tasks that are exclusively completed by
managers without any decision-making by non-managers. While our data in principle allows us to measure joint decision-making by managers and non-managerial
employees, we instead focus on exclusive decision-making in order to make the results easier to interpret.
As was pointed out in the theory section, models of optimal delegation of real
decision authority can have very different implications for firm age dynamics. Both
Aghion and Tirole (1997) and Akcigit et al. (2014) focus on incomplete contracting
as the key friction between managers and employees. But while decentralization of
decision-making can be an optimal response as in Aghion and Tirole (1997), the
optimal response in Akcigit et al. (2014) is stricter monitoring and centralization of
decisions.
Figure 3(b) shows that neither of these predictions holds for the entire age dynamics. Indeed, it seems that up to age 27, firms tend to centralize more and more
decision-making. This is possibly driven by the fact that professional managers and
business owners are not differentiated in our measure of centralization. It is also
compatible with the basic predictions of Akcigit et al. (2014). However, note that
although not statistically significant, firms actually systematically reduce the degree
of centralization past the age of 27. In this context, we would like to reemphasize
that since theories of centralization are mostly driven by size effects instead of pure
age effects, the evidence here needs to be considered in the light of the conditional
size effects discussed below.
Performance pay The WES survey data offers a variety of information on performance-based compensation in firms. Specifically, it allows us to measure four different types of performance pay: individual incentive pay such as bonuses, commissions,

18

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

piece-rates etc.; group or team incentives; profit sharing agreements; and stock-based
compensation. Standard principal agent analysis characterizes very general forms of
state contingent compensation contracts to solve the moral hazard problem. Consequently, we measure the presence of performance pay with an indicator that is one if
any form of performance pay is present. We exclude stock compensation from this,
since information on stock compensation is completely missing for one year and only
a very small fraction of firms offer stock compensation to their employees. For more
details on the performance pay data, see Hong, Kueng and Yang (2014a).
Figure 3(c) shows that although measured with considerable noise, the adoption
probability declines as firms age. This supports the notion that young firms often
specialize in innovative tasks, which involve considerable moral hazard, as emphasized by Holmstrom (1989).
Presence of professional management The WES also offers comprehensive
information about the occupational composition of establishments. The survey reports the fraction of employees in each of seven possible occupational categories:
managers, production workers, professionals, administrative staff, sales workers,
technical support staff and “others.” It also reports whether the employees hired
in those categories are full or part-time employees. Since we are most interested in
the presence of professional management hired by the business owner, we focus on
the category of full-time managers.
Not surprisingly, the probability of firms hiring professional full-time managers
strongly increases with age, as figure 3(d) shows. For very old firms, the likelihood
of employing professional managers eventually bottoms out. This is driven by the
fact that very few establishments that are older than 30 years do not employ any
professional full-time managers.
Outsourcing To measure outsourcing, we utilize a part of the WES survey that
asks establishments, “How many independent contractors provided products or services to your location?” The measure has the advantage that it focuses not only on
intermediate inputs but also on labor services that are hired outside the firm. We
would like to emphasize at this point that our measure of outsourcing should not be
understood as a comprehensive indicator of outsourcing. It is likely to capture issues
regarding firm boundaries only very roughly. For instance, it might still be possible
that although outside contractors are legally independent, they are closely connected
and permanently dependent on the purchasing firm, as in the famous “GM-Fisher
Body” example. We will not be able to capture those types of “vertically integrated
but in legal terms only” examples.
Figure 3(e) shows that as expected from the theory review in section 2, the
likelihood of outsourcing strongly and monotonically increases with firm age. This
pattern can be seen as indicative that firm boundary patterns might be strongly

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

19

affected by firm life-cycles. However, in the absence of any information about the
nature of tasks that are outsourced, there are also alternative explanations, such as
the reduced hold up explanation offered earlier. For instance, firms might expand
their intermediate input varieties over time, making it more likely that at least one
of the varieties needs to be supplied by an outside contractor.

Organizational changes All of the measures presented in this section are capturing the current status of internal firm organization and management practices.
A complementary perspective to the question of whether an organization adopted
a certain practice is the question of whether organizations change practices more
often as they age. Literature on this phenomenon of organizational adaption and
learning has been scarce in economics, mainly due to the lack of reliable data. This
is in contrast to related fields, such as management science, which has developed
extensive theories of “organizational learning”; see for instance Levitt and March
(1988).
We include a brief analysis of patterns of organizational change over the firm
life-cycle. Our analysis here should be taken as very preliminary, especially in
the absence of any solid economic theory. We base our analysis on a section of
the WES survey that asks establishments, “Has your workplace experienced any
of the following forms of organizational change during the last year?” Examples of
these changes include “Greater integration among functional areas,” “Downsizing,”
“Re-engineering,” “Implementation of TQM,” and many more, including a residual
category of “other changes.” As is clear from these examples, these organizational
changes focus mainly on changes in the formal organizational structure of an establishment. The data is therefore unable to actually speak to the organizational
learning literature exemplified by Levitt and March (1988), since this literature focuses mainly on hard-to-measure “organizational routines.”
To obtain a single measure of overall organizational change and to reduce the
noise in the data, we sum across all 15 categories of organizational change categories. Figure 3(f) displays the results from using the Deaton decomposition to
measure the age dynamics of organizational change. As firms get older, the extent
of organizational change slows down considerably. This slowdown in the degree of organizational changes might reflect diminishing returns to learning as establishments
age. It is compatible with possible vintage effects in organization capital emphasized
by Atkeson and Kehoe (2005). Since the overall measures of organizational change
are hard to match to the management practices we discussed in previous sections,
we abstain from further utilizing this evidence in the analysis that follows.

20
4.1.2

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Conditional Size Effects

Column 2 in tables 1 and 2 reports results from including proxies for management practices in the Deaton decomposition. Table 1 uses log employment as the
dependent variable, while 2 uses log revenue. Remember that model (1) estimates
age effects non-parametrically under the restrictions of the Deaton decomposition.
The coefficient on the theory proxy variables are therefore correlations of these proxies with size, controlling for age effects as well as indicators for multi-establishment
firms and exporters, a full set of 4-digit NAICS sector fixed effects, and Deaton time
and cohort effects.
The results show that for both the presence of management and for outsourcing,
the size effects are similar to the age effects estimated earlier. Larger firms of a
given age are more likely to hire professional managers and outsource activities, in
much the same way as older firms are more likely to pursue these practices. Note
that for both sets of mechanisms, we pointed out possible size effects as well as
learning mechanisms which imply pure age effects. The existence of systematic size
effects, even after controlling for age, suggests that for outsourcing and adoption of
professionalized management, size effects and learning effects both matter.
For the other management practices, however, different patterns emerge, indicating that one cannot simply equate age effects with size effects. Importantly, and
in contrast to the age dynamics, the conditional size effects are more in line with the
predictions derived from standard theories summarized in section 2. This can be
most clearly seen for our measure of decision layers. Remember that the estimated
age dynamics indicated that the number of layers seems to decline over the life-cycle,
especially for very old establishments. But old establishments, as we showed in section 3, are also larger establishments. Hence these age dynamics seem to stand in
contrast to empirical work by Caliendo et al. (2014) who, using an alternative proxy
for number of organizational layers, show that larger firms exhibit more layers. Column 2 in tables 1 and 2 shows that this pattern also holds in our data. Controlling
for age, larger firms have more decision layers, whether size is measured by total
employment or by revenue.
Similarly, the age effects showed older firms are not more likely to be decentralized, contrary to the intuition that larger firms should decentralize more tasks.
However, controlling for age as in tables 1 and 2, we do find that larger firms systematically centralize less tasks. Note that these correlations still stand in contrast
to predictions from models such as Akcigit et al. (2014), in which larger firms should
be more centralized.
In this context, we argued in section 2 that larger firms might be subject to more
prevalent moral hazard problems, since it is harder for principals to monitor many
employees. This prediction is borne out in the correlation of establishment size
and the adoption of performance pay. Large firms are indeed more likely to adopt

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

21

performance pay, even though the unconditional probability of adopting performance
pay declines weakly in age.

4.2

Financial Frictions

We now turn to theories of financial frictions as explanations for the age dynamics
of firms. As outlined in section 2, financial leverage is a simple, yet meaningful
statistic to differentiate theories of the effects of financial frictions on firm dynamics.
4.2.1

Measurement and Age Profiles

We obtain leverage data from balance sheet information that Canadian tax authorities collect in the context of calculating profit tax liabilities. We link the administrative tax records, assembled in the previously mentioned GIFI, with the WES
via the Canadian business register. Leverage is measured as the log of the ratio of
a firm’s overall assets to the implicit equity, defined as the difference between total
assets and total debt liabilities. This measure approximates the debt-equity ratio
well for low levels of debt (which is typical for the businesses in our sample) and
is less subject to large outliers than the direct measure of debt to equity. Remember that theories of costly debt financing and default, such as Cooley and Quadrini
(2001), predict systematically decreasing leverage in size (but not necessarily in
age), theories of limited commitment frictions such as Moll (2014) predict constant
leverage.
Figure 4(a) demonstrates that there is no systematic trend in financial leverage
over the firm life-cycle. To be sure, the data is quite noisy, but note that the
point estimates of the age effects are virtually flat until age 25. This stands in
contrast to the predictions for leverage from models of firm dynamics explaining
age effects using costly debt financing, such as Cooley and Quadrini (2001). On
the other hand, the empirical patterns seem broadly compatible with theories of
limited commitment frictions, as leverage is predicted not to exhibit any age effects.
It should be emphasized that since the main mechanism in Cooley and Quadrini
(2001) depends on profitability and therefore size, the age predictions per se are not
sufficient to cast doubt on the theory.
A second dimension of financial frictions is the maturity structure of debt. Here
we utilize the same GIFI balance sheet data as before to calculate the log of the ratio
between short-term and long-term debt. As can be seen in figure 4(b), this ratio
slowly rises over time, as older firms seem to be able to substitute more long-term
debt for costly short-term debt. The effects are too noisy to pick up systematic
patterns with any degree of confidence, though. Models of financial frictions relying
on debt maturity structure channels might therefore only be of limited importance.

22
4.2.2

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Conditional Size Effects

One result of the previous analysis is that the age dynamics of leverage seem
to contradict popular models of financial frictions such as Cooley and Quadrini
(2001). At the same time, the shift from costly debt to internal financing at the
heart of Cooley and Quadrini (2001) seems to be a size effect rather than a pure age
effect. Column 3 in tables 1 and 2, therefore, show the results of including financial
leverage in the Deaton decomposition. One would therefore expect that larger and
more profitable firms have lower levels of leverage. As can be seen, the correlation
of establishment size and leverage conditional on age is positive, contrary to what
theory predicts. Hence, not only are the age dynamics of leverage incompatible with
the costly debt financing effect in Cooley and Quadrini (2001), but size correlations
with leverage conditional on age also do not offer much support.
The age dynamics of leverage were much more supportive of models of limited
commitment financial frictions such as Buera (2009) and Moll (2014). The natural
question therefore is whether size-leverage correlations are as supportive. Unfortunately, the answer is no, since baseline limited commitment financial frictions models
would predict that leverage is a constant that is independent of firm size.

4.3

Learning about Demand

To quantify the importance of active learning about demand, as emphasized in
the structural model of Foster et al. (2013), we measure the dynamics of mark-ups
predicted by their theory for the entire sample of firms across all industries, instead
of focusing on manufacturing only.
4.3.1

Measurement and Age Profiles

We pursue two alternative measures of mark-ups. Our first measure is taken
directly from the accounting data in GIFI and captures gross margins of sales. It
is defined as the log difference between operating revenue and costs of goods and
services sold (or COGS). To the degree that COGS captures the variable costs used
for production of goods and services, gross margins should be a good proxy for markups. They also have the unique advantage of being exclusively data-driven instead
of relying on any type of timing or structural identification assumption. However,
around a third of the firms in our sample do not provide information on COGS, so
it seems prudent to pursue alternative measures of mark-ups.
As a primary alternative, we use GMM-based mark-up measures proposed by
Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2006). This estimator relies on a set of timing assumptions, including the assumption that intermediate goods like electricity and
materials are acquired in frictionless spot markets, while other inputs such as capital are predetermined one period in advance. The advantage of this GMM procedure

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

23

is that it allows us to construct measures for mark-ups for nearly all establishments
in our sample. The main caveat is that it relies on cost minimization and timing
assumptions to be valid.
Figures 5(a) and 5(b) report the results from applying the Deaton decomposition to the two alternative measures of mark-ups. While both measures show a
qualitatively similar pattern of rising mark-ups over the firm’s life-cycle as predicted
by the structural model of Foster et al. (2013), the noise—especially in the gross
margin—complicates statistical inference. The structural mark-up measure, on the
other hand, shows both a statistically and an economically significant increase in
mark-ups over the life-cycle. However, the fact that it takes over 20 years for those
effects to show up in the data is somewhat surprising. The GMM-based measure
will serve as our primary proxy for mark-ups in the rest of the analysis, since it is
available for a broader sample of firms.
4.3.2

Conditional Size Effects

The fourth column in table 1 and 2 reports conditional size effects of markups.
The results differ, depending on whether employment or revenue is taken as the
measure of size. While the correlation of mark-ups and employment is negative,
the correlation of mark-ups and revenue is systematically positive. One possible
explanation for this puzzling pattern could be that the mark-up measures based on
Ackerberg et al. (2006) reflect revenue productivity of labor to a large degree and
that the correlations we find, once we control for age effects, are to a large degree
mechanical.

4.4
4.4.1

Innovation
Measurement and Age Profiles

We rely on survey measures of innovative activity which are included in the WES
dataset as our baseline data for theories of endogenous innovation. The WES asks
respondents to report four possible types of innovations: new products or services,
new processes, improved products or services, and improved processes. The survey
form asks establishments to categorize innovations that “differ significantly in character” from products or processes used before as new. In this sense, the difference
between “new” and “improved” could be interpreted to capture the difference between drastic and incremental innovations. We validate these innovation measures
in Hong, Kueng and Yang (2014b), by showing that the measures of innovation
are significantly correlated with firm growth and that innovation by other firms in
the industry significantly depresses growth at non-innovating firms. These results
are consistent with findings for similar innovation surveys for other countries; see
Mairesse and Mohnen (2010).

24

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Starting with process innovations, remember that older firms in a baseline model
of Klette and Kortum (2004) are more likely to innovate, since they consist of more
products and therefore benefit from stronger knowledge spillovers. Using indicators
for process innovations, figures 6(a) and 6(b) show that exactly the opposite pattern
holds in the data. Smaller and younger firms are more likely to generate process
innovations than are older firms. To the degree that “new process innovations”
displayed in figure 6(a) can be understood as “radical innovations,” this pattern is
compatible with extended Klette-Kortum models such as Akcigit and Kerr (2010),
in which younger firms pursue radical explorative innovations, while older firms specialize in incremental exploitative innovations. Note, however, that this evidence is
only a qualified success for the model of Akcigit and Kerr (2010), for two reasons.
First, it seems that in their own empirical work they consider process innovations as
being close to incremental innovations. If this were the correct mapping, then one
would expect that older firms would be more likely to innovate in process innovations, just as in the baseline Klette-Kortum model. Second, note that even if new
process innovations could be mapped to Akcigit and Kerr’s radical innovations, one
would still expect that the baseline predictions from the Klette-Kortum model would
continue to apply to improved process innovations shown in figure 6(b). However,
this graph displays a probability of incremental process innovations that is declining
with firm age as well, albeit with a less negative slope.
An alternative interpretation of the Klette-Kortum model would map the innovations in this model into product innovations. This might be the correct mapping, if
by product innovations respondents refer to product innovations that are new to the
firm instead of new to the economy. Unfortunately, even this broad interpretation
of the Klette-Kortum model and its extension by Akcigit and Kerr (2010) does not
generate the correct life-cycle dynamics of innovation, as figures 6(c) and 6(d) show.
In fact, the patterns of innovation for new or improved products are even at odds
with models of innovation explicitly constructed to explain the difference between
product and process innovations, such as Klepper (1996). As previously discussed,
this model would predict that the probability of product innovations declines in firm
age, while the probability of process innovations increases in firm age. In contrast,
the data displays no significant relation between product innovation and age, while
the probability of process innovations sharply declines in firm age.
Theories of incumbent innovation such as Klette and Kortum (2004) clearly
exhibit difficulties to match the age dynamics of innovation in our data. We draw two
main conclusion from the analysis of the data. First, as emphasized in section 2, the
Klette-Kortum and related models operate through size effects, so it is worthwhile
to consider evidence on innovative activity of large vs. small firms to look for
support of this class of theories. Second, there is clearly more need for detailed data
development on the difference between product and process innovations. However,
to the extent that the results gathered in this section are indicative, models of

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

25

product and process innovations, such as Klepper (1996), have difficulties matching
the joint age dynamics of these types of innovations. Further theory development
on the joint dynamics of product and process innovation is clearly needed.
4.4.2

Conditional Size Effects

Current models of incumbent innovation such as Klette and Kortum (2004) have
a hard time matching innovation patterns over the life-cycle in our data. However,
as emphasized during the theory review of section 2, Klette and Kortum (2004) and
related models such as Akcigit and Kerr (2010) should be understood as models
making predictions about firm size and innovation rather than firm age and innovation.
Furthermore, to differentiate theories of endogenous innovation from technology
adoption and imitation, we exploit additional information on technology adoption
from the WES. The WES survey asks respondents to report spending on three
different categories of new technology: computers/software, CAD/CAM technology
and remaining “other technologies.” We sum up the spending on all three types of
new technology and normalize it by establishment revenue to arrive at measures for
technology intensity.
Results, including technology adoption and innovation variables in the Deaton
decomposition, are reported in column 5 of tables 1 and 2. For the innovation
variables, these results are very much compatible with predictions from incumbent
innovation models such as Klette and Kortum (2004). Controlling for age effects,
larger establishments tend to be more likely to innovate. Note, however, that results
are strongest for improved processes and to a lesser extent for improved products
and services, while the results for new innovations depend on the measure of firm
size. To the degree that the difference between “new” and “improved” products or
processes can be considered to capture the differences between radical and incremental innovations, the patterns shown in tables 1 and 2 stand somewhat in contrast
to predictions by Akcigit and Kerr (2010). The model of Akcigit and Kerr (2010)
would predict that smaller firms are more likely to innovate in “new” technologies,
so that the correlation with establishment size should be negative.

4.5

Residual Age Dynamics

How does controlling for different theoretical mechanisms of firm age dynamics
affect the estimated age effects from the Deaton decomposition? To answer this
question, we return to the sample statistics we computed in section 3, where we
compared the Canadian data to other international benchmarks from Hsieh and
Klenow (2014). As before, we focus on the age effects by ages 10-14 as well as
30-34. Table 4 displays the age effects, controlling for different proxies of firm age

26

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

dynamics. As before, we group age dynamics theories together in the four categories
firm organizational capital and management practices, financial frictions, dynamic
mark-ups, and innovation, each corresponding to a different row in the table. The
first row “none” repeats age effects for employment or revenue without any proxy
variables for firm age dynamics theories. As we follow the age effects down the rows
of table 4, we track the impact of including different proxy variables on the age
effects. The more successful these variables are in capturing firm age dynamics, the
closer to one should be the residual age effects reported in this table.
Starting with total employment as dependent variable in the Deaton decomposition, the first two columns of table 4 reveal two main stylized facts. First, including
organizational capital and management practices reduces residual age effects by the
largest amount. This becomes especially clear when comparing the effects of organizational capital and management practices on innovation. Including variables of
innovation actually increases residual age effects instead of lowering them. Second,
overall the four types of theories for age dynamics do reduce age effects by around
25%. On the one hand, this can be considered a significant reduction in the residual
age dynamics. On the other hand, a majority of firm age dynamics still remains
unexplained, despite the fact that our proxy variables capture a variety of prominent
firm life-cycle theories. One of the main reasons for this result seems to be that some
factors such as innovation actually increase residual age effects. Furthermore, as we
document in figure 7(a), although there is a significant reduction in firm age effects
around age 20, this effect disappears as plants age further.
However, results on total employment stand in contrast to revenue results as
reported in the last two columns of table 4. As before, organizational capital and
management practices substantially reduce age effects on revenue. On the other
hand, learning about demand as captured in dynamic mark-ups also tends to reduce
age effects in revenue considerably. This strong effect of learning about demand on
revenue is intuitive, since revenue is much more closely related to demand than total
employment. As a result, by age 34, age effects on revenue are only 60% of their
level before controlling for theories of firm age dynamics. This is despite the fact
that measures of innovation, as before, actually tend to increase these age effects,
as shown in the 5th column of table 4. Figure 7(b) shows another difference of
conditional age dynamics in revenue and total employment. While the age effect
of controlling for firm age dynamics theories eventually dissipates when using total
employment, those age effects become stronger when using revenue as a measure of
firm size.

4.6

Explanatory Power of the Theories

We now move to the question of how much of the life-cycle patterns can be
explained by the different firm age dynamics theories. Our principal metric to com-

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

27

pare the contribution of the various theories is the change in adjusted R2 in the
Deaton decomposition if proxies for those theories are included as additional explanatory variables. We group the specific theories into the four broad categories
used before: firm organization and management practices, financial frictions, learning about demand, and innovation. We focus much of our emphasis on comparing
the age dynamics in employment and the life-cycle of revenue, since these are alternative measures of establishment size. As before, all results regarding age dynamics
are conditioned on the set of non-exiting firms during the sample period. A discussion of the life-cycle pattern of exits follows in the next section.
The last line in tables 1 and 2 reports adjusted R2 values from including the
proxy variables, first individually and finally jointly. For comparison purposes, the
first column of both tables reports the Deaton decomposition without any proxy
variables added. At least three noteworthy patterns emerge. First, measures of firm
organization and management practices are the most important factors in improving
the explanatory power of the Deaton decomposition. The adjusted R2 with total
employment as a measure of size increases from 0.316 to 0.481, while in the revenue
regression it increases from 0.375 to 0.5. No other set of theories is as successful in
capturing the variation in size across firms, controlling for firm age. In particular,
note that although including all variables jointly in column 6 helps improve the fit,
the majority of the increase in explanatory power is attributable to firm organization
and management practices. Second, proxies for endogenous growth models are the
second most important set of variables. Despite this fact, the innovation variables
are not nearly as successful in explaining size variation. Third, note that for most
of the organizational capital and management practice variables, point estimates
remain stable even when including all other variables. This stands in contrast to
innovation variables, which sometimes change substantially in magnitude.

5

Exit Patterns

In the Deaton decompositions of firm size in the previous section, we controlled
for selection effects along the firm life-cycle by focusing on the set of surviving
firms. To consider selection effects, we analyze a Deaton decomposition with firm
exit as dependent variable in table 3. It turns out that the most important set of
explanatory variables is not organizational capital or management practices, learning
about demand, or innovation. Instead, financial variables such as leverage and
especially debt maturity structure have significant explanatory power for firm exit,
once age effects are controlled for. That is, controlling for firm age, firms with higher
leverage and more long-term debt are less likely to exit. These stylized facts suggest
that financial variables might influence firm dynamics primarily through selection
instead of by impacting firm growth.

28

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

However, it should be noted that, as before, most of the variation in exit remains
unexplained, as the last row in table 3 shows. Similarly, age effects from the Deaton
decomposition shown in figure 7(c) are virtually unaffected by including the various
proxy variables for firm life-cycle models.

6

Conclusion

This paper is a first step in exploring the empirical importance of several theories
of firm age dynamics. Models proposing specific mechanisms that drive firm growth
over the life-cycle are a crucial complement to studies about the sources of firm
performance differences. Throughout our empirical analysis, our focus is not only
on stylized facts that are consistent with current theory, but also on novel empirical
insights that provide opportunities for further research. Here, the difference between
age dynamics generated through size effects and age dynamics that are independent
of size effects seems crucial. While many current theories successfully describe size
effects, there is a clear shortfall of models that generate age dynamics independent
of size.
The stylized facts presented in this paper can be considered a starting point for
theory development in several areas relating to firm dynamics. First, in the area
of organizational capital accumulation and management practices, learning models
with implications for optimal firm organization and management practice adoption
seem promising. Not only is survey evidence by Bloom et al. (2013a) consistent
with a theory of learning, but age profiles of all organizational capital variables and
management practices we analyze exhibit strong life-cycle effects, which cannot be
explained by size effects alone.
Second, endogenous growth models of firm dynamics and incumbent innovation
need to be extended to match the age profiles of innovation activity. Beyond the fact
that age profiles tend to be downward sloping, in contradiction to current theory,
there seem to be systematic differences in product and process innovations when
analyzing size effects. These differences are currently not captured by prevailing
models of innovation.
Third, models of financial frictions currently focus on intensive margin firm
growth implications. While relatively uninformative for intensive margin firm growth
patterns, we find that a firm’s capital structure plays an important role in predicting
firm exit, conditional on firm age. These results suggests that theories of financial
frictions focusing on extensive margin effects are a natural way forward for models
of credit constraints. Such models would also put extensive margin misallocation at
the center of the welfare analysis of financial crises and credit crunches.
Overall, the novel avenues for theory development that our stylized facts open
are likely to have major implications for the welfare analysis of firm dynamics and

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

29

for policies that affect innovation, international competitiveness, and firm growth in
the long run.

References
Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “The Structural Identification of Production Functions,” mimeo UCLA, 2006.
Aghion, P. and J. Tirole, “Formal and real authority in organizations,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1997.
Akcigit, U. and W. Kerr, “Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations,” NBER Working
Paper, 2010.
, H. Alp, and M. Peters, “Lack of Selection and Imperfect Managerial Contracts: Firm
Dynamics in Developing Countries,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 2014.
Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick Kehoe, “Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2005.
Baily, M., C. Hulten, and D. Campbell, “Productivity Dynamics in Manufacturing
Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1992.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Jounral of Economics, 2007.
, B. Eifert, D. McKenzie, A. Mahajan, and J. Roberts, “Does management matter:
evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.
, L. Garicano, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “The distinct effects of information technology and communication technology on firm organization,” Management Science,
2013.
, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen, “The organization of firms across countries,” Quarterly
Jounral of Economics, 2012.
Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson, and L. Hitt, “Information technology, workplace organization and the demand for skilled labor: firm-level evidence,” Quarterly Jounral of
Economics, 2002.
Buera, F., “A dynamic model of entrepreneurship with borrowing constraints,” Annals of
Finance, 2009.
Caliendo, L., F. Monte, and E. Rossi-Hansberg, “The Anatomy of French Production
Hierarchies,” Journal of Political Economy, 2014.
Cooley, T. and V. Quadrini, “Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,” American Economic
Review, 2001.
Deaton, Angus, The Analysis of Household Surveys, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.
Diamond, D., “Seniority and Maturity of Debt Contracts,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1993.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, “The Growth and Failure of U.S.
Manufacturing Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989.
Fort, Teresa, John Haltiwanger, Ron S Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “How Firms Respond
to Business Cycles: the Role of Firm Age and Firm Size,” NBER Working Paper, 2013.
Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, “The Slow Growth of New Plants:
Learning about Demand?,” mimeo, Chicago Booth, 2013.

30

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Garicano, L., “Hierachies and the organization of knowledge in production,” Journal of
Political Economy, 2000.
and E. Rossi-Hansberg, “Organizing Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2012.
Grossman, G. and O. Hart, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of Vertical
and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 1986.
Guadalupe, M. and J. Wulf, “The flattening firm and product market competition: the
effect of trade liberalization on corporate hierarchies,” American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 2010.
Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse, and Laura Turner, “Identifying Age, Cohort and Period
Effects in Scientific Research Productivity: Discussion and Illustration Using Simulated
and Actual Data on French Physicists,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
2007.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
Large versus Young,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013.
Holmstrom, B., “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1989.
Hong, Bryan, Lorenz Kueng, and Mu-Jeung Yang, “Estimating Management Practice
Complementarity between Decentralization and Performance Pay,” mimeo University
of Washington, 2014.
, , and , “Managing Innovation,” mimeo, University of Washington, 2014.
Hsieh, C. and Peter J. Klenow, “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,” mimeo
Stanford University, 2014.
Klepper, S., “Entry, Exit, Growth and Innovation over the Product Life Cycle,” American
Economic Review, 1996.
Klette, T. and S. Kortum, “Innovating firms and aggregate innovation,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004.
Levitt, Barbara and James March, “Organizational Learning,” Annual Review of Sociology, 1988.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics, 1978.
Mairesse, Jacques and Pierre Mohnen, “Using Innovations Surveys for Econometric Analysis,” NBER Working Paper, 2010.
Moll, B., “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo Capital
Misallocation?,” American Economic Review, 2014.
Mukherjee, Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press, 2012.
Penrose, E., The theory of the growth of the firm, Oxford University Press, 1959.
Schulhofer-Wohl, Sam, “The Age-Time-Cohort Problem and the Identification of Structural Parameters in Life-Cycle Models,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
2013.
Sutton, John, “Gibrat’s Legacy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1997.
Williamson, O., Markets and Hierarchies, Free Press, 1975.
Yang, Mu-Jeung, Lorenz Kueng, and Bryan Hong, “Business Strategy and the Management of Firms,” mimeo, University of Washington, 2014.

31

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Table 1: Size effects conditional on age using log employment
Dependent: log empl.

(1)

Organization and Mgmt
has a mgmt layer

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.513***
(0.047)
0.155***
(0.031)
0.269***
(0.031)
0.245***
(0.017)
-0.016***
(0.005)

does outsourcing
uses performance pay
# of decision layers
# of centralized tasks
Capital Structure
log asset/equity

Dynamic Mark-Ups
log mark-up

0.027**
(0.011)
-0.047
(0.083)
-0.090***
(0.025)

Innovation
new process innovation
new product innovation
improved processes
improved products
technology intensity
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.330
0.316

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.492
0.481

(6)

0.496***
(0.046)
0.151***
(0.033)
0.251***
(0.031)
0.236***
(0.016)
-0.016***
(0.004)
0.069***
(0.015)
-0.057
(0.092)

log short/long debt

Age FEs
Deaton time FEs
Cohort FEs
Sector FEs
Additional controls
Obs.
R2
Adj R2

(5)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.334
0.320

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.333
0.319

-0.062***
(0.022)
0.082**
(0.039)
0.033
(0.037)
0.232***
(0.052)
0.081**
(0.037)
-0.331
(0.545)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.352
0.338

0.037
(0.032)
-0.040
(0.037)
0.120***
(0.035)
0.047
(0.032)
-0.712
(0.470)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.498
0.487

Notes: Sector fixed effects are 4-digit NAICS industries. “Other controls” are multi-establishment exporter status indicators.
Regressions use sample weights. Heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent (HAC) standard errors are in parentheses,
clustered by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. ***, **, * indicates significance at or above 1%,
5%, or 10%, respectively.

32

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Table 2: Size effects conditional on age using log revenue
Dependent: log revenue

(1)

Organization and Mgmt
has a mgmt layer

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.630***
(0.063)
0.279***
(0.043)
0.371***
(0.044)
0.303***
(0.017)
-0.024***
(0.007)

does outsourcing
uses performance pay
# of decision layers
# of centralized tasks
Capital Structure
log asset/equity

Dynamic Mark-Ups
log mark-up

0.066***
(0.015)
0.190**
(0.094)
0.610***
(0.033)

Innovation
new process innovation
new product innovation
improved processes
improved products
technology intensity
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.388
0.375

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.514
0.504

(6)

0.698***
(0.062)
0.213***
(0.039)
0.377***
(0.040)
0.299***
(0.022)
-0.024***
(0.006)
0.157***
(0.020)
0.152
(0.122)

log short/long debt

Age FEs
Deaton time FEs
Cohort FEs
Sector FEs
Additional controls
Obs.
R2
Adj R2

(5)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.398
0.385

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.462
0.450

0.647***
(0.028)
-0.021
(0.062)
0.092**
(0.042)
0.405***
(0.053)
0.040
(0.046)
-2.401***
(0.793)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.405
0.392

-0.023
(0.052)
-0.055
(0.044)
0.186***
(0.050)
0.009
(0.043)
-1.849***
(0.588)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
23,241
0.603
0.595

Notes: Sector fixed effects are 4-digit NAICS industries. “Other controls” are multi-establishment exporter status indicators.
Regressions use sample weights. Heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent (HAC) standard errors are in parentheses,
clustered by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. ***, **, * indicates significance at or above 1%,
5%, or 10%, respectively.

33

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Table 3: Effects on exit probability
Dependent: I(exit)

(1)

Organization and Mgmt
has a mgmt layer

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.000
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.004)
-0.008*
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001**
(0.001)

does outsourcing
uses performance pay
# of decision layers
# of centralized tasks
Capital Structure
log asset/equity

Dynamic Mark-Ups
log mark-up

-0.008**
(0.004)
-0.036**
(0.016)
0.003
(0.004)

Innovation
new process innovation
new product innovation
improved processes
improved products
technology intensity
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.109
0.091

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.112
0.094

(6)

0.002
(0.007)
-0.004
(0.004)
-0.007*
(0.003)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001**
(0.001)
-0.009**
(0.004)
-0.039**
(0.017)

log short/long debt

Age FEs
Deaton time FEs
Cohort FEs
Sector FEs
Additional controls
Obs.
R2
Adj R2

(5)

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.116
0.098

YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.109
0.092

0.003
(0.004)
0.008**
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.135***
(0.049)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.110
0.092

0.008*
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.006)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.005)
-1.23**
(0.052)
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
24,936
0.119
0.101

Notes: Sector fixed effects are 4-digit NAICS industries. “Other controls” are multi-establishment exporter status indicators.
Regressions use sample weights. Heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent (HAC) standard errors are in parentheses,
clustered by sampling strata, which are broad industry-size-region categories. ***, **, * indicates significance at or above 1%,
5%, or 10%, respectively.

34

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Table 4: Contributions to firm size relative to age bin 0-4
Dependent variable
Age bin
Additional determinants
None
Organization and Mgmt
Capital Structure
Dynamic Mark-Ups
Innovation
All

employment
10-14 30-34

revenue
10-14 30-34

1.57
1.42
1.56
1.56
1.62
1.43

2.58
2.24
2.56
2.64
2.61
2.30

2.36
2.03
2.39
2.47
2.69
2.19

11.23
8.75
11.56
8.38
12.53
6.72

Notes: The table shows the average firm size for age bins 10-14 and 30-34
relative to age bin 0-4, after controlling for various mechanisms suggested by
theoretical models. The regressions also partial out sector, cohort, and Deaton
time fixed effects as well as multi-establishment and exporter status; they use
sample weights.

35

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Figure 1: Unconditional life-cycle profile of size and exit
1.6
1.4

log employment

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

age

(a)
3.5
3

log revenue

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1
0

5

10

15

20

age

(b)
0.15

0.1

exit

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1
0

5

10

15

20

age

(c)
Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

36

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Figure 2: Unconditional life-cycle profile of organizational capital and management
practices

number of decision layers

1

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5

−2
0

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

30

35

40

age

(a)
9

number of centralized tasks

8
7

Age effect
95% confidence region

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
0

5

10

15

20

age

(b)
0.4

performance pay indicator

0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1
0

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

20

age

(c)

25

37

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Figure 2: Unconditional life-cycle profile of organizational capital and management
practices (cont.)

presence of professional managers

1.2
1

Age effect
95% confidence region

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

age

(d)
1.6
1.4

outsourcing

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
Age effect
95% confidence region

0.2
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

age

(e)

sum of organizational changes

0.5
0
−0.5
−1
−1.5
−2
−2.5
−3
−3.5
−4
−4.5
0

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

20

age

(f)
Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

38

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Figure 3: Unconditional life-cycle profile of capital structure
1
0.8
0.6

leverage

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
−1
0

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

age
(a)

log(long−term debt/short−term debt)

0.35
0.3
0.25

Age effect
95% confidence region

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1
−0.15
0

5

10

15

20

age
(b)
Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

39

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Figure 4: Unconditional life-cycle profile of mark-ups
1
0.9

Age effect
95% confidence region

log gross margin

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

30

35

40

age
(a)
1.2
Age effect
95% confidence region

log mark−up (ACF)

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
0

5

10

15

20

25

age
(b)
Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

40

KUENG, YANG AND HONG

Figure 5: Unconditional life-cycle profile of different types of innovation.
0.6

0.2
Age effect
95% confidence region

0.1

innov: impv process

innov: new process

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8
0

0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

−0.6
0

40

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

age

(a)

35

40

30

35

40

0.2

innov: impv product/service

innov: new product/service

30

0.3

0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3

−0.5
0

25

(b)

0.3

−0.4

20

age

Age effect
95% confidence region
5

10

15

0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
Age effect
95% confidence region

−0.6
20

25

30

35

age

40

−0.7
0

5

10

15

20

25

age

(c)

(d)

Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

41

FIRM LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS

Figure 6: Residual vs. unconditional dynamics of size and exit
1.5
Unconditional age effect
Residual age effect

log employment

1

0.5

0

−0.5
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

25

30

35

40

age

(a)
3.5
3

log revenue

2.5

Unconditional age effect
Residual age effect

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
−0.5
−1
0

5

10

15

20

age

(b)
0.15

0.1

Unconditional age effect
Residual age effect

exit

0.05

0

−0.05

−0.1
0

5

10

15

20

age

(c)
Notes: Age effects are estimated using the Deaton (1997) decomposition. See
the text for more details.

