NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

QUANTIFYING LIQUIDITY AND DEFAULT RISKS OF CORPORATE BONDS
OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE
Hui Chen
Rui Cui
Zhiguo He
Konstantin Milbradt
Working Paper 20638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20638

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We thank Ron Anderson, Mark Carey, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, Thomas Dangl, Vyacheslav Fos, Joao
Gomes, Lars Hansen, Jingzhi Huang, David Lando, Mads Stenbo Nielsen, Martin Schneider, and seminar
participants at Chicago economic dynamics working group, ECB, Georgia Tech, Kellogg, Maryland,
MIT Sloan, the NBER Summer Institute (Risk of Financial Institution, Capital Markets), Federal Reserve
Board, AFA 2014, the USC Fixed Income Conference, University of Alberta, University of Calgary,
Central European University, Wirtschaftsuniversitaet Wien, WFA, CICF, the Rothschild Caesarea
Conference, and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics Workshop for helpful comments.
We acknowledge the financial supported from the Fama-Miller Center at Booth School of Business,
University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hui Chen, Rui Cui, Zhiguo He, and Konstantin Milbradt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Quantifying Liquidity and Default Risks of Corporate Bonds over the Business Cycle
Hui Chen, Rui Cui, Zhiguo He, and Konstantin Milbradt
NBER Working Paper No. 20638
October 2014
JEL No. G00,G1,G12,G20
ABSTRACT
We develop a structural credit risk model to examine how the interactions of liquidity and default
risk affect corporate bond pricing. By explicitly modeling debt rollover and by endogenizing the holding
costs via collateralized financing, our model generates rich links between liquidity risk and default
risk. The introduction of macroeconomic risks helps the model capture realistic time variation in default
risk premia and the default-liquidity spiral over the business cycle. Across different credit ratings,
our calibrated model can simultaneously match the average default probabilities, credit spreads, and
bond liquidity measures including Bond-CDS spreads and bid-ask spreads in the data. Through a structural
decomposition, we show that the interactions between liquidity and default risk account for 2540%
of the observed credit spreads and up to 55% of the credit spread changes over the business cycle.
As an application, we use this framework to quantitatively evaluate the effects of liquidity-provision
policies for the corporate bond market.

Hui Chen
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-637
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
huichen@mit.edu
Rui Cui
University of Chicago
ruicui1@gmail.com

Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Konstantin Milbradt
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Rd #401
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
milbradt@northwestern.edu

1.

Introduction

It is well known that a significant part of corporate bond pricing cannot be accounted
for by default risk alone. For example, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) estimate that
“non-default components” account for about 50% of the spread between the yields of Aaa/Aarated corporate bonds and Treasuries and about 30% of the spread for Baa-rated bonds.
Furthermore, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) find that non-default components of credit
spreads are strongly related to measures of bond liquidity, which is consistent with evidence of
illiquidity in secondary corporate bond markets (e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007),
Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)).
Hitherto, the literature on structural credit risk modeling has almost exclusively focused
on the “default component” of credit spreads. The “credit spread puzzle,” as defined by
Huang and Huang (2012), refers to the finding that, after matching the observed default and
recovery rates, traditional structural models produce credit spreads for investment grade
bonds that are significantly lower than those in the data. By introducing macroeconomic
risks into structural credit models, Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009), Bhamra,
Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010) and Chen (2010) are able to explain the default components
of the credit spreads for investment-grade bonds.1 However, these models are silent on the
sources of the non-default component of credit spreads and their potential impact on the
default component of the spreads.
In this paper, we build a tractable structural credit risk model that captures both the
default and non-default components in corporate bond pricing by introducing secondary
market search frictions (a la Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005)) into a model with
aggregate macroeconomic fluctuations (e.g., Chen (2010)). Rather than simply piecing
1

Chen (2010) relies on estimates of Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) to obtain the default component of
the credit spread for Baa rated bonds, while Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010) focus on the difference
between Baa and Aaa rated bonds. The difference of spreads between Baa and Aaa rated bonds presumably
takes out the common liquidity component, which is a widely used practice in the literature. This treatment
relies on the assumption that the liquidity components for bonds of different ratings are the same, which is at
odds with existing literatures on the liquidity of corporate bonds, e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007),
Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011).

1

together the default and non-default components of credit spreads, our approach of jointly
modeling default and liquidity risk over the business cycle is essential to understanding the
interactions between the two components. Such interactions give rise to endogenous default
as well as endogenous liquidity, which helps explain two general empirical patterns for the
liquidity of corporate bonds: (1) corporate bonds with higher credit ratings tend to be more
liquid; (2) corporate bonds are less liquid during economic downturns, especially for riskier
bonds.2 These interactions can also significantly raise the level of credit spreads and make
them more volatile over the business cycle.
In our model, which builds on He and Milbradt (2014), investors face uninsurable
idiosyncratic liquidity shocks, which drive up their costs for holding corporate bonds. Market
illiquidity arises endogenously because to sell their bonds, investors have to search for dealers
to intermediate transactions with other investors not yet hit by liquidity shocks, and in
the meantime they incur costs for having to hold onto the bonds. The dealers set bid-ask
spreads to capture part of the trading surplus. On the one hand, default risk crucially affects
the trading surplus and thus the liquidity discount of corporate bonds. On the other hand,
heavier liquidity discount makes it more costly for firms to roll over their maturing debt,
hence raising the probability of default. Thus, a default-liquidity spiral arises: when secondary
market liquidity deteriorates, equity holders are more likely to default, which in turn worsens
secondary bond market liquidity even further, and so on so forth.
Our model extends He and Milbradt (2014) in two important aspects. First, instead of
assuming a constant exogenous holding cost due to liquidity shocks as in He and Milbradt
(2014), we model holding costs based on the mechanism of collateralized financing. In this
mechanism, investors hit by liquidity shocks raise cash either via cheaper collateralized financing (with the bond as collateral, subject to some haircuts) or more expensive uncollateralized
financing. A lower bond market price together with a larger haircut pushes investors toward
more expensive uncollateralized financing, which translates to higher effective holding costs
2

See e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007), Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter,
and Lando (2012), and Friewald, Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam (2012).

2

for bonds with higher default risk.
Second, our paper introduces aggregate macroeconomics states as in Chen (2010) into He
and Milbradt (2014) by explicitly modeling the procyclical liquidity together with cyclical
variations in the firm’s cash flows and aggregate risk prices. This allows us to generate
significant time variation in default risk premia, an essential feature of the data. Moreover, it
generates a liquidity risk premium in corporate bond pricing since secondary market liquidity
worsens (e.g., the meeting intensity with dealers decreases) in recessions when investors’
marginal utilities are high. Together, these two types of risk premia magnify the quantitative
effect of the default-liquidity spiral over the business cycle.
We follow the literature to set the pricing kernel parameters over two macroeconomic
states (economic expansions and recessions) to fit a set of standard moments of asset prices.
The parameters governing secondary bond market liquidity over macroeconomic states are
either pre-fixed based on existing empirical studies and TRACE data (e.g., bond turnover),
or calibrated to match the moments that our model aims to explain (e.g., bid-ask spreads).
We then apply our model with the same set of parameters to corporate bonds across four
credit rating classes (Aaa/Aa, A, Baa, and Ba) and two different maturities (5 and 10 years).
Altogether, we only calibrate four free parameters, a much lower degree of freedom relative
to the number of moments that our model tries to explain.
To evaluate model performance, we not only examine the cumulative default probabilities
and credit spreads—two common measures that the literature on corporate bond pricing
has focused on—but also consider two empirical measures of non-default risk in corporate
bonds. The first measure is the Bond-CDS spread, defined as the bond’s credit spread minus
the Credit Default Swap (CDS) spread on the same bond. This measure is motivated by
Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005), who argue that CDS prices mostly reflect the default
risk because of their relatively liquid secondary market. The second measure is the bid-ask
spread. These two measures crucially rely on secondary market illiquidity: in a model with
a perfectly liquid bond market, both the implied Bond-CDS spread and bid-ask spread are
zero. This approach differs from He and Milbradt (2014), whose calibration only matches the
3

unconditional moments of credit spreads and bid-ask spreads, eschewing matching historic
default rates or state-dependent moments of pricing and liquidity measures.
As it is well-known that the CDS market is the most liquid for 5-year contracts, our
calibration focuses predominantly on bonds with 5-year maturity. The endogenous liquidity
helps our calibrated model match closely the empirical patterns of default probabilities and
credit spreads for 5-year bonds both cross-sectionally (across credit ratings) and over time
(across the business cycle).3 For non-default risk, the endogenous link between bond liquidity
and a firm’s distance-to-default allows us to generate the cross-sectional and business-cycle
patterns observed in the date for both Bond-CDS spreads and bid-ask spreads. Overall, our
model produces quantitatively reasonable non-default risk for corporate bonds. Relative
to the data, our model can explain about 55% of observed variation in Bond-CDS spreads
across rating classes, and future research incorporating heterogeneity of investor bases should
further improve in this regard. The model’s performance on 10-year bonds is less satisfactory:
in comparison to the data, our model features a too steep term structure of credit spreads
and Bond-CDS spreads.
It is common practice in the empirical literature to decompose credit spreads into a liquidity
and a default component, with the interpretation that these components are independent of
each other. Our model suggests that both liquidity and default are inextricably linked. Such
dynamic interactions are difficult to capture using reduced-form models with exogenously
imposed default and liquidity risk components.4
To quantify the interaction between default and liquidity, we propose a structural decomposition of credit spreads that nests the common additive default-liquidity decomposition.
Motivated by Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) who use CDS spread to proxy for default risk,
we identify the “default” component in the total credit spreads of a corporate bond by pricing
the same bond in a hypothetical perfectly liquid market but using the default threshold
3

Our calibration on aggregate macroeconomic states focuses on normal expansions and recessions, but not
crises. As a result, in constructing empirical moments for recessions, we exclude the 2008 crises period from
October (Q4) 2008 to March (Q1) 2009 throughout.
4
See, for example, Duffie and Singleton (1999) and Liu, Longstaff, and Mandell (2006).

4

endogenously derived from the full model with liquidity frictions. After subtracting this
“default” component, we identify the remaining credit spread as the “liquidity” component.
We further decompose the “default” component into a “pure default” component and a
“liquidity-driven-default” component, and the “liquidity” component into a “pure liquidity”
component and a “default-driven liquidity” component. The “pure default” component is
the spread for the same bond in a hypothetical setting where the bond market is perfectly
liquid as in Leland and Toft (1996) and hence equity holders optimally choose to default
less often. The “pure liquidity” component is the spread for default-free bonds when there
are over-the-counter search frictions as in Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005). The
two interaction terms, i.e., the “liquidity-driven default” and the “default-driven liquidity”
component, capture the endogenous positive spiral between default and liquidity. For instance,
“liquidity-driven-default” is driven by the rollover risk mechanism (He and Xiong (2012b)) in
that firms relying on finite-maturity debt financing will default earlier when facing worsening
secondary market liquidity.
We find that these interaction terms are quantitatively significant across all ratings. These
interaction terms account for 25%∼30% of the total credit spread of Aaa/Aa rated bonds
and 35%∼40% of the total spread of Ba rated bonds across the two aggregate states. They
account for 27% of the spread increase for Aaa/Aa rated bonds and 55% of the spread increase
for Ba rated bonds as the economy switches from a normal state into a recession. We further
perform a time-series default-liquidity decomposition for each rating category. Future studies
can readily apply our decomposition scheme to individual firms.
By taking into account how individual firms’ default decisions responds to changes in
liquidity conditions, our model offers important new insight on evaluating the effectiveness of
government policies that aim at improving market liquidity. Imagine a policy that improves
the secondary market liquidity in a recession to the level of normal times. In our model,
such a policy would lower the credit spread of Ba rated bonds in recession by about 112
bps, or 32% of the original spread. Furthermore, according to our decomposition, the
policy’s impact on the pure liquidity component only explains 23% of this reduction in credit
5

spreads. In contrast, the liquidity-driven default component, which reflects the reduction in
default risk when firms face smaller rollover losses, accounts for 67% of the reduction in the
spread. The default-driven liquidity component, which captures the endogenous reduction of
liquidity premium for safer bonds, explains the remainder, about 11%. The prevailing view
in the literature masks this interdependence between default and liquidity and thus could
substantially under-estimate the impact of such liquidity policies.
Finally, the interconnection between liquidity and default also has important implications
for an ongoing debate in accounting regarding how one should recognize losses on financial
assets.5 Our model suggests that (il)liquidity can affect the credit losses for these debt
instruments. Moreover, it offers a framework on how to use the liquidity information to
evaluate the expected credit losses, which will help improve the accuracy of accounting for
credit losses in debt instruments.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the model, which is solved in
Section 3. Section 4 presents the main calibration. Section 5 discusses the model-based
default-liquidity decomposition and its applications. Section 6 concludes.

2.

The Model

Based on He and Milbradt (2014), we introduce secondary over-the-counter market search
frictions (a la Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005)) into a structural credit risk Leland-type
model with aggregate macroeconomic fluctuations. Our model extends He and Milbradt
(2014) in two important aspects. First, we explicitly model aggregate shocks where firm cash
flows and secondary market liquidity are procyclical while risk prices are countercyclical,
which allows us to study the default-liquidity spiral across the business cycle. Second, instead
of assuming constant holding costs for investors hit by liquidity shocks as in He and Milbradt
(2014), we derive holding costs that decrease with bond prices through the mechanism of
5

For instance, after the collapse of Asset-Backed-Securities market during the second half of 2007, the
discussion focused on the interplay between default and liquidity and their respective accounting recognitions,
e.g., being recognized as net income vs. comprehensive income.

6

collateralized financing.

2.1

Aggregate States and the Firm

The following model elements are similar to Chen (2010), except that we introduce bonds
with an average finite maturity a la Leland (1998) so that rollover risk is present.

2.1.1

Aggregate states and stochastic discount factor

The aggregate state of the economy is described by a continuous time Markov chain, with
the current Markov state denoted by st and the physical transition density between state i
and state j denoted by ζijP . We assume an exogenous stochastic discount factor (SDF):6

X 
dΛt
(s ,s )
eκ(st− ,st ) − 1 dMt t− t ,
= −r(st )dt − η (st ) dZtm +
Λt
s 6=s
t

(1)

t−

where Ztm is a standard Brownian Motion under the physical probability measure P, η (·) is
(j,k)

the state-dependent price of risk for aggregate Brownian shocks, dMt

is a compensated

Poison process capturing switches between states i and j, and κ (i, j) represents the jump risk
premia such that the jump intensity between states i and j under the risk neutral measure Q
is ζijQ = eκ(i,j) ζijP . We focus on the case of binary aggregate states to capture the notion of
economic expansions and recessions, i.e., st ∈ {G, B}. In the Internet Appendix we provide
the general setup for the case of n > 2 aggregate states.
Later on, we will introduce undiversifiable idiosyncratic liquidity shocks to investors.
Upon receiving a liquidity shock, an investor who cannot sell the bond will incur a positive
holding cost. In the presence of such liquidity shocks, bond investors can still price assets
using the SDF in (1) provided that the bond holdings only make up an infinitesimal part of
the representative investor’s portfolio.7
6

We adopt a partial equilibrium approach where the pricing kernel is exogenous. For general equilibrium
credit risk models with endogenous pricing kernel, see, e.g., Gomes and Schmid (2010).
7
Intuitively, if the representative agent’s consumption pattern is not affected by the idiosyncratic shock

7

2.1.2

Firm cash flows and risk neutral measure

A firm has assets in place that generate cash flows at the rate of Yt . Under the physical
measure P, the cash-flow rate Yt dynamics, given the aggregate state st , are
dYt
= µP (st ) dt + σm (st ) dZtm + σf dZtf .
Yt

(2)

Here, dZtm captures aggregate Brownian risk, while dZtf captures idiosyncratic Brownian risk.
Note that this is a nominal model as we do not specify a separate inflation process.
Given the stochastic discount factor Λt , the cash-flow dynamics under Q are
dYt
= µQ (st ) dt + σ (st ) dZtQ ,
Yt
where ZtQ is a standard Brownian Motion under Q. The state-dependent risk-neutral growth
rate and volatility of cash flows are given by
µQ (st ) ≡ µP (st ) − σm (st ) η (st ) , and σ(st ) ≡

q

2 (s ) + σ 2 .
σm
t
f

For the ease of notation, we work with log cash flows y ≡ log (Y ) and denote the state
dependence of the parameters using either a subscript or a superscript. Since we will work
under Q-measure unless otherwise stated, we drop the subscript Q where no confusion can
arise. For instance, the risk-neutral dynamics of log cash flows are simply given by
dyt = µs dt + σs dZtQ ,

(3)

where

1
1 2
(st ) + σf2 ,
µs ≡ µQ (st ) − σ 2 (st ) = µP (st ) − σm (st )η(st ) − σm
2
2

σs ≡ σ(st ).

(which is true if the bond holding is infinitesimal relative to the rest of the portfolio), then the representative
agent’s pricing kernel is independent of the idiosyncratic undiversified shocks.

8

We can obtain valuations for any asset by discounting the expected cash flows under the
risk neutral measure Q with the risk-free rate. The unlevered firm value given the aggregate
state s and the cash-flow rate Y is vUs Yt , where the vector of price-dividend ratios vU is

vU = 

2.1.3

rG − µG + ζG
−ζB

−ζG
rB − µB + ζB

−1


1.

(4)

Firm’s debt maturity structure and rollover frequency

The firm has a unit measure of bonds in place that are identical except for their time to
maturity, with the aggregate and individual bond coupon and face value being c and p. As
in Leland (1998), equity holders commit to keeping the aggregate coupon and outstanding
face value constant before default, and thus issue new bonds of the same average maturity
as the bonds maturing. We assume that the issuance of new bonds in the primary market
incurs a proportional cost ω ∈ (0, 1). Each bond matures with intensity m, and the maturity
event is i.i.d. across individual bonds. Thus, by law of large numbers over [t, t + dt) the firm
retires a fraction m · dt of its bonds. This implies an expected average debt maturity of

1
.
m

The deeper implication of this assumption is that the firm adopts a “smooth” debt maturity
structure with an average refinancing/rollover frequency of m.

2.2

Secondary Over-the-Counter Corporate Bond Market

We follow Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005) and He and Milbradt (2014) to model the
over-the-counter corporate bond market. All trades have to be intermediated through dealers.
Bond investors can hold either zero or one unit of the bond. They start in the H state
without any holding cost when purchasing corporate bonds in the primary market. As time
passes by, H-type bond holders are hit by idiosyncratic liquidity shocks with intensity ξs .
These liquidity shocks lead them to become L-types who bear a positive holding cost hcs per
unit of time, which we micro-found shortly.

9

2.2.1

Endogenous Holding Cost

Different from He and Milbradt (2014) which features no aggregate state switching and
constant holding cost equal to some exogenous constant, we have state-dependent holding
costs hcs (P s ) that depend on the prevailing bond prices as follows:
hcs (P s ) = χs (N − P s (y))

(5)

where N > 0, χs > 0 are constants and P s (y) is the endogenous market price of the bond (to
be derived in the next section).
In Appendix A, we provide a micro-foundation for (5) based on collateralized financing.
We interpret a liquidity shock as the urgent need for an investor to raise cash which exceeds
the value of all the liquid assets that he holds, a common phenomenon in modern financial
institutions. Bond investors first use their bond holdings as collateral to raise collateralized
financing at the risk-free rate subject to a haircut until they manage to sell the bonds; any
remaining gap must be financed through uncollateralized financing, which requires a higher
interest rate. In this setting, the investor obtains less collateralized financing if (i) the current
market price of the bond is lower, and/or (ii) the haircut for the bond is higher. In practice, (i)
and (ii) often coincide, with the haircut increasing while the price goes down. The investor’s
effective holding cost is then given by the additional uncollateralized financing cost, which
increases when the bond price goes down. Under certain functional form assumptions on
haircuts detailed in Appendix A, the holding cost takes the linear form in (5).
In Equation (5), at issuance the bond is priced at par value p, implying a baseline holding
cost of χs (N − p) (we will set N ≥ p). With χs > 0, the holding cost increases as the firm
moves closer to default, so that the bond market value P s (y) goes down. This is the key
channel through which our model captures the empirical pattern that lower rated bonds have
worse secondary market liquidity.
The holding cost hcs (P s ) in (5) also depends on the aggregate state, through the following
two channels. First, there is a direct effect, as we set χB > χG , which can be justified by the
10

fact that the wedge between the collateralized and uncollateralized borrowing rates is higher
in bad times. Second, there is an indirect effect, as the bond value P s (y) drops in bad times,
giving rise to a higher holding cost. In Section 4.6 we study the quantitative importance of
linking holding costs to firm’s distant-to-default.
While we provide one micro-foundation for hcs (P s ) based on collateralized financing,
there are other mechanisms via which institutional investors hit by liquidity shock incur extra
losses if the market value of their bond holdings has dropped. For instance, suppose that
corporate bond fund managers face some unexpected withdrawals when hit by a liquidity
shock. As models with either learning managerial skills or coordination-driven runs would
suggest, the deteriorating bond portfolios can trigger even greater fund outflows and extra
liquidation costs.8

2.2.2

Dealers and Equilibrium Prices

There is a trading friction in moving the bonds from L-type sellers to H-type potential
buyers currently not holding the bond in that trades have to be intermediated by dealers
in the over-the-counter market. Sellers meet dealers with intensity λs , which we interpret
as the intermediation intensity of the bond market. For simplicity, we assume that after
L-type investors sell their holdings, they exit the market forever.9 The H-type buyers on
the sideline currently not holding the bond also contact dealers with intensity λs . We follow
Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2007) to assume Nash-bargaining weights β for the investor
and 1 − β for the dealer, constant across all dealer-investor pairs and aggregate states.
Dealers use the competitive (and instantaneous) interdealer market to sell or buy bonds
in order to keep a zero inventory position. When a contact between a L-type seller and a
dealer occurs, the dealer can instantaneously sell the bond at the inter-dealer clearing price
M to another dealer who is in contact with an H-type investor via the interdealer market. If
8

Models analyze these issues include, for example, Berk and Green (2004), He and Xiong (2012a), Cheng
and Milbradt (2012), and Suarez, Schroth, and Taylor (2014).
9
This is an innocuous assumption made for exposition. Switching back from L to H is easily incorporated
into the model. See the Appendix for details

11

he does so, the bond travels from an L-type investor to an H-type investor with the help of
the two dealers who are connected in the inter-dealer market.
For any aggregate state s, denote by Dls the bond value for an investor with type l ∈ {H, L}.
Denote by B s the bid price at which the L-type is selling his bond, by As the ask price at
which the H-type is purchasing this bond, and by M s the inter-dealer market price.
Following He and Milbradt (2014), we assume that the flow of H-type buyers contacting
dealers is greater than the flow of L-type sellers contacting dealers; in other words, the
secondary market is a seller’s market. Then, Bertrand competition, the holding restriction,
and excess demand from buyer-dealer pairs in the interdealer market drive the surplus of
buyer-dealer pairs to zero.10
s
Proposition 1. Fix valuations DH
and DLs . In equilibrium, the ask price As and inter-dealer
s
s
market price M s are equal to DH
, and the bid price is given by B s = βDH
+ (1 − β) DLs . The
s
dollar bid ask spread is As − B s = (1 − β) (DH
− DLs ).

As is typical in any model with decentralized trading, there is no single “market price” in
our over-the-counter market. However, we use “market price” when we model the endogenous
holding cost in equation (5). For simplicity, which is also consistent with market practice, we
take the mid-price between the bid and the ask prices to be the “market price”, i.e.,
Ps =

s
+ (1 − β) DLs
(1 + β) DH
As + B s
=
.
2
2

(6)

Critically, the holding cost hcs in (5) is linear in individual bond valuations, which allows us
to derive bond values in closed-form later.
Finally, empirical studies focus on the proportional bid-ask spread which is defined as the
10

Introducing a situation in which there is less buyers than potential sellers, i.e., a buyer’s market, would
entail tracking the value functions of investors on the sideline and significantly complicate the pricing of the
deterministic maturity bonds we use for the calibration below. As it, however, would not add additional
economic insights pertaining to credit risk in particular, we do not consider this case here.

12

dollar bid-ask spread divided by the mid price. In our model, it is
∆s (y, τ ) =

2.3

s
2 (1 − β) (DH
− DLs )
.
s
(1 + β) DH
+ (1 − β) DLs

(7)

Bankruptcy and Effective Recovery Rates

When the firm’s cash flow deteriorates, equity holders are willing to repay the maturing
debt holders only when the equity value is still positive, i.e. the option value of keeping
the firm alive justifies absorbing rollover losses and coupon payments. The firm defaults
s
when its equity value drops to zero at some endogenous default threshold ydef
, which is

optimally chosen by equity holders. The bankruptcy costs is a fraction 1 − α of the value of
s
the unleveled firm vUs ydef
value, where vUs is given in (4).

There is strong empirical evidence that bankruptcy recovery rates α change with the
aggregate state s (see Chen (2010)). Moreover, as emphasized in He and Milbradt (2014), if
bankruptcy leads investors to receive the bankruptcy proceeds immediately, then bankruptcy
confers a “liquidity” benefit similar to a maturing bond. This “expedited payment” benefit
runs counter to the fact that in practice bankruptcy leads to the freezing of assets within
the company and a delay in the payout of any cash depending on court proceeding.11
Moreover, investors of defaulted bonds may face a much more illiquid secondary market (e.g.,
Jankowitsch, Nagler, and Subrahmanyam (2013)), and potentially a much higher holding cost
once liquidity shocks hit due to regulatory or charter restrictions which prohibit institutions
from holding defaulted bonds. These practical features, as shown in He and Milbradt (2014),
lead to a type- and state-dependent bond recovery at the time of default:
 G G
T
B B
Ddef (y) = αH
vU (y) , αLG vUG (y) , αH
vU (y) , αLG vUB (y) .
11

(8)

For evidence on inefficient delay of bankruptcy resolution, see Gilson, John, and Lang (1990) and Ivashina,
Smith, and Iverson (2013). In addition, the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in September 2008 is a good case
in point. After much legal uncertainty, payouts to the debt holders only started trickling out after about
three and a half years.

13

 G G B B >
Here, α ≡ αH
, αL , αH , αL
are the effective bankruptcy recovery rates at default. As
explained in Section 4.1.3, when calibrating α, we rely exclusively on the market price of
defaulted bonds observed immediately after default, and the associated empirical bid-ask
spreads, to pin down α.

2.4

Summary of Setup

Figure 1 summarizes the cash flows to debt and equity holders.
Panel A visualizes the cash flows to a debt holder in aggregate state s (excluding jumps
of the aggregate state). The horizontal lines depict the current log cash flow y. The top half
of the graph depicts an H-type debt holder who has not been hit by a liquidity shock yet.
This bond holder receives a flow of coupon c each instant (all cash-flows in this figure are
indicated by grey boxes). With intensity m, the bond matures and the investor receives the
face value p. With intensity ξs the investor is hit by a liquidity shock and transitions to an
L-type investor who receives cash flows net of holding costs of (c − hcs (P )) dt each instant,
s
where P = [(1 + β) DH
+ (1 − β) DLs ] /2 is the endogenous secondary market mid price. With
s
intensity λs the L-type investor meets a dealer, sells the bond for βDH
(y) + (1 − β) DLs (y),

and exits the market forever. To the debt holder, this is equivalent in value to losing the
ability to trade but gaining a recovery intensity λs β of transitioning back to being an H-type
s
investor. Finally, when y ≤ ydef
, the firm defaults immediately and the bond holders recover

αls vUs (y) depending on their type l ∈ {H, L}.
Panel B visualizes the cash flows to equity holders. The horizontal lines depict the current
log cash flow y, where the top (bottom) line represents the aggregate G (B) state. Each
instant, the equity holder receives a cash-flow Y = ey from the firm and pays the coupon c to
debt holders. As debt is of finite average maturity, there are cash flows caused by continuously
rolling over the debt: by the law of large numbers, a flow m of bonds come due each instant
and each bond requires a principal payment of p. At the same time, the firm reissues these
maturing bonds with their original specification and raises an amount (after issuance costs)

14

Figure 1: Schematic graphic of cash flows to debt and equity holders

s
of (1 − ω)DH
per bond depending on aggregate state s ∈ {G, B}. With intensity ζG the
G
B
state switches from G to B and primary bond market prices decrease from DH
(y) to DH
(y)

reflecting the higher default probability as well as the worsened liquidity in the market. In

G
B
cases where y ∈ ydef
, ydef
(as shown), the cash flows to equity holders are so low that they
declare default immediately following the jump, receiving a payoff of 0. Thus, the model
features jumps to default even though the cash-flow process y is continuous. Finally, with
intensity ζB , the state jumps from B to G. Implicit in the model is that equity holders are
raising new equity frictionlessly to cover negative cash flows before default.
Panel A and Panel B are connected via the primary market prices of newly issued bonds,
15

s
i.e. DH
(y) for s ∈ {G, B}. Although in the primary market the firm is able to locate and

place newly issued bonds to H-type investors, the primary market prices reflect the secondary
market illiquidity in Panel A, simply because forward-looking H-type investors take into
account that they are facing the illiquid secondary market in the future once hit by liquidity
shocks. Through this channel, the secondary market illiquidity enters the firm’s rollover cash
flows in Panel B and affects the firm’s default decision.

3.

Model Solutions
(s)

For l ∈ {H, L} and s ∈ {G, B}, denote by Dl
E (s)

the l-type bond value in aggregate state s,
 G

B >
the equity value in aggregate state s, and y def = ydef
the vector of endogenous
, ydef

default boundaries. We derive the closed-form solution for debt and equity valuations as
a function of y for given y def , along with the characterization of the endogenous default
boundaries y def .

3.1

Debt Valuations

G
B
Because equity holders will default earlier in state B, i.e., ydef
< ydef
, the domains on which

the bonds are ”alive” change when the aggregate state switches. We deal with this issue by
the method described below; see the Internet Appendix for the generalization of this analysis.
 G

 B

B
Define two intervals I1 = ydef
, ydef
and I2 = ydef
, ∞ , and denote by Dls,i the restriction
of Dls to the interval Ii , i.e., Dls,i (y) = Dls (y) for y ∈ Ii . Clearly, DlB,1 (y) = αlB vUB (y) is
in the “dead” state, so that the firm immediately defaults on interval I1 when switching
 B

into state B (from state G). In light of this observation, on interval I2 = ydef
, ∞ all bond
h
i>
G,2
G,2
B,2
B,2
(2)
valuations denoted by D = DH , DL , DH , DL
are “alive.”
Holding costs given liquidity shocks can be interpreted as negative dividends, which
effectively lower the coupon flows that bond investors are receiving. Moreover, we directly
apply the pricing kernel given in (1) without risk adjustments on the liquidity shocks. This

16

treatment is justified by the assumption that the illiquid bond holding makes up only an
infinitesimal part of the representative investor’s portfolio. For further discussions, see
footnote 7 and the end of Section 2.1.2.
Take D(2) on interval I2 as example. The bond valuation equation can be written in
matrix form as follows:
R̂ · D(2) (y)
|
{z
}

Discounting,4×1

=

00
0
1
Σ D(2) (y) + Q̂ · D(2) (y)
µ D(2) (y) + |{z}
|{z}| {z } 2
{z
}
| {z } |
4×4
4×4
T ransition,4×1
4×1
4×1


 
+ c14
+ m p14 − D(2) (y) − χ · N − χ · W · D(2) (y) ,
|{z}
{z
} |
{z
}
|
Coupon,4×1

M aturity,4×1

(9)

Holding Cost,4×1

where R̂, µ, Σ, Q̂, χ, and W are given in the Internet Appendix. Here, the left-hand-side
is the required return for holding the bond. On the right-hand-side, the first three terms
capture the evolution of cash-flows and the aggregate state. The fourth term is the coupon
payment, the fifth captures the effect of debt maturing, and the last gives the holding costs.
Importantly for solvability, from (5), we see that endogenous debt valuations enter the holding
cost linearly.
Proposition 2. The bond values on interval i are given by


(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
· |{z}
b(i) + k0 + k1 exp (y) ,
D
=
G
·
exp
Γ
y
|{z} |{z}
|{z}
|{z}
{z
} 4i×1
2i×1
2i×4i |
2i×1
2i×1

(10)

4i×4i

(i)

(i)

where the matrices G(i) , Γ(i) and the vectors k0 , k1 and b(i) are given in the Internet
Appendix.

3.2

Equity Valuations and Default Boundaries

When the firm refinances its maturing bonds, we assume that the firm can place newly issued
bonds with H investors in a competitive primary market subject to issuance costs. This


implies that there are rollover gains/losses of m S(i) · D(i) (y) − p1i dt as a mass m · dt of
17

debt holders matures at each instant. Here, S(i) is a i × 2i matrix that incorporates ω ∈ (0, 1)
as the proportional issuance cost in the primary corporate bond market, and selects the
appropriate DH .12 Denote by double letters (e.g. xx) a constant for equity that takes an
analogous place to the single letter (i.e. x) constant for debt. We can write down the
valuation equation for equity on interval Ii . For instance, on interval I2 we have
00
0
1
RR · E(2) (y) = µµ E(2) (y) + |{z}
ΣΣ E(2) (y) +QQ · E(2) (y)
|{z} | {z } 2
|
{z
}
{z
}
| {z } |
2×2
2×2
Discounting,2×1
T ransition,2×1
2×1
2×1


+ 12 exp (y) − (1 − π) c12 + m S(2) · D(2) (y) − p12
| {z }
| {z } |
{z
}
Coupon,2×1

Cashf low,2×1

(11)

Rollover,2×1

where π is the marginal tax rate, and matrices µµ, ΣΣ, QQ, and RR are given in the
Internet Appendix.
Proposition 3. The equity value is given by




(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
(i)
·
exp
ΓΓ
y
+KK
exp
Γ
y
E(i) (y) = |GG
·bb
b(i) +kk0 +kk1 exp (y) for y ∈ Ii
{z
}
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
|{z}
{z } | {z }
| {z }
{z
} 2i×1
{z
} 4i×i |i×1
i×2i |
i×4i |
i×1
i×1
2i×2i

4i×4i

(12)
where the matrices GG(i) , ΓΓ(i) , KK(i) , Γ(i) and the vectors

(i)
kk0 ,

(i)
kk1

and b(i) are given

in the Internet Appendix.
 G

B >
Finally, the endogenous bankruptcy boundaries y def = ydef
, ydef
are given by the
standard smooth-pasting condition:
E(1)

0

G
ydef


[1]

= 0, and E(2)

12

0

B
ydef


[2]

= 0.

(13)

Recall we assume that the firm issues to H-type investors in the primary market, which is consistent
with our seller’s market assumption in Section 2.2, i.e., there are sufficient H-type buyers waiting on
h
i>
G,2
G,2
B,2
B,2
the sidelines. For instance, for y ∈ I2 = [ydef (B) , ∞), we have D(2) = DH
, DL
, DH
, DL
and


1 0 0 0
S(2) = (1 − ω)
.
0 0 1 0

18

3.3

Model Implied Credit Default Swap

One of the key empirical moments for bond liquidity used in this paper is the Bond-CDS
spread, defined as Bond credit spread minus the spread of the corresponding Credit Default
Swap (CDS). Since the CDS market is much more liquid than that of corporate bonds,
following Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) we compute the model implied CDS spread
under the assumption that the CDS market is perfectly liquid.13
Let τ (in years from today) be the time of default. Formally, if today is time u, then
s

u+t
τ ≡ inf{t : yu+t ≤ ydef
} can be either the first time at which the log cash-flow rate y reaches

s
G
B
the default boundary ydef
in state s, or when ydef
< yt < ydef
so that a change of state from

G to B triggers default. Thus, for a T -year CDS contract, the required flow payment f is
the solution to the following equation:
EQ

"Z

min[τ,T ]

#



exp (−rt) f dt = EQ exp −rτ 1{τ ≤T } LGDτ ,

(14)

0

where LGDτ is the loss-given-default, which is the bond face value p minus its recovery value,
where the recovery value is defined as the mid transaction price at default. If there is no
default, no loss-given-default is paid out by the CDS seller. We calculate the flow payment f
that solves (14) using a simulation method. The CDS spread, f /p, is defined as the ratio
between the flow payment f and the bond’s face value p.
13

Arguably, the presence of the CDS market will in general affect the liquidity of the corporate bond
market; but we do not consider this effect. A recent theoretical investigation by Oehmke and Zawadowski
(2013) shows ambiguous results in this regard. Further, there is some ambiguity in the data about which way
the illiquidity in the CDS market affects the CDS spread. Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen (2011) show
that the sellers of CDS contracts earn a liquidity premium.

19

4.

Calibration

4.1

Benchmark Parameters

We calibrate the parameters governing firm fundamentals and pricing kernels to key moments
of the aggregate economy and asset prices. Parameters governing time-varying liquidity
conditions are calibrated to their empirical counterparts on bond turnover and observed
bid-ask spreads.
[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]

4.1.1

SDF and cash flow parameters

In Table 1 we follow Chen, Xu, and Yang (2012) in calibrating firm fundamentals and
investors’ pricing kernel. Start from the investors’ pricing kernel. To abstract from any
term structure effects, we set risk the free rate rG = rB = 5% in both aggregate states;
the choice of 5% is based on the time-series average of nominal 5- and 10-year interest rate
from 1994 onwards. For simplicity, in this paper we do not model the liquidity premium
for Treasuries and compute the credit spreads relative to the risk-free rate instead of the
Treasury yields.14 Transition intensities give the duration of the business cycle (10 years
for expansions and 2 years for recessions). The jump risk premium exp(κ) = 2 in state G
(and the state B jump risk premium is the reciprocal of that of state G) is consistent with a
long-run risk model with Markov-switching conditional moments and calibrated to match the
equity premium (Chen (2010)). The price of risk η is the product of relative risk aversion γ
and consumption volatility σc : η = 0.165 (0.255) in state G (state B) requires γ = 10 and
σc = 1.65% (σc = 2.55%).
14

It has been widely recognized (e.g., Duffie (1996), Krishnamurthy (2002), Longstaff (2004)) that Treasury
yields are lower than the risk-free rate due to their special role in financial markets. In unreported results,
we introduce (exogenous) state-dependent liquidity premia ∆s for Treasuries and calibrate them using the
spreads between 3-month general collateral repo rates and Treasury yields. This introduction of the ∆s
simply leads to level shifts between the spreads using the risk-free rate as the benchmark and those using the
Treasury yield as benchmark. However, it makes our structural liquidity-default decomposition cumbersome.

20

On the firm side, the cash-flow growth is matched to the average (nominal) growth rate of
s
aggregate corporate profits. State-dependent systematic volatilities σm
are chosen to match

equity return volatilities. Based on the empirical median debt maturity (including bank
loans and public bonds reported in Chen, Xu, and Yang (2012)) we set m = 0.2 implying an
average debt maturity of 5 years. We set the debt issuance cost ω in the primary corporate
bond market to be 1% as in Chen (2010).
The idiosyncratic volatility σf is chosen to match the default probability of Baa firms.
There is no state-dependence of σf as we do not have data counterparts for state-dependent
Baa default probabilities. Finally, as explained later, the firm’s cash-flow is determined from
empirical leverage observed in the data.
Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009) argue that generating a reasonable equity
Sharpe ratio is an important criterion for a model that tries to simultaneously match the
default rates and credit spreads, as otherwise one can simply raise credit spreads by imposing
unrealistically high systematic volatility and prices of risk. Our calibration implies an equity
Sharpe ratio of 0.11 in state G and 0.20 in state B, which are close to the mean firm-level
Sharpe ratio for the universe of CRSP firms (0.17) reported in Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and
Goldstein (2009).

4.1.2

Secondary bond market illiquidity

The liquidity parameters describing the secondary corporate bond market are less standard
in the literature. We first fix the state-dependent intermediary meeting intensity based on
anecdotal evidence, so that it takes a bond holder on average a week (λG = 50) in the good
state and 2.6 weeks (λB = 20) in the bad state to find an intermediary to divest of all bond
holdings. We interpret the lower λ in state B as a weakening of the financial system and
its ability to intermediate trades. We then set bond holders bargaining power β = 0.05
independent of the aggregate state, based on empirical work that estimates search frictions
in secondary corporate bond markets (Feldhütter (2012)).

21

We choose the intensity of liquidity shocks, ξs , based on observed bond turnover in the
secondary market. As we are aiming to explain the observed Bond-CDS spreads, we focus on
the sample with CDS contracts traded (a total of 1,313 firms). Their value-weighted turnover
from 2005 to 2012 is about 3.1 per year; over the business cycle, the normal time turnover is
3.3 per year while the recession time turnover is around 2 times per year.15
In our model, given our choice of relative high meeting intensities (λs ), the turnover rate
is almost entirely determined by the liquidity shock intensity ξs .16 Importantly, all turnover
in the secondary corporate bond market is driven by liquidity trades in our setting. Of course,
in practice investors trade corporate bonds for reasons other than liquidity. Because during
recession institutional investors are more likely to be hit by liquidity shocks and hence trade
their bond holdings, we rely on the empirical turnover frequency during recessions to set
ξB = 2. To reduce the number of free parameters, we fix the the state-G liquidity intensity
ξG = 2 as well.
The parameters χs ’s in equation (5) are central to determining the endogenous holding
costs and thus illiquidity of corporate bonds in secondary market. We calibrate χG = 0.12
and χG = 0.17 to target the bid-ask spread for investment grade bonds in both aggregate
states. In light of the particular micro-foundation in Section 2.2.1 where χs is interpreted
as the wedge between collateralized and uncollateralized borrowing costs, both numbers
are higher than the typical observed TED (LIBOR-Tbill) spreads. However, TED spreads
(using the uncollateralized borrowing rate among a select group of large and reputable banks)
might underestimate the true cost of uncollateralized borrowing for a large set of firms. More
importantly, as a quantitative paper, the state-dependent holding cost parameters χs in (5)
are in reduced form and meant to capture factors beyond this particular micro-foundation of
uncollateralized borrowing (see discussion in Section 2.2.1). Finally, we set N = 107 (with
par bond value of p = 100) to roughly target the Bond-CDS spread for Baa rated bonds in
15

In the TRACE whole sample from 2005 to 2012, the value-weighted turnover of corporate bonds during
NBER recessions is about 0.7 times per year, and there are is no significant difference in bond turnover over
the business cycle.
λs
16
The expected turnover is ξξss+λ
' ξs when λs  ξs .
s

22

state G.17
4.1.3

Effective recovery rates

As explained in Section 2.3, our model features type- and state-dependent recovery rates
αls for l ∈ {L, H} and s ∈ {G, B}. We first borrow from the existing structural credit risk
literature, specifically Chen (2010), who treats the traded prices right after default as recovery
rates, and estimates recovery rates of 57.6% · vUG in normal times and 30.6% · vuB in recessions
(recall vUs is the unlevered firm value at state s).
Assuming that post-default prices are bid prices at which investors are selling, then
Proposition 1 implies:
G
B
− αLG ), and 0.3060 = αLB + β(αH
− αLB ).
0.5755 = αLG + β(αH

(15)

We need two more pieces of information on bid-ask spreads of defaulted bonds to pin down
the αls ’s. Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) report that in normal times (2003-2005), the
transaction cost for defaulted bonds for median-sized trades is about 200bps. To gauge the
bid-ask spread for defaulted bonds during recessions, we take the following approach. Using
TRACE, we first follow Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) to calculate the implied bid-ask spreads
for low rated bonds (C and below) for both non-recession and recession periods. We find that
relative to the non-recession period, during recessions the implied bid-ask spread is higher by
a factor of 3.1. Given a bid-ask spread of 200bps for defaulted bonds, this multiplier implies
that the bid-ask spread for defaulted bonds during recessions is about 620bps. Hence we have


G
B
2 (1 − β) αH
− αLG
2 (1 − β) αH
− αLB
2% =
, and 6.2% = B
.
G
G
B
B
αLG + β(αH
− αLG ) + αH
αL + β(αH
− αLB ) + αH
17

(16)

In the micro-foundation provided in Appendix A, given other baseline calibrations, the choice of N = 107
and χs gives rise to model-implied haircuts that range from 10% to 25% depending on ratings. They are
broadly consistent with BIS (2010) which gives a comprehensive survey conducted by the BIS Committee
on the Global Financial System (including both Europe and US) for June 2007 and June 2009. The model
implied haircuts are 9% for Aaa/Aa bonds, 10% for A, 12% for Baa, and 18% for Ba. In BIS (2010), the
average haircuts for non-rated counterparties are 6.7% for Aaa/Aa rated bonds, 12% for Baa, and 23% for
high yield bonds.

23

Solving (15) and (16) gives us the estimates of:18

 G
B
= 0.3256, αLB = 0.3050 .
= 0.5871, αLG = 0.5749, αH
α = αH

(17)

These default recovery rates determine the bond recovery rate, a widely-used measure
defined as the defaulted bond price divided by its promised face value. In our calibration,
the implied bond recovery rate is 49.7% in state G and 24.5% in state B. The unconditional
average recovery rate is 44.6%. These values are consistent with the average issuer-weighted
bond recovery rate of 42% in Moody’s recovery data over 1982-2012, and they capture the
cyclical variations in recovery rates as documented in Chen (2010).

4.2

Degree of freedom in calibration

We summarize our calibration parameters in Table 1. Although there are a total of 29
parameters, most of them are “pre-fixed parameters ” that are displayed in the upper
part, Panel A, of Table 1. These are set either using the existing literature or based on
moments other than the corporate bond pricing moments. We only freely pick (calibrate)
four “calibrated parameters ” displayed in the lower part, Panel B, of the table. These target
the empirical moments that our model aims to explain: The idiosyncratic volatility σf is
picked to target Baa firm default probabilities; for holding cost parameters, N is set to target
the Baa state G Bond-CDS spread; and χG and χB are picked to target investment grade
bid-ask spreads in both states. As shown shortly, the number of degrees of freedom (4) is far
below the number of our empirical moments that we aim to match.
We point out that in our model, the quantitative performance over the business cycle
is less surprising given that our model takes (and sometimes, chooses) different exogenous
parameters for the two aggregate states. Because our model links the secondary bond market
liquidity to the firm’s distance-to-default, our model’s quantitative strength is more reflected
18

This calculation assumes that bond transactions at default occur at the bid price. If we assume that
G
G
B
B
transactions occur at the mid price, these estimates are αH
= 0.5813, αL
= 0.5691, αH
= 0.3140, αL
= 0.2972.

24

in its cross-sectional performance. Further, as we choose the liquidity parameters (e.g. holding
costs) to target turnover and bid-ask spreads, the matching of Bond-CDS spreads can be
considered and additional measure of success of our model.

4.3

Empirical Moments

We consider four rating classes: Aaa/Aa , A, Baa, and Ba; the first three rating classes are
investment grade, while Ba is speculative grade. We combine Aaa and Aa together because
there are few observations for Aaa firms. We emphasize that previous calibration studies on
corporate bonds focus on the difference between Baa and Aaa only, while we are aiming to
explain the level of credit spreads across a wide range of rating classes. Furthermore, we report
the model performance conditional on macroeconomic states, while typical existing literature
only focus on unconditional model performance (Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009),
Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010), and Chen (2010)). We classify each quarter as either
in “state G” or “state B” based on NBER recessions. As the “B” state in our model only
aims to capture normal recessions in business cycles, we exclude two quarters during the
2008 financial crisis, which are 2008Q4 and 2009Q1, to mitigate the effect caused by the
unprecedented disruption in financial markets during crisis.19
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]

4.3.1

Default Probabilities

The default probabilities for 5-year and 10-year bonds in the data column of Panel A in Table
2 are taken from Exhibit 33 of Moody’s annual report on corporate default and recovery
rates (2012), which provides cumulative default probabilities over the period of 1920-2011.
Unfortunately, state-dependent measures of default probabilities over the business cycle are
unavailable.
19

For recent empirical research that focuses on the behavior of the corporate bond market during the
2007/08 crisis, see Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) and Friewald, Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam
(2012).

25

4.3.2

Bond Spreads

Our data of bond spreads is obtained using Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database
(FISD) trading prices from January 1994 to December 2004, and TRACE data from January
2005 to June 2012. We follow the standard data cleaning process, e.g. excluding utility
and financial firms.20 For each transaction, we calculate the bond credit spread by taking
the difference between the bond yield and the treasury yield with corresponding maturity.
Within each rating class, we average these observations in each month to form a monthly time
series of credit spreads for that rating. We then calculate the time-series average for each
rating conditional on the macroeconomic state (whether the month is classified as a NBER
recession), and provide the conditional standard deviation for the conditional mean. To
account for the autocorrelation of these monthly series, we calculate the standard deviation
using Newey-West procedure with 15 lags.
We report the conditional means of bond spreads for each rating class and their corresponding conditional standard deviations for both 5-year and 10-year bonds in the data
column in Panel B of Table 2. In the existing literature, Huang and Huang (2012) cover the
period from the 1970’s to the 1990’s, and report an (unconditional) average credit spread of
55 bps for 4-year Aaa rated bonds, 65 bps for Aa, 96 for A, 158 for Baa, and 320 for Ba. Our
unconditional 5-year average credit spreads which are the weighted average across conditional
means reported in Panel B of Table 2 are fairly close to Huang and Huang (2012): 65 bps for
Aaa/Aa, 100 bps for A, 167 for Baa, and 349 for Ba.

4.3.3

Bond-CDS spreads

Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) argue that because the market for CDS contracts is much
more liquid than the secondary market for corporate bonds, the CDS spread should mainly
reflect the default risk of a bond, while the credit spread also includes a liquidity premium to
compensate for the illiquidity in the corporate bond market. Following Longstaff, Mithal, and
20

For FISD data, we follow Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001). For TRACE data, we follow
Dick-Nielsen (2009).

26

Neis (2005), we take the difference between the bond credit spread and the corresponding
CDS spread to get the Bond-CDS spread. This spread is our first empirical measure for the
non-default risk of corporate bonds.
In more detail, we construct Bond-CDS spreads as follows. We first match FISD bond
transaction data with CDS prices from Markit, and then difference the spreads, with two
caveats. First, the data sample period only starts from 2005 when CDS data become available.
Second, to address the potential selection issue, we follow Chen, Xu, and Yang (2012) and
focus on firms that have both 5-year and 10-year bonds outstanding. The results are reported
in the data column in Panel A in Table 2, which shows that Bond-CDS spreads are higher
for lower rated bonds.21

Bond-CDS spread versus Bond-CDS basis One issue is worth further discussing.
Our Bond-CDS spread is defined as the corporate bond yield minus the treasury yield
with matching maturity, and then minus its corresponding CDS spread. Another closely
related measure, the Bond-CDS basis, is of great interest to both practitioners and academic
researchers. The only difference is on the risk-free benchmark: our Bond-CDS spread takes
the Treasury yield as the benchmark, while Bond-CDS bases takes interest rate swap rate as
the benchmark. For recent studies on Bond-CDS basis, see Gârleanu and Pedersen (2011)
and Bai and Collin-Dufresne (2012).
The study of the Bond-CDS basis mostly focuses on limits-to-arbitrage during the turmoil
of financial market, because the interest rate swap rate gives a more accurate measure of an
arbitrager’s financing cost. In contrast, our paper aims to explain total credit spreads, and we
follow the corporate bond pricing literature in setting the Treasury yield as our benchmark.
The credit spread includes both default and liquidity components. Treasuries are a better
21

We focus on investment grade bonds and Ba rated bonds (the high-end of speculative grade). Over this
range, riskier bonds have higher Bond-CDS spreads. This monotonicity tends to be reversed toward the
low-end of speculative grade bonds, which could be simply due to the fact that by definition bond yields
are biased downward relative to CDS spreads (yields are calculated based on the stated maturity, which are
substantially smaller than the actual duration for risky bonds due to imminent default.) Karakas, Hotchkiss,
and Feldhutter (2014) offers another explanation outside of our model emphasizing the valuable control rights
of bond holders in the event of corporate default.

27

default-free benchmark, because the interest rate swap rate is the fixed leg of LIBOR, which
is contaminated by default risk. Treasuries also serve as the illiquidity-free benchmark, where
“liquidity” can be interpreted broadly to include market liquidity and funding liquidity that
are captured by our model.

4.3.4

Bid-Ask Spreads

The second non-default measure that we study is bid-ask spreads in the secondary market
for corporate bonds, whose model counterpart is given in (7). Previous empirical studies
have uncovered rich patterns of bid-ask spreads across aggregate states and rating classes.
More specifically, we combine Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) and Bao, Pan, and
Wang (2011) to construct the data counterparts for the bid-ask spread, as Edwards, Harris,
and Piwowar (2007) only report the average bid-ask spread across ratings in normal times
(2003-2005). The ratings considered in Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) are superior
grade (Aaa/Aa) with an bid-ask spread of 40 bps, investment grade (A/Baa) with an bid-ask
spread of 50 bps, and junk grade (Ba and below) with a bid-ask spread of 70 bps.22 For each
grade, we then compute the measure of liquidity in Roll (1984) as in Bao, Pan, and Wang
(2011), which we use to back out the bid-ask spread ratio between B-state and G-state. We
multiply this ratio by the bid-ask spread estimated by Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007)
in normal times (2003-2005) to arrive at a bid-ask spread measure for the B state. These
empirical estimates are reported in Panel B in Table 3.

4.4
4.4.1

Model Performance on Default Risk and Credit Spreads
Calibration method

For any given log cash-flow y, which links one-to-one to the firm’s market leverage, we can
compute the default probability and credit spread of bonds at 5 and 10 year maturity using
22

We take the median size trade around 240K. Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) show that trade size
is an important determinant for transaction costs of corporate bonds. But, for tractability reasons, we have
abstracted away from trade size considerations.

28

Monte-Carlo methods.23 As is typical in structural corporate bond pricing models, we find
that the model implied default probability and total credit spread are highly nonlinear in
market leverage (see Figure 2).24 The non-linearity inherent in the model implies, via Jensen’s
inequality, that the average credit spreads are higher than the spreads at average market
leverage. This concern is empirically relevant, because the observed leverage distribution
within each rating category is diverse as shown in Figure 3. We thus follow David (2008) in
computing model implied aggregate moments. Specifically, we compute the market leverage
(i.e., book debt over the sum of market equity and book debt) of each Compustat firm
(excluding financial and utility firms and other standard filters) that has rating information
between 1994 and 2012. We then match each firm-quarter observation in Compustat to
its model counterpart based on the observed market leverage, compute the average across
all firms, and repeat the procedure for each rating class, each maturity and each aggregate
state (5 or 10 years). Hence, by construction, our model always exactly matches the data
counterpart on the dimension of leverage.
Relative to the existing literature, our calibration aims to explain the level of credit spread
across ratings, rather than differences between ratings. For instance, Chen, Collin-Dufresne,
and Goldstein (2009), Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010), and Chen (2010) focus on
explaining the difference in spreads between Baa and Aaa rated bonds, which they consider
the default component of Baa rated bonds under the assumption that the observed spreads
for Aaa rated bonds are mostly driven by the liquidity premium. Because our framework
endogenously models bond liquidity, we are able to match the total credit spreads that we
observe in the data across the superior ratings (Aaa/Aa) down to the high end of speculative
rated bonds (here Ba).
Another important dimension that our paper improves upon over the existing literature
23
Recall that for tractability we assume that bonds have random maturity. In our calibration, we study
bonds with deterministic maturities, which can be viewed as some infinitesimal bonds in the firm’s aggregate
debt structure analyzed in Section 2.1.3. Since the debt valuation derived in Proposition 2 does not apply, we
rely on Monte-Carlo methods.
24
The reason that default rate is higher in state G for the same market leverage is that the market leverage
is higher in state B for the same book leverage due to the drop in equity value.

29

Figure 2: Model Implied Nonlinearity. This graph demonstrates that the implied default
probability and credit spreads are nonlinear functions of the firm’s market leverage. The
model parameters are given in Table 1.
A. Annual default probability

B. Credit spread

70

2500

State G
State B

60

2000

basis points

percent

50
40
30

1500

1000

20
500
10
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

1

Market Leverage

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Market Leverage

is on the matching of conditional means of credit spreads. Because the success of Chen,
Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009), Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010), and Chen
(2010) hinges on the idea that the bond’s payoff is lower in recessions with a higher marginal
utility of consumption, checking whether the model implied bond spreads conditional on
recessions match their empirical counterparts can be viewed as a disciplinary test for the
mechanism proposed by those papers.

4.4.2

Calibration results

Table 2 presents our calibration results on default probabilities (Panel A) and credit spreads
across four rating classes (Panel B), for both 5-year and 10-year bonds.
Our calibration exercise puts more emphasis on the 5-year horizon.25 The reason that we
focus more on the 5-year, rather than the 10-year, horizon is that this paper aims to explain
the non-default component of corporate bonds. The Bond-CDS spreads require the input of
observed CDS spreads. It is well known that CDS contracts are at their most liquid at 5-year
25
More specifically, within the reasonable range used in the literature, we have chosen the state-dependent
risk price η and systematic volatility σm to deliver an overall good match for 5-year Baa rated bonds.

30

Figure 3: Empirical Distribution of Market Leverage for Compustat Firms by
We compute quasi-market leverage for each
Aggregate State and Rating classes.
firm-quarter observation in the Compustat database from 1994-2012, excluding financials and
utilities. State B is classified as quarters for which at least two months are NBER recession
month. The remaining quarters are G state. We drop financial and utility firms in our sample,
as well as firms with zero leverage. We exclude the crisis quarters 2008Q4 and 2009Q1.
Normal A

Normal Baa

Normal Ba

Recession Aaa/Aa

Recession A

Recession Baa

Recession Ba

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9

0
8
0

2

4

6

Density

2

4

6

8

Normal Aaa/Aa

Market Leverage

maturities (e.g., Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005)). Since our model assumes a perfectly
liquid CDS market, focusing on the 5-year horizon mitigates the potential liquidity effect of
the CDS market in biasing our calibration results.

5-year default probabilities and credit spreads For 5-year bond maturities, our quantitative model is able to deliver a decent matching for both cross-sectional and state-dependent
patterns in default probabilities and credit spreads.
For superior grade bonds (rated Aaa/Aa), our model gives a reasonable match for 5-year
credit spreads: in state G, the model predicts 72.9 bps while the data counterpart is 55.7 bps;
in state B, we have 99 bps in the model versus 107 bps in the data. Thanks to introducing
31

liquidity into the structural corporate bond pricing model, we are able to produce reasonable
credit spreads for Aaa/Aa bonds conditional on empirically observed default probabilities.
The model implied default probability is 0.5%, just below the data counterpart of 0.7%.
For lower rated bonds, the match on default probability is quite satisfactory. For instance,
for Ba rated bonds, the model implied default probability is 9.9%, matching well with the
9.8% value reported by Moody’s. Overall, relative to the data the model implied credit spread
tends to overshoot in state G and undershoot in state B, but the match remains reasonable.

10-year default probabilities and credit spreads While our model is able to quantitatively match the cross-sectional and state-dependent pattern for the credit spreads of
5-year bonds, the matching for 10-year bonds is less satisfactory. The general pattern is that
although the default probabilities match their data counterparts reasonably well, the model
implied conditional credit spreads for 10-year bonds overshoot the empirical moments at
a significant margin, suggesting that the model implied term structure of credit spreads is
steeper than the data suggests.26 Certain interesting extensions of our model (e.g., introducing
jumps in cash flows that are more likely to occur in state B) should help in this dimension,
and we leave it to future research to address this issue.

4.5

Model Performance on Non-Default Risk

Our model features an illiquid secondary market for corporate bonds, which implies that the
equilibrium credit spread must compensate the bond investors for bearing not only default
risk but also liquidity risk. This new element allows us to investigate the model’s quantitative
performance on dimensions specific to bond market liquidity, i.e., Bond-CDS spreads and
bid-ask spreads, in addition to default probabilities and credit spreads on which the previous
literature has focused.
26

In unreported results, we find that the method of David (2008) which addresses the nonlinearity in
the data (caused by the diverse distribution in leverage) has helped our model greatly to deliver a flatter
term structure. This finding is consistent with Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010). Nevertheless, this
treatment is not strong enough to get the term structure right.

32

4.5.1

Bond-CDS Spread

Recall that we assume a perfectly liquid CDS market in Section 3.3. In practice, although
much more liquid than the secondary corporate bond market, the CDS market is still not
perfectly liquid. As explained above, to mitigate this effect we have focused on bonds with
5-year maturity, because 5-year CDS contracts are traded with the most liquidity.27

5-year Bond-CDS spread Similar to the procedure in Section 4.4, following David (2008)
we obtain our model-implied aggregate moments by first calculating the Bond-CDS spread
for each firm-quarter observation for the Bond-CDS firm sample (after 2005) based on its
market leverage, conditional on the macroeconomic state.
[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
The quantitative matching of Bond-CDS spreads, which is reported in Panel A in Table
3, is reasonably good for 5-year bonds. Overall, on the state-dependent dimension, the
matching on state G is close, but the model undershoots the data counterpart in state B.
Cross-sectionally, the model implied slope with respect to rating classes of the Bond-CDS
spread is flatter than its data counterpart. For instance, in state B, the Bond-CDS spread
goes from 76 bps for Aaa/Aa-rated bonds to 227 bps for Ba-rated bonds in the date, while
the model explains about 55% of this variation (from 74.5 bps of Aaa/Aa to 160 bps of Ba).
Overall, our model delivers the right magnitude for the empirically observed Bond-CDS
spreads. The matching across macroeconomic states is better than the matching across the
four rating categories, in that our model seems to produce too little variation ranging from
superior grade bonds (Aaa/Aa) to speculative grade bonds (Ba). One possible avenue to
explore in future research which may help generate rating-dependent liquidity is that bonds
with different ratings should have different clienteles.
27

Because the CDS market is a zero-net-supply derivative market, how the secondary market liquidity of
CDS market affects the pricing of CDS depends on market details. Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen (2011)
show that the sellers of CDS contract earn a liquidity premium.

33

10-year Bond-CDS spreads and term structure Let us next consider 10-year bonds.
Similar to the discussion at the end of Section 4.4, one area in which our model clearly fails
is to replicate a slightly downward sloping Bond-CDS term structure in the data. In our
data from 2005 to 2012, the 5-year Bond-CDS spread is slightly higher than the 10-year
counterpart across all rating categories, subject to the caveat that the difference may not
be statistically significant taking standard deviations into account. It is worth noting that
this downward sloping term structure in Bond-CDS spreads is inconsistent with the robust
finding of longer-maturity bonds being less liquid documented in the empirical literature
(e.g., Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007); Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)). In fact, Longstaff,
Mithal, and Neis (2005) report a positive relation between Bond-CDS spread and maturity
in their sample.
From a theoretical perspective, the model implied term structure for Bond-CDS spreads
is upward sloping for investment grade bonds, but may turn flat or even downward sloping
for firms that are close to default.28 However, the observed leverages in our Bond-CDS firm
sample are relatively low, leading to upward-sloping Bond-CDS spreads for all ratings.
One possible explanation, which is outside our model, for the downward sloping Bond-CDS
spreads in the maturity dimension is that CDS spreads at different maturities are affected by
liquidity differently. It is well recognized that CDS contracts are most liquid at the 5-year
horizon when measured by the number of dealers offering quotes. If dealers are mainly selling
CDS protections to regular investors and they possess market power (consistent with the
empirical evidence in Bongaerts, De Jong, and Driessen (2011)), then the premium of 10-year
CDS contracts that are only offered by a small number of dealers tend to be higher than the
price of 5-year CDS contracts with more competitive dealers. This may contribute to the
relatively lower 10-year Bond-CDS spreads.
28
The reason is similar to the inverted term structure of credit spreads for bonds with lower distance-todefault in standard default-driven models. For bonds that are close to default, the bond’s stated maturity
matters little, thus 5-year and 10-year bonds face similar illiquidity. Thus, the illiquidity discount per year
(for its stated maturity) is higher for 5-year bonds, leading to downward sloping curve for Bond-CDS spreads
for risky bonds.

34

4.5.2

Bid-Ask Spread

Our second measure of the non-default component is bid-ask spreads, whose empirical
counterparts are given in Panel B of Table 3. On the model side, again we rely on the
empirical leverage distribution in Compustat of firms across ratings and aggregate states to
calculate our model implied bid-ask spreads. Since the average maturity in TRACE data
is around 8 years, the model implied bid-ask spread is calculated as the weighted average
between the bid-ask spread of a 5-year bond and a 10-year bond.
Our model is able to generate both cross-sectional and state-dependent patterns that
quantitatively match what we observe in the data, especially in normal time. As mentioned
before, we calibrate two state-dependent holding cost parameters (χG and χB ) to match
the bid-ask spread of investment grade bonds over macroeconomic states. Thus, it is less
surprising that we are able to match the state-dependent pattern that bid-ask spreads more
than double when the economy switches from state G to state B. Cross sectionally, in normal
times the average bid-ask spread is 38 bps for superior grade bonds, 50 bps for investment
grade bonds, and 91 bps for junk grade bonds, which are close to the data taken from Edwards,
Harris, and Piwowar (2007). The quantitative matching during recessions is also satisfactory.
Although not reported here, the model-implied bid-ask spread of longer-maturity bonds
is higher than that of shorter-maturity bonds, which is consistent with previous empirical
studies (eg. Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007); Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)).

4.6
4.6.1

Quantitative performance relative to benchmark models
What if the secondary market is perfectly liquid?

Compared to earlier credit risk models that also incorporate macroeconomic risks, such as
Chen, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2009), Bhamra, Kuehn, and Strebulaev (2010), and
Chen (2010), our model adds an illiquid secondary market for corporate bonds. By setting
either the holding cost for type L investors, or the liquidity shock intensity, to zero (i.e., either

35

χs = 0 or ξs = 0), we see what our model calibration implies about default risk and credit
spreads in the absence of liquidity frictions, and thus helps isolate the effects of secondary
market illiquidity.
With the same baseline parameters except χs = 0, we repeat the same procedure as
before (i.e., locate the corresponding cashflow level y that delivers the observed quasi market
leverage for Compustat firms) to generate the implied moments on default probabilities,
credit spreads, and Bond-CDS spreads. The results are reported in the rows “χ = 0” in
Table 2 and Table 3. With χs = 0, the credit spreads become significantly lower, and more
so for higher rated bonds. For highly rated Aaa/Aa firms, in state G the 5-year spread falls
from 72.9 bps to 10.1 bps (compared to the average spread of 55.7 bps in the data), while in
state B it falls from 99 bps to 12.9 bps (compared to 107 bps in the data). Credit spreads
for low-rated firms also fall, but by less in relative terms.
Further, though not reported in Table 3, setting χs = 0 generates model implied bid-ask
spreads that are identically zero and Bond-CDS spreads that are close to zero.29
Besides the credit spreads, shutting off the secondary market illiquidity lowers modelimplied default probabilities as well. Quantitatively, the reduction for highly rated 5-year
bonds about 20%∼30%, while it is about 17% for speculative grade bonds. This is because
secondary market illiquidity raises the rollover risk for firms, which in turn raises the
probability of default.

4.6.2

What if the holding cost does not depend on distance-to-default?

As emphasized, our paper differs from He and Milbradt (2014) in several dimensions. First,
our model introduces time-varying Markov aggregate states. This work-horse setting in
structural corporate bond pricing models proves to be successful in distinguishing risk-neutral
measures from physical measures. As a result, our quantitative exercise matches the cross29

Bond-CDS spreadsheet are not exactly zero due to the different methods in which we calculate bond
yields and CDS spreads. For instance, for long-term (say 20 years) bonds that are close to default, credit
spreads—which effectively assume that default risk is averaged out over 20 years—tend to be much lower
than CDS spreads.

36

sectional default probabilities and leverage distributions observed in the data, a task that He
and Milbradt (2014) does not perform.
More importantly, in equation (5) we allow the holding costs for bond investors hit
by liquidity shocks to be decreasing in the bonds with lower distance-to-default. This
generalization is important in generating endogenous cross-sectional pattern in bond liquidity
that are close to the data. To illustrate this point, we consider another benchmark following
He and Milbradt (2014) but with Markov aggregate states. More precisely, the alternative
model, labeled by “hcs ,” is the model considered here but with state-dependent holding costs
which no longer depend on the firm’s distance-to-default; recall that our model has holding
costs depend on bond price, i.e., hcs (P ). The calibration takes the same baseline parameters,
but chooses hcs so that the implied bid-ask spreads for investment grade bonds in state
s = G, B match their empirical counterparts, as shown in the row of “hcs ” in Table 3 Panel
B. We then repeat the same leverage-matching procedure as before and report the model
implied moments in the row of “hcs ” in Table 2 and Table 3. Not surprisingly, relative to our
model, the “hcs ” model fails to deliver a sizable cross-sectional differences in bond illiquidity
across different ratings.30

5.

Structural Default-Liquidity Decomposition

Our structural model of corporate bonds features an interaction between default and liquidity
in determining the credit spreads of corporate bonds. This default-liquidity interaction is
manifested in a lower default probability in the absence of liquidity frictions (the rows “χ = 0”
in Table 2). Put differently, one needs to take into account the interactions between default
risk and liquidity risk for a precise default-liquidity decomposition of credit spreads.
30

Qualitatively, the endogenous default-illiquidity relation does not rely on the assumption of holding costs
being decreasing in the firm’s distance-to-default. As emphasized by He and Milbradt (2014) with constant
holding cost, an endogenous default-illiquidity loop arises as long as bond investors face a worse liquidity in
the post-default secondary bond market. In the calibration considered in He and Milbradt (2014), there is a
reasonable cross-sectional difference despite a constant holding cost. Our results shown in Table 2 and Table 3
indicate the importance of matching default probabilities and leverage distributions in quantitative exercises.

37

It has been common practice in the empirical literature to decompose credit spreads into
liquidity and default components in an additive way, such as in Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis
(2005). From the perspective of our model, this “intuitively appealing” decomposition tends
to over-simplify the role of liquidity in determining the credit spread. More importantly,
the additive structure often leads to a somewhat misguided interpretation that liquidity or
default is the cause of the corresponding component, and each component would be the
resulting credit spread if we were to shut down the other channel.
Which decomposition one uses has important implications for considering policy related
questions. For instance, as our proposed decomposition will highlight, part of the default
risk comes from the illiquid secondary market. Thus, when policy makers are considering
providing liquidity to the market, besides the direct effect on the credit spread by improving
liquidity, they should account for the indirect effect in lowering the default risk via the rollover
channel. The traditional perspective often overlooks this indirect effect, a quantitatively
important effect according to our study as we show below.

5.1

Decomposition Scheme

We propose a structural decomposition that nests the additive default-liquidity decomposition
common in the literature. Specifically, we further decompose the default part into a puredefault and a liquidity-driven-default parts, and similarly decompose the liquidity part into a
pure-liquidity and a default-driven-liquidity parts:
Default Component csˆ DEF Liquidity Componentcsˆ LIQ
z
}|
{
z
}|
{
cs
ˆ = cs
ˆ pureDEF + cs
ˆ LIQ→DEF + cs
ˆ pureLIQ + cs
ˆ DEF →LIQ

(18)

This way, we separate causes from consequences, and emphasize that lower liquidity (higher
default) risk can lead to a rise in the credit spread via the default (liquidity) channel.
Recognizing and further quantifying this endogenous interaction between liquidity and default
is important in evaluating the economic consequence of policies that are either improving

38

market liquidity (e.g., Term Auction Facilities or discount window loans) or alleviating default
issues (e.g, direct bailouts). This decomposition has been proposed in He and Milbradt (2014),
but we believe the quantitative implication is more trustworthy given the more advanced
calibration methodology in our paper.
Let us start by considering the default component. Imagine a hypothetical investor who
is not subject to liquidity frictions and consider the spread that this investor demands over
the risk-free rate. The resulting spread, denoted by cs
ˆ DEF , only prices the default event
s
given the unchanged default threshold ydef
, in line with Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005)

who use information from the relatively liquid CDS market to back out the default premium.
s
Importantly, the default boundaries ydef
’s in calculating cs
ˆ DEF are the ones that arise out of

solving the model with liquidity frictions in equation (13).31
In contrast, we define the “Pure-Default” component cs
ˆ pureDEF as the spread implied by
the benchmark Leland model without secondary market liquidity frictions at all (e.g., setting
ξs = 0 or χs = 0). Because the liquidity of the bond market leads to less rollover losses, equity
Leland,s
Leland,s
s
holders default less often, i.e., ydef
< ydef
, where ydef
denotes the endogenous default

boundaries in the absence of secondary market illiquidity. The distinction between default
boundaries implies a smaller pure-default component cs
ˆ pureDEF than the default component
cs
ˆ DEF . The difference cs
ˆ DEF − cs
ˆ pureDEF gives the “Liquidity-Driven Default” component,
which quantifies the effect that the illiquidity of secondary bond markets makes default more
likely.
Next, let us consider the liquidity side. The liquidity component, in line with Longstaff,
Mithal, and Neis (2005), is defined as cs
ˆ LIQ ≡ cs
ˆ − cs
ˆ DEF . That is to say, the liquidity
component is the difference between the total credit spread cs
b implied by our model, and
that required by a hypothetical investor without liquidity frictions, i.e., the spread cs
ˆ DEF .
Following a similar treatment to the default component, we further decompose cs
ˆ LIQ into
a “Pure-Liquidity” component and a “Default-driven Liquidity” component. Let cs
ˆ pureLIQ
31

Hypothetically, this is the situation where all other bond investors are still facing liquidity frictions as
modeled. Hence, the equity holders’ default decision is not affected.

39

be the spread of a bond that is subject to liquidity frictions as in Duffie, Gârleanu, and
Pedersen (2005) but does not feature any default risk; this is the spread implied by our
model as P s = p in equation (5) so that the bond price never drops (hence default free).
The residual cs
ˆ LIQ − cs
ˆ pureLIQ is what we term the default-driven liquidity part of our credit
spread. Economically, when distance-to-default falls, lower bond prices give rise to a higher
holding cost, which contributes to the default-driven liquidity part.

5.2
5.2.1

Default-Liquidity Decomposition
Level of credit spreads

We perform the above default-liquidity decomposition for 5-year bonds. We follow the same
procedure as in Section 4.4.1, i.e., first identify the cash-flow state at the firm-quarter level
based on empirical leverage observed in Compustat, then aggregate them over firms and
quarters.
The decomposition results for each aggregate state are presented in Panel A of Table 4,
and graphically in Panel A and B of Figure 4. For each component, we report its absolute
level in bps, as well as the percentage contribution to the credit spread. In unreported results,
we find that the decomposition results are largely unchanged when we vary the calibrated
values of χs .
As expected, the “pure default” component not only increases during recessions, but also
rises for lower rated bonds. The fraction of credit spreads that can be explained by the
“pure default” component starts from only 13% for Aaa/Aa rated bonds, and monotonically
increases to about 50% for Ba rated bonds. Not surprisingly, the “pure liquidity” component
is higher in state B (61 bps) than state G (46 bps), but mechanically does not vary across
ratings as χs is fixed within state. This is because the “pure liquidity” component captures
the liquidity premium for a security whose holding cost is independent of ratings but higher
in state B.
The remainder of the observed credit spreads, which is around 25%∼40% depending on
40

Figure 4: Structural Liquidity-Default Decomposition for 5-Year Bonds Across
Ratings. Graphical illustrations based on the data reported in Table 4. For detailed
explanations see Table 4.
Panel A. State G

Ba
341 bps

Pure Default

Baa
170 bps

AaaAa
72.9 bps

Liq-driven Default

A
103 bps

Pure Liq

Default-driven Liq

Panel B. State B

Ba
459 bps

Pure Default

Baa
243 bps
Liq-driven Default
A
148 bps

Pure Liq

AaaAa
99 bps
Default-driven Liq

Panel C. Changes from state G to B
Ba
118 bps

Pure Default

Baa
73.5 bps

Liq-driven Default
Pure Liq

A
45 bps
AaaAa
26.2 bps

Default-driven Liq

41

the rating, can be attributed to the novel interaction terms, either “liquidity-driven default”
or “default-driven liquidity.” The “liquidity-driven default” part captures how corporate
endogenous default decisions are affected by secondary market liquidity frictions via the
rollover channel, which is quantitatively small for the highest rating firms (about 4% for
Aaa/Aa rated bonds). As expected, its quantitative importance rises for low rating bonds:
for Ba rated bonds, the liquidity-driven default accounts for about 13% of observed credit
spreads.
The second interaction term, i.e., the “default-driven liquidity” component, captures how
secondary market liquidity endogenously worsens when a bond is closer to default. Given
a more illiquid secondary market for defaulted bonds, a lower distance-to-default leads to
a worse secondary market liquidity because of the increased holding cost in (5). Different
from “liquidity-driven default,” the “default-driven liquidity” component is significant across
all ratings: it accounts for about 20∼27% of the credit spread when we move from Aaa/Aa
ratings to Ba ratings.

Comparison to Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) How do our decomposition results
compare to those documented in Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005)? Based on CDS spreads
and a structural model, Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) estimate that for 5-year Aaa/Aa
rated bonds, the default component is about 51% of their credit spreads. For lower ratings,
they report 56% for A, 71% for Baa, and 83% for Ba.
Overall, our decomposition in Table 4 gives a much lower default component compared to
Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005). More specifically, by adding up the “pure-default” and
“liquidity-driven default” components, we have a default component of about 17% for Aaa/Aa
rated bonds, 33% for A, 50% for Baa, and 64% for Ba. This discrepancy is mostly due to
the fact that we have a much lower empirical ratio between CDS spread and credit spreads,
especially for investment grade bonds. More specifically, in our sample, Table 2 and Table 3
imply that the ratio between CDS spread to credit spread is only about 51% for 5-year Baa
rated bonds, a much lower number compared to 74% reported in Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis

42

(2005).32 A lower targeted CDS spread implies a smaller default component, which leads to a
calibrated model with a relatively higher liquidity component.

5.2.2

The change of credit spreads over aggregate states

This subsection addresses a long-standing question that has interested empirical researchers,
e.g., Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) and Friewald, Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam (2012): How much of the soaring credit spread when the economy switches from
boom to recession is due to increased credit risk, and how much is due to worsened secondary
market liquidity? Our default-liquidity decomposition in (18) acknowledges that both liquidity
and default risks for corporate bonds are endogenous and may affect each other. Given
this feature, structural answers that rely on well-accepted economic structures are more
appropriate than the reduced-form approaches.
We take the difference of credit spreads across two aggregate states for each rating class;
results are reported in Panel B of Table 4 and graphically in Panel C of Figure 3. We observe
that increased default risks constitute a large fraction of the jump in credit spreads. The
pure liquidity component is also quantitatively significant in explaining the rise of credit
spreads: even for Ba rated bonds, about 13% of the rise when entering recessions is due to
the lower secondary market illiquidity in state B.
When the economy encounters a recession, the higher default risk lowers secondary market
liquidity further, giving rise to a greater “default-driven liquidity” part. Since worse liquidity
in state B also pushes firms to default earlier, bond spreads rise because of a larger “liquiditydriven default” part. For low rated (say Ba) bonds, the “default-driven liquidity” channel
(45%) is more important than that of “liquidity-driven default” (10%).
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]
32

In Longstaff, Mithal, and Neis (2005) whose sample period is from March 2001 to October 2002, the
CDS spreads for Aaa/Aa rated bonds are about 59% of their corresponding credit spreads; 60% for A, 74%
for Baa, and 87% for Ba. In our data with a much longer sample period, these moments are 63% for Aaa/Aa,
52% for A, 51% for Baa, and 68% for B.

43

5.2.3

Default-liquidity decomposition in time-series

Finally, we apply the default-liquidity decomposition scheme in Section 5.1 to the time series
of credit spreads. For a given credit rating, we use the observed leverage distribution for firms
within this rating each quarter to compute the average credit spread and its four components
in equation (18). We treat the NBER expansions and recessions as states G and B in our
model, respectively. One caveat of this assumption is that the model treats the severity of
the 2001 recession and the 2008-09 recession as the same (we have excluded 2008Q4 and
2009Q1 in this study so far), even though the latter was arguably more severe in reality.
Figure 5 plots the time-series decomposition of credit spreads for Baa and B-rated bonds.
To highlight the relative importance of the two interaction terms, in the left panels we plot
the pure default spreads together with the liquidity-driven default spreads, while in the right
panels we plot the pure liquidity spreads and the default-driven liquidity spreads.
The four components of the credit spreads are driven by both the time series variation in
the leverage distribution and the aggregate state. Relative to Table 4, Figure 5 illustrates
the time series variation in the cross-sectional leverage distribution.
Let us first consider the default components. For both the Baa-rated and B-rated firms,
the liquidity-driven default spreads have meaningful magnitudes, but they are significantly
smaller than the pure default spreads. Not surprisingly, both default components rise in
the two recessions in the sample. The model predicts that the pure default spread for Baa
spreads is lower in 2008-09 than in 2001. In reality, the fact that the 2008-09 recession was
more severe than the 2001 recession (especially the financial crisis period from late 2008 to
early 2009, which is marked in dark grey in the plots) drives the credit spreads higher in the
2008-09 recession.
Moving on to liquidity components, we observe that by definition the pure liquidity
parts only depend on the aggregate state and are identical across ratings. In contrast, the
default-driven liquidity spreads show significant variation over time and across ratings. For
Baa-rated bonds, the default-driven liquidity spreads have similar magnitude as the pure

44

Figure 5: Time-series Structural Decomposition of Credit Spreads for Baa and
B-rated Firms. For each firm-quarter observation, we locate the corresponding cashflow
level y that delivers the observed quasi market leverage in Compustat (excluding financial
and utility firms) and perform the structural liquidity-default decomposition for a 5-year
bond following the procedure discussed in Section 4.4.1. For a given credit rating (Baa or B),
we average across firms to obtain liquidity-default components for each quarter from 1994 to
2012. Recessions are highlighted in grey area. For completeness, we also calculate the model
implied decomposition results for the crisis period from 2008Q4 to 2009Q1 in dark grey area
(which is excluded from our study).
Panel A. Baa-rating

Panel B. Baa-rating

150

120

basis points

pure default
liq-driven default

pure liquidity
def-driven liquidity

100

100

80
60

50

40
20

0

95Q1

00Q1

05Q1

0

10Q1

95Q1

basis points

Panel C. B-rating
300

500

250

400

200

300

150

200

100

100

50
95Q1

00Q1

05Q1

05Q1

10Q1

Panel D. B-rating

600

0

00Q1

0

10Q1

95Q1

00Q1

05Q1

10Q1

liquidity spreads on average, but the interaction term accounts for a larger fraction of the
liquidity spreads in recessions. For B-rated bonds, the default-driven liquidity spreads account
for the majority of the liquidity spreads, especially in recessions.

45

5.3
5.3.1

Applications
Implications on Evaluating Liquidity Provision Policy

Our decomposition and its quantitative results are informative for evaluating the effect of
policies that target lowering the borrowing cost of corporations in recession by injecting
liquidity into the secondary market. As argued before, a full analysis of the effectiveness of
such a policy must take account of how firms’ default policies respond to liquidity conditions
and how liquidity conditions respond to the default risks. These endogenous forces are what
our model is aiming to capture.
Suppose that the government is committed to launching certain liquidity enhancing
programs (e.g., Term Auction Facilities or discount window loans) whenever the economy falls
into a recession, envisioning that the improved funding environment for financial intermediaries
alleviates the worsening liquidity in the secondary bond market. Suppose that the policy is
effective in making the secondary market in state B as liquid as that of state G in terms of
the characteristic liquidity parameters. More precisely, the policy helps increase the meeting
intensity between L investors and dealers in state B, so that λB rises from 20 to λG = 50;
and reduce the state B holding cost parameter χB from 0.17 to χG = 0.12.
In Table 5 we take the same cash flow distribution for each rating class and aggregate
state as in Table 4, and calculate the credit spreads with and without the state-B liquidity
provision policy on this fixed cash flow distribution. We find that a state-B liquidity provision
policy lowers state-B credit spreads by about 40 (112) bps for Aaa/Aa (Ba) rated bonds,
which is about 67% (32%) of the corresponding credit spreads. Moreover, given the dynamic
nature of our model, the state-B-only liquidity provision affects firms’ borrowing costs in
state G: the state-G credit spreads for Aaa/Aa (Ba) rated bonds go down by 18 (46) bps, or
about 33% (16%) of the corresponding credit spreads.
Our structural decomposition further allows us to investigate the underlying driving
force for the effectiveness of this liquidity provision policy. By definition, the “pure default”
component remains unchanged given any policy that only affects the secondary market
46

liquidity.33 In Table 5, we observe that the pure-liquidity component accounts for above 56%
(63%) of the drop in spread for Aaa/Aa rated bonds in state G (state B). However, the
quantitative importance of the pure-liquidity component goes down significantly when we
walk down the rating spectrum: for Ba rated bonds, it only accounts for about 22% of the
decrease in the credit spread.
The market-wide liquidity provision not only reduces investors’ required compensation for
bearing liquidity risk, but also alleviates some default risk faced by bond investors. A better
functioning financial market helps mitigate a firm’s rollover risk and thus relaxes its default
risk—this force is captured by the “liquidity-driven default” part. This is an quantitatively
important channel: it accounts for around 30% of credit spread change in Aaa/Aa rated
bonds, and goes up to 62% for lower Ba rated bonds.
Given that the hypothetical policy was limited to only improving secondary market
liquidity, the channel of “default-driven liquidity” is more intriguing, which only exists in our
model with endogenous liquidity featuring a positive feedback loop between corporate default
and secondary market liquidity. Not surprisingly, the contribution through “default-driven
liquidity” is smaller but not negligible. This interaction component can be quantitatively
significant at about 10%∼17% for risky bonds.
[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]

5.3.2

Implications on accounting recognitions of credit-related losses

The interaction between liquidity and default as documented above has important implications
for the ongoing debate regarding how accounting standards should recognize credit losses on
financial assets. The interesting interplay between liquidity and default and their respective
accounting recognitions has been illustrated in the collapse of Asset-Backed-Securities market
during the second half of 2007. As Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013) document, because
market participants are forward-looking, the liquidity problems (i.e., these conduits cannot
33

The “pure default” component is defined by Leland and Toft (1996) which is independent of the secondary
market liquidity.

47

roll over their short-term financing) occur before the actual credit-related losses (assets in
the conduit start experiencing default). In a news release by Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB) on 12/20/2013, the FASB Chairman Leslie F. Seidman noted that “the global
financial crisis highlighted the need for improvements in the accounting for credit losses
for loans and other debt instruments held as investment ... the FASB’s proposed model
would require more timely recognition of expected credit losses.” However, there is no
mentioning of the “liquidity” of these debt instrument at all. Our model not only suggests
that (il)liquidity can affect the credit losses for these debt instruments, but more importantly
offers a framework on how to evaluate the expected credit losses while taking into account
the liquidity information.

6.

Concluding Remarks

We build an over-the-counter search friction into a structural model of corporate bonds. In the
model, firms default decisions interact with time varying macroeconomic and secondary market
liquidity conditions. We calibrate the model to historical moments of default probability,
bond yields and empirical measures of liquidity. The model is able to match the conditional
observed credit spreads for corporate bonds across different rating classes and aggregate
states, as well as various measures of non-default component studied in the previous literature.
We propose a structural decomposition that captures the interaction of liquidity and default
risks of corporate bonds over the business cycle and use this framework to evaluate the effects
of liquidity provision policies during recessions. Our results identify quantitatively important
economic forces that were previously overlooked in empirical researches on corporate bonds.
To focus on the interaction of liquidity and default, our model is cast in a partial
equilibrium. Nevertheless, we believe these interactions have profound macroeconomic real
impact, and the recent progress of general equilibrium models with credit risk (e.g., Gomes
and Schmid (2010)) is the path for future research.

48

References
Acharya, V. V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez, 2013, “Securitization without risk transfer,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 515–536.
Bai, J., and P. Collin-Dufresne, 2012, “The CDS-Bond Basis During the Financial Crisis of
2007-2009,” Working Paper.
Bao, J., J. Pan, and J. Wang, 2011, “The illiquidity of corporate bonds,” The Journal of
Finance, 66, 911–946.
Berk, J., and R. Green, 2004, “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational Markets,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1269–1295.
Bhamra, H., L. Kuehn, and I. Strebulaev, 2010, “The levered equity risk premium and credit
spreads: A unified framework,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 645–703.
BIS, 2010, The role of margin requirements and haircuts in procyclicality, Bank for International Settlements.
Bongaerts, D., F. De Jong, and J. Driessen, 2011, “Derivative pricing with liquidity risk:
Theory and evidence from the credit default swap market,” Journal of Finance, 66, 203–240.
Chen, H., 2010, “Macroeconomic conditions and the puzzles of credit spreads and capital
structure,” The Journal of Finance, 65, 2171–2212.
Chen, H., Y. Xu, and J. Yang, 2012, “Systematic Risk, Debt Maturity, and the Term Structure
of Credit Spreads,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chen, L., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. S. Goldstein, 2009, “On the Relation Between the
Credit Spread Puzzle and the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Review of Financial Studies, 22,
3367–3409.
Cheng, I., and K. Milbradt, 2012, “The Hazards of Debt: Rollover Freezes, Incentives, and
Bailouts,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1070–1110.
49

Collin-Dufresne, P., R. S. Goldstein, and S. J. Martin, 2001, “The Determinants of Credit
Spread Changes,” Journal of Finance, 56, 2177–2207.
David, A., 2008, “Inflation uncertainty, asset valuations, and the credit spreads puzzle,”
Review of Financial Studies, 21, 2487–2534.
Dick-Nielsen, J., 2009, “Liquidity Biases in TRACE,” Journal of Fixed Income, 19, 43–55.
Dick-Nielsen, J., P. Feldhütter, and D. Lando, 2012, “Corporate bond liquidity before and
after the onset of the subprime crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 103, 471–492.
Duffie, D., 1996, “Special Repo Rates,” Journal of Finance, 51, 493–526.
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. Pedersen, 2005, “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econometrica,
73, 1815–1847.
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen, 2007, “Valuation in Over-the-Counter Markets,”
Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1865–1900.
Duffie, D., and K. J. Singleton, 1999, “Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable Bonds,”
Review of Financial Studies, 12, 687–720.
Edwards, A., L. Harris, and M. Piwowar, 2007, “Corporate bond market transaction costs
and transparency,” The Journal of Finance, 62, 1421–1451.
Feldhütter, P., 2012, “The same bond at different prices: identifying search frictions and
selling pressures,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1155–1206.
Friewald, N., R. Jankowitsch, and M. G. Subrahmanyam, 2012, “Illiquidity or credit deterioration: A study of liquidity in the US corporate bond market during financial crises,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 105, 18–36.
Gârleanu, N., and L. H. Pedersen, 2011, “Margin-Based Asset Pricing and the Law of One
Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 1980–2022.

50

Gilson, S. C., K. John, and L. H. P. Lang, 1990, “Troubled debt restructurings*1: An empirical
study of private reorganization of firms in default,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27,
315–353.
Gomes, J. F., and L. Schmid, 2010, “Equilibrium Credit Spreads and the Macroeconomy,”
working paper.
He, Z., and K. Milbradt, 2014, “Endogenous Liquidity and Defaultable Bonds,” Forthcoming,
Econometrica.
He, Z., and W. Xiong, 2012a, “Dynamic debt runs,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 1799–
1843.
He, Z., and W. Xiong, 2012b, “Rollover risk and credit risk,” The Journal of Finance, 67,
391–430.
Huang, J.-Z., and M. Huang, 2012, “How much of the Corporate-Treasury Yield Spread is
Due to Credit Risk,” Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 2, 153–202.
Ivashina, V., D. C. Smith, and B. Iverson, 2013, “The Ownership and Trading of Debt Claims
in Chapter 11 Restructurings,” Working Paper.
Jankowitsch, R., F. Nagler, and M. G. Subrahmanyam, 2013, “The Determinants of Recovery
Rates in the US Corporate Bond Market,” Working Paper.
Karakas, O., E. Hotchkiss, and P. Feldhutter, 2014, “The Impact of Creditor Control on
Corporate Bond Pricing and Liquidity,” working paper.
Krishnamurthy, A., 2002, “The bond/old-bond spread,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66,
463–506.
Leland, H., 1998, “Agency costs, risk management, and capital structure,” Journal of Finance,
53, 1213–1243.

51

Leland, H., and K. Toft, 1996, “Optimal capital structure, endogenous bankruptcy, and the
term structure of credit spreads,” The Journal of Finance, 51, 987–1019.
Liu, J., F. A. Longstaff, and R. E. Mandell, 2006, “The Market Price of Risk in Interest Rate
Swaps: The Roles of Default and Liquidity Risks,” The Journal of Business, 79, 2337–2360.
Longstaff, F., S. Mithal, and E. Neis, 2005, “Corporate yield spreads: Default risk or liquidity?
New evidence from the credit default swap market,” The Journal of Finance, 60, 2213–2253.
Longstaff, F. A., 2004, “The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,”
The Journal of Business, 77, 511–526.
Oehmke, M., and A. Zawadowski, 2013, “The anatomy of the CDS market,” Working Paper.
Roll, R., 1984, “A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient
market,” Journal of Finance, 39, 1127–39.
Suarez, G., E. Schroth, and L. Taylor, 2014, “Dynamic Debt Runs and Financial Fragility:
Evidence from the 2007 ABCP Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 112, 164–189.

52

Appendix
A

Holding Costs Microfoundation

This section gives the details of the derivation of endogenous holding costs that depend on current
bond value. The derivation also applies to other assets that are traded on an over-the-counter search
market.
Suppose that investors can only borrow at the riskfree rate r if the loan is collateralized; otherwise
the borrowing rate is r + χ for all uncollateralized amounts. Suppose further that, when an agent is
hit by a liquidity shock, he will need to raise an amount of cash that is large relative to his financial
asset holdings. This assumption implies that the agent will borrow at the uncollateralized rate r + χ
in addition to selling all of his liquid assets.
The agent can reduce the financing cost of uncollateralized borrowing by using the bond as
collateral to raise an amount (1 − h (y)) P (y), where h (y) is the haircut on the collateral and
P (y) = A(y)+B(y)
is the midpoint bond price. Then, the ownership of the bond conveys a marginal
2
value of χ (1 − h (y)) P (y) per unit of time (equaling to the net savings on financing cost) until the
time of sale. At the time of sale, which occurs with intensity λ, on top of the sale proceeds equal
to the bid price B (y), the bond conveys a marginal value of χB(y) per unit of time perpetually,
or χB(y)
in present value. Notice that that there is no haircut on the cash proceeds. Intuitively, a
r
more risky collateral asset will face a larger haircut, which lowers its marginal value for an investor
hit by liquidity shocks. This is the channel that generates the relative holding cost in our model.
We can now characterize value of the bond in terms of the utility of an investor, which can be
different from the market value of the bond when the investor’s marginal value of cash is above 1.
rVH (y) = c + LVH (y) + ξHL [VL (y) − VH (y)]

(19)



χB (y)
− VL (y)
rVL (y) = c + χ (1 − h (y)) P (y) + LVL (y) + λ B (y) +
r

(20)

Suppose that with probability β, the investor can make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the dealer, and
with probability (1 − β) the dealer can make the offer the the investor. If the dealer gets to make
the offer, his offering price will be such that B (y) + χB(y)
− VL (y) = 0, or
r
Bd (y) =

r
VL (y) .
r+χ

(21)

The dealer’s outside option is 0, and his valuation of the bond is simply VH (y), the price at which
he can sell the bond on the secondary market to H-type investors. If the investor gets to make the
offer, his offering price will be
Bi (y) = VH (y) .
(22)


Thus, with probability β, a surplus of (1 + χr )VH (y) − VL (y) accrues to the investor, and with
probability (1 − β), zero surplus accrues to the investor. We can also see that cash has a Lagrange
multiplier 1 + χr > 1 in the liquidity state L.

53

Further, the mid-point bond price is
r
VH (y) + (1 − β) VH (y) + β r+χ
VL (y)
A (y) + B (y)
P (y) =
=
=
2
2

Multiply the VL equation (20) by
rBd (y) =

r
r+χ ,



β
β
1−
VH (y) + Bd (y) .
2
2
(23)

we rewrite to get

r
[c + χ (1 − h (y)) P (y)] + LBd (y) + λβ [VH (y) − Bd (y)]
r+χ

(24)

From (20) to (24), we have simply re-expressed the bond valuation in state L from being in utility
terms into dollar terms through the Lagrange multiplier, which allows us to express the effective
holding cost in dollars. Specifically, we can rewrite the flow term in (24) as
χ
r
[c + χ (1 − h (y)) P (y)] = c −
[c − r (1 − h (y)) P (y)],
r+χ
r+χ
|
{z
}
holding cost
where the second term can be interpreted as the holding cost. Under appropriate parameterization,
this holding cost is increasing in the spread for uncollateralized financing χ and the haircut h(y).
While we have left the haircut function h(y) as exogenous, it is intuitive that it should become
larger when the bond becomes more risky, which is when the bond price is lower. Consider the
following functional form,
a0
− a1 .
h (y) =
P (y)
By choosing a0 = (N (r + χ) − c)/r and a1 = χ/r, we obtain the holding cost hc (y) = χ (N − P (y))
as in equation (5).34
Given N = 107, χG = 12%, χB = 17% and other baseline calibrations, we find that modelimplied haircuts range from 10% to 25% depending on ratings. They are broadly consistent with
BIS (2010) which gives a comprehensive survey conducted by the BIS Committee on the Global
Financial System (including both Europe and US) for June 2007 and June 2009. The model implied
haircuts are 9% for Aaa/Aa bonds, 10% for A, 12% for Baa, and 18% for Ba. In BIS (2010), the
average haircuts for non-rated counterparties are 6.7% for Aaa/Aa rated bonds, 12% for Baa, and
23% for high yield bonds.

34

Clearly, we will need to pick the parameter values for N and χ appropriately to keep the haircut between
0 and 1.

54

Table 1: Baseline Parameters used in calibration. Unreported parameters are the
tax rate of π = 0.35, and bond face value p = 100. Panel A reports pre-fixed parameters.
Transition density ζ P , jump risk premium exp(κ), risk price η, risk-free rate r, cash flow
growth µP , primary bond market issuance cost κ, and inverse of debt maturity m are similar
to the literature (e.g., Chen, Xu, and Yang (2012)). Systematic volatility σm is chosen to
match equity volatility. Meeting intensities λs are set so that selling holdings takes one week
(2.5 weeks) in normal (recession) period. The liquidity shock intensity ξB is set to match bond
turnover in Bond-CDS sample in recession, and we set ξG = ξB . Investors’ bargaining power
β is from Feldhütter (2012). State- and type- dependent recovery rates αls ’s are calculated
using existing literature on credit risk models and observed bid-ask spreads of defaulted
bonds. Panel B reports four calibrated parameters. The idiosyncratic volatility σf is chosen
to target the default probability of Baa firms. The holding cost parameters N is set to target
the Baa state-G Bond-CDS spread, and χs ’s are chosen to target the investment grade bid-ask
spreads.
Symbol

Description

State G

State B

Justification / Target

A. Pre-fixed parameters
ζP
exp(κ)
η
r
µP
σm
ω
m
λ
ξ
β
αH
αL

σf
N
χ

Transition density
Jump risk premium
Risk price
Risk free rate
Cash flow growth
Systematic vol
Primary market issuance cost
Average maturity intensity
Meeting intensity
Liquidity shock intensity
Investor’s bargaining power
Recovery rate of H type
Recovery rate of L type

Idiosyncratic vol
Holding cost intercept
Holding cost slope

0.1
2.0
0.165

0.5
0.5
0.255

literature; Section 4.1.1
literature; Section 4.1.1
literature; Section 4.1.1
0.05
historical data; Section 4.1.1
0.045
0.015
literature; Section 4.1.1
0.1
0.11
equity vol; Section 4.1.1
0.01
literature; Section 4.1.1
0.2
literature; Section 4.1.1
50
20
anecdotal evidence; Section 4.1.2
2
turnover in B, Bond-CDS sample; Section 4.1.2
0.05
literature; Section 4.1.2
58.71%
32.56%
literature; Section 4.1.3
57.49%
30.50%
literature; Section 4.1.3
B. Calibrated parameters
0.225
107
0.12

0.17

55

Baa default probability; Section 4.1.1
Baa Bond-CDS spread in G; Section 4.1.2
Investment bid-ask spread; Section 4.1.2

Table 2:

Default probabilities and credit spreads across credit ratings.

Default
probabilities are cumulative default probabilities over 1920-2011 from Moody’s investors service
(2012), and credit spreads are from FISD and TRACE transaction data over 1994-2010. We report
the time series mean, with the standard deviation (reported underneath) being calculated using
Newey-West procedure with 15 lags. The standard deviation of default probabilities are calculated
based on the sample post 1970’s due to data availability issue. On model part, we first calculate the
quasi market leverage for Compustat firms (excluding financial and utility firms) for each rating over
1994-2010 (excluding the crisis quarters 2008Q4 and 2009Q1), then match observed quasi market
leverage by locating the corresponding cash flow level y. We calculate the average of model-implied
credit spreads and Bond-CDS spreads across these firm-quarter observations. This procedure implies
that our model-implied leverages exactly match their empirical counterparts. The row of ”hcs ”
gives the implied moments under the assumption that holding costs depend on aggregate state only
(i.e., not hcs (P ), and we calibrate hcG = 1.78 and hcB = 3.20 to match investment-grade bid-ask
spreads). The row of χ = 0 gives the model implied moments when there is no liquidity frictions
under our baseline parameters.

Maturity = 5 years
Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Maturity = 10 years
Ba

Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Ba

3.4
5.8
4.7
5.2

7.0
10.9
9.3
10.1

19.0
20.0
17.7
18.8

61.2
(4.4)
108
26.5
155

90.2
(6.3)
193
61.1
203

150
(12.8)
305
119
270

303
(22.7)
490
234
390

106
(6.7)
146
29.4
195

159
(13.8)
259
70.0
253

262
(29.3)
409
133
333

454
(44.4)
642
255
466

Panel A. Default probability (%)
data
model
χ=0
hcs

0.7
0.5
0.4
0.4

1.3
1.5
1.0
1.2

3.1
3.7
2.8
3.3

9.8
9.9
8.2
8.9

2.1
2.5
2.0
2.2

Panel B. Credit spreads (bps)
State G
data
model
χ=0
hcs

55.7
(3.7)
72.9
10.1
130

85.7
(6.6)
103
26.5
150

149
(15.5)
170
68.8
196

315
(33.8)
341
194
328
State B

data
model
χ=0
hcs

107
(5.8)
99
12.9
187

171
(10.5)
148
33.8
216

275
(23.9)
243
84.0
277

542
(29.8)
459
221
430

56

Table 3: Bond-CDS spreads and bid-ask spreads across credit ratings. The sample
in Panel A consists of firms with both 5-year and 10-year bonds outstanding over 2005 to 2012. We
report the time series mean (excluding crisis period from October 2008 to March 2009), with the
standard deviation (reported underneath) being calculated using Newey-West procedure with 15
lags. On the model side, we calculate the quasi market leverage for Compustat firms (excluding
financial and utility firms) for each rating classes. We match the observed quasi market leverage by
locating the corresponding cash flow level y, and calculate the time series average of model-implied
credit spreads and Bond-CDS spreads across these firm-quarter observations (excluding the crisis
quarters 2008Q4 and 2009Q1). The row of ”hcs ” gives the implied moments under the assumption
that holding costs depend on aggregate state only (i.e., not hcs (P ), and we calibrate hcG = 1.78
and hcB = 3.20 to match investment-grade bid-ask spreads). The row of χ = 0 gives the model
implied moments when there is no liquidity frictions under our baseline parameters. In Panel B, the
normal time bid-ask spreads are taken from Edwards, Harris, and Piwowar (2007) for median sized
trades. The recession time numbers are normal time numbers multiplied by the ratio of bid-ask
spread implied by Roll’s measure of illiquidity (following Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011)) in recession
time to normal time. The model counterpart is computed for a bond with time to maturity of 8
years, which is the mean time-to-maturity of frequently traded bonds (where we can compute a
Roll (1984) measure) in the TRACE sample.

Panel A. Bond-CDS spreads (bps)
Maturity = 5 years
Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Maturity = 10 years
Ba

Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Ba

23.2
(9.9)
71.7
126

37.2
(6.1)
108
133

58.5
(9.0)
161
135

67.8
(16.1)
201
119

72.2
(3.4)
105
164

104
(6.1)
154
169

162
(22.0)
229
177

191
(36.5)
311
171

State G
data
model
hcs

27.7
(6.6)
55.5
117

44.4
(5.8)
62.1
118

74.6
(8.7)
78.6
119

104
(11.2)
99.6
115
State B

data
model
hcs

76.0
(5.1)
74.5
171

125
(2.1)
90.6
173

182
(18.0)
116
176

227
(39.2)
160
178

Panel B. Bid-Ask spreads (bps)
State G
data
model
hcs

Superior
40
38
46

Investment
50
50
50

State B
Junk
70
91
54
57

Superior
77
104
117

Investment
125
127
122

Junk
218
282
133

Table 4: Structural Liquidity-Default Decomposition for 5-Year Bonds Across
Ratings. For each firm-quarter observation, we locate the corresponding cashflow level y that
delivers the observed quasi market leverage in Compustat. We then perform the structural liquiditydefault decomposition for a 5-year bond following Section 4.4.1, given rating and aggregate state, and
then aggregate over the leverage distribution. Panel A reports the liquidity-default decompositions
for the level of credit spread; panel B reports the liquidity-default decomposition for the change of
credit spread between state G and state B.

Rating

State

Credit
Spread

Default-Liquidity Decomposition
P ure Def

Liq → Def

P ure Liq

Def → Liq

Panel A: Explaining Credit Spread Levels

Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Ba

G (bps)

72.9

9.7

2.8

45.9

14.4

(%)

100

13

4

63

20

B (bps)

99.1

13.8

4.1

61.1

20.1

(%)

100

14

4

62

20

G (bps)

103

25.8

8.9

45.9

22.0

(%)

100

25

9

45

21

B (bps)

148

36.1

12.2

61.1

38.3

(%)

100

24

8

41

26

G (bps)

170

65.5

20.5

45.9

37.9

(%)

100

39

12

27

22

B (bps)

243

86.9

26.7

61.1

68.5

(%)

100

36

11

25

28

G (bps)

341

178

45.3

45.9

71.9

(%)

100

52

13

13

21

B (bps)

459

215

57.5

61

124.7

(%)

100

47

13

13

27

Panel B: Explaining Credit Spread Changes
Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Ba

G → B (bps)

26.2

4.1

1.3

15.2

5.6

(%)

100

16

5

58

22

G → B (bps)

45.0

10.3

3.3

15.2

16.3

(%)

100

23

7

34

36

G → B (bps)

73.5

21.5

6.2

15.2

30.6

(%)

100

29

8

21

42

58

G → B (bps)

118

37.6

12.2

15.2

52.8

(%)

100

32

10

13

45

Table 5: Effect of Liquidity Provision Policy on 5-Year Bonds Across Ratings.
We consider a policy experiment that improves the liquidity environment (χ, λ) in the B
state to be as good as G state. We fix the distribution of cashflow levels y at the values
that deliver the observed market leverage distribution in Compustat (excluding financial
and utility firms) for the corresponding state in our baseline calibration. We then report
the average credit spreads under the policy for both G and B states together with credit
spread without policy. We perform the structural liquidity-default decomposition to examine
the channels that are responsible for the reduced borrowing cost. We report the percentage
contribution of each component to the credit spread change. Note that the pure default
component remains unchanged regardless of policy as it is based on a perfectly liquid world
and only liquidity parameters are influenced by policy.
Contribution of Each Component

Credit Spread (rf)
Rating

Aaa/Aa

A

Baa

Ba

State

G
B
G
B
G
B
G
B

w/o.

w.

LIQ→DEF

pure LIQ

DEF→LIQ

policy

policy

(%)

(%)

(%)

72.9
99.1

54.7
59.2

30
30

56
64

14
6

102.7
148

78.4
92.6

45
46

42
46

13
8

170
243

136.3
166

52
56

30
33

18
11

341
459

295
347

62
67

22
23

16
11

59

