NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEAT OR STRAWBERRIES? INTERMEDIATED TRADE WITH LIMITED CONTRACTING.
Kala Krishna
Lena Sheveleva
Working Paper 20630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20630
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We are grateful to Manolis Galenianos, Nageeb Ali, and Yu Awaya for their comments on an earlier
draft, and to Corinne Jones for research assistance. We are also grateful to participants at the 2012
Conference on Economic Growth and Development at the Indian Statistical Institute, Delhi, for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kala Krishna and Lena Sheveleva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Wheat or Strawberries? Intermediated Trade with Limited Contracting.
Kala Krishna and Lena Sheveleva
NBER Working Paper No. 20630
October 2014, Revised January 2016
JEL No. O12
ABSTRACT
Why do developing countries fail to specialize in products in which they appear to have a comparative
advantage? We propose a model of agricultural trade with intermediation that explains how hold-up
resulting from poor contracting environments can produce such an outcome. We use the model to
explore the role of production subsidies, support prices, easing sanitary and phyto-sanitary (SPS) requirements,
and the creation of local markets in resolving the hold-up problem. The model highlights the importance
of infrastructure in aligning production with comparative advantage and sheds light on the pass-through
of the world price to the producer.
Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu
Lena Sheveleva
Cardiff Business School
Aberconway Building
Colum Dr, Cardiff CF10 3EU
United Kingdom
yas0306@gmail.com

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20630

Wheat or Strawberries? Intermediated Trade with
Limited Contracting. ∗
Kala Krishna
The Pennsylvania State University, CES-Ifo and NBER
Lena Sheveleva
Cardiff University
January 17, 2016

Abstract
Why do developing countries fail to specialize in products in which they appear
to have a comparative advantage? We propose a model of agricultural trade with
intermediation that explains how hold-up resulting from poor contracting environments
can produce such an outcome. We use the model to explore the role of production
subsidies, support prices, easing sanitary and phyto-sanitary (SPS) requirements, and
the creation of local markets in resolving the hold-up problem. The model highlights
the importance of infrastructure in aligning production with comparative advantage
and sheds light on the pass-through of the world price to the producer.

There is a large literature which documents that labor productivity in developing countries is lower than in developed ones, and that this is more so in agriculture than in manufacturing. For example, Caselli (2005) shows that aggregate productivity for countries at
the 90th percentile of income relative to the countries at the 10th percentile is 22, while this
ratio for agriculture is 45.1 Lagakos and Waugh (2013) show that for staples such as maize,
∗

Krishna: Kern Graduate Building, Room 523, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA,
16802, USA, (e-mail:kmk4@psu.edu). Sheveleva: Cardiff Business School, T43, Aberconway Building, Colum
Drive, Cardiff, CF10 3EU, UK(e-mail: yas0306@gmail.com).We are grateful to Manolis Galenianos, Nageeb
Ali, and Yu Awaya for their comments on an earlier draft, and to Corinne Jones for research assistance. We
are also grateful to participants at the 2012 Conference on Economic Growth and Development at the Indian
Statistical Institute, Delhi, for comments
1
Such differences in agricultural productivity could arise from differences in efficiencies conditional on the
set of products made and/or composition effects.

1

rice, and wheat the ratio is 146, 90, and 83 respectively, twice as high as for agriculture
overall. Yet farmers in developing countries persist in producing staples like wheat, corn
or maize, rather than exotic fruits and vegetables that are highly valued in urban areas or
export markets.
We explain why this could occur using a model of agricultural trade with intermediation
and a lack of contract enforcement. Comparative advantage alone is far from sufficient for
the efficient pattern of specialization to take hold. Challenges associated with exporting
agricultural produce range from difficulties in transport and storage of perishables, to difficulties in meeting sanitary and phyto-sanitary requirements (SPS). All of these exacerbate
the problems associated with the poor contracting environments endemic in less developed
economies.
Using our model we identify the conditions ensuring that in the presence of intermediation agricultural producers make production decisions according to comparative advantage.
We explore policies that can align production choices with comparative advantage. Local
markets for perishable agricultural products, price guarantees, production subsidies as well as
infrastructure improvements that reduce transport costs are shown to help align comparative
advantage and production.
The environment in a developing country is very different from that in a developed one.
A number of factors limit the farmer’s ability to transport his strawberries to an urban
or export location by himself: roads are poor, trucks are expensive, and credit markets are
poorly developed. Hence a farmer must rely on intermediaries (traders) to access markets. At
the same time, traders are scarce, irregular in their arrivals, and unreliable in their promises
as contracts are poorly enforced. Though improvements in the contracting environment can
alleviate the challenges of farm-gate trade in a developing country, the required judicial and
political reforms to do this are difficult and time consuming to implement. We therefore take
as given the problematic contracting environment in less developed countries, and build a
simple model that captures essential features of such an environment.
In our setup, farmers have the technology to produce staples, which we call wheat, and
an exotic perishable produce, which we call strawberries. These goods differ along four
dimensions: the farmer’s ability to consume them, the farmer’s efficiency in producing them,
the kind of market in which they are traded, and the degree of perishability. The first
good, wheat, is a storable staple that a farmer can subsist on, and/or which is sold in a
competitive market. The second, strawberries, is a perishable non-staple which is traded
only through intermediaries. Farmers can survive on their wheat if the need arises, while
they cannot survive on strawberries. Not only are strawberries nutritionally inadequate, but
they are perishable, and have to be sold quickly. This gives intermediaries bargaining power
2

when markets are thin, and makes farmers reluctant to grow strawberries, which makes
intermediaries reluctant to enter, resulting in the expected thin markets materializing.
Traders, unlike farmers, have access to a competitive market for strawberries. Entry into
intermediation is free and traders incur a sunk cost at entry. Farmers and traders cannot
contract on price ex-ante and traders arrive at the farm-gate randomly. The trader who
offers the highest price to the farmer gets strawberries. If there is no trader at the farmer’s
door step, he exercises his outside option. The farmers’ outside option could be selling to a
local canning factory, or could be 0 if no such option is available.2
We solve the model and characterize all the possible equilibria as a function of the four
primitive parameters: the farmers’ productivity in strawberries, the world price of strawberries, the farmers’ outside option (reservation price), and the sunk costs of intermediation.
Of particular interest is the region in parameter space with multiple equilibria where the
hold-up problem occurs.
The hold-up occurs because traders cannot credibly promise a worthwhile price to farmers
if they make strawberries. Ex-post, a trader who is the sole buyer has no incentive to pay the
farmer more than his outside option. Anticipating this, the farmer chooses not to produce
strawberries unless he believes that a sufficient number of traders enter to ensure competition
among traders. However, were more farmers to produce strawberries, more traders would
enter and this would make the production of strawberries profitable. So depending on
farmer’s and traders beliefs about one another actions, and the primitive parameters, two
equilibria could occur. In the “good” equilibrium farmers specialize in strawberries, which
they have a comparative advantage in, and there is intermediation. In the “bad” equilibrium,
there is no intermediation and the staple is produced.
Analysis of the model suggests that even if the government is not able to resolve the core
issue, namely the underlying lack of enforceable contracts, there are policies that ensure specialization according to comparative advantage. An export board that provides farmers with
an outside option or a production subsidy for strawberries eliminate the “bad” equilibrium,
with the production subsidy being a more efficient policy than the export board. Agricultural
extension programs and easing of SPS restrictions can also eliminate the “bad”equilibria.
Local markets, where farmers can sell strawberries under competitive conditions, provide
an endogenous outside option. The price of strawberries in the local market depends on their
world price less traders’ cost of accessing it. To access these markets farmers incur a cost
too. The price of strawberries at the local market and the farmer’s cost of accessing it pin
down his outside option at the farm-gate. Hence a sufficient fall in the cost of accessing the
2

Outcomes are unaffected by whether we assume the trader knows how many competitors he faces, or
not, as explained below.

3

local market removes the ”bad” equilibrium. Similarly, agricultural extensions and easing
of the SPS requirements raise the farmer’s pay-off at the local market and can also eliminate
the “bad” equilibria.
Farmers near cities and trading centers are likely to have access to local markets with a
high price for strawberries. In remote locations, on the other hand, farm-gate trade is likely
to be prevalent. Moreover, as farmers in thin markets fear the power of intermediaries, they
may choose not to produce strawberries without local markets that provide enough of an
outside option. This suggests that farmers in remote locations where local markets are hard
to access are less likely to grow strawberries.
Furthermore, the extent of pass-through of the world price into the producer price depends on access to a local market. With local markets, the level of intermediation is independent of export price fluctuations, and the farm-gate price adjusts one for one in response
to world price changes. In contrast, when farmers have limited access to world markets
directly, the level of intermediation itself adjusts so that pass through to the farmer is far
from complete.
In the rest of the introduction we discuss the modelling assumptions we make, provide
anecdotal evidence in support of the model and relate it to the wider literature.

0.1

Motivating the Modelling Assumptions

The model we present in subsequent sections focuses on some essential aspects of agricultural
trade in order to retain tractability. In this section we turn to the existing empirical literature
and case studies to explain our modelling choices.
Intermediaries have been known to play an important role in facilitating agricultural
trade in general and in developing countries in particular. Fafchamps, Gabre-Madhin and
Minten (2005) describe the environment in which agricultural farmers and traders interact in
Africa. They document that there are a large number of small intermediaries who specialize
in buying from producers and selling to wholesale traders or exporters. In our model we
focus on these small itinerant traders.
Fafchamps and Hill (2005) document that farmers face a decision whether to sell at the
farm gate or to travel to the nearest organized market to sell the good. Farmers are less
likely to travel to the local market and more likely to sell to the itinerant trader when the
nearest market is far or the cost of transportation is high. Similarly, Osborne (2005) finds
that in poorer and more remote areas, traders have more market power than in markets that
are located to big trading centers. Consistent with their findings, in our model, farmers in
remote areas sell at the farm-gate at lower prices than farmers close to ports.

4

A number of historical examples of the hold-up issue that we focus on in the paper have
been documented. One such account can be found in Kranton and Swamy (2008). They
argue that the Opium Agency, initiated by the East India Company (EIC) in India, had
a similar problem and recognized it. As the agency was the sole procurer of opium it had
monopsony power, its agents had incentives to behave opportunistically towards farmers.
Such behavior would have resulted in farmers switching to other crops. In order to prevent
this the Opium Agency expended significant resources monitoring their own agents.
The role that cooperatives played in establishing the dairy industry in India, e.g., the
Amul cooperative, is another historical account that supports our model. In India prior to
“Operation Flood,”milk was hard to come by in urban areas. Farmers were reluctant to
produce milk because of the risk of spoilage and the lack of distribution channels. Dairy
cooperatives that took hold in India during “Operation Flood” encouraged production by
giving farmers a “fair” price for their milk. The success of the cooperatives was a key part
of the “white revolution” when India went from being a milk deficient nation in the 1970s
to being the world’s largest milk producer in 2011.3
An important feature of our work is that we do not allow for the possibility of repeated
interactions between farmers and traders. This is justified by the extent of uncertainty
that prevails in developing countries. Weather variability, political uncertainty and disease,
all of which make people focus on the short term so that the future is highly discounted.
Such considerations call for the use of static models that exclude repeated interactions and
relational contracting.
The long term relations and reputational concerns have received a lot of attention in
recent years and have been shown to play an important role in facilitating contracts. Banerjee
and Duflo (2000) focus on the role played by repeated interactions in the software industry
in India. Macchiavello and Morjaria (2012) focus on the role of repeated interactions in
the context of rose exports from Kenya, while McMillan and Woodruff (1999) look at credit
relations between firms in Vietnam. Antras and Foley (2011) show that prepayment for
orders is more common when relational capital is low, i.e., at the start of a relationship.
Greif (2005) uses historical examples to study how contractual problems were resolved among
Magrabi traders. All these are established markets. Here, as in Kranton and Swamy (2008),
we assume there are no relational contracts possible. Our focus is on why certain markets
do not come into being when there is no repeated interaction, rather than on the operation
of established markets.
3

See Delgado, Narrod and Tiongco (2003) for more on how the white revolution occurred in India.

5

0.2

Relation to Existing Work

Our work fits into recent literature on the effect of productivity and trade costs on patterns
of specialization, see Costinot, Donaldson and Smith (2012), Costinot and Donaldson (2012),
Sotelo (2013). However, all of this work abstracts from intermediation and the related frictions that arise. In contrast, we focus on precisely such frictions and explore their interaction
with trade costs in defining (often suboptimal) patterns of specialization.
Our work is related to Antras and Costinot (1993) who introduce intermediation into
a two-good two-country Ricardian framework to analyze the implications of globalization.
They focus on the welfare effects of integration in the goods market versus intermediary
markets, and, in contrast to us, assume that contracts are fully enforced and hold-up is not
possible.
Our model highlights how intermediation in the absence of contracts can lead to a hold-up
problem and multiple equilibria. Other papers that have emphasized multiplicity of equilibria
and explored how policy intervention can be welfare improving include the big push and
unbalanced growth type of stories as in Nurkse (1966), Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), Murphy,
Shleifer and Vishny (1989), and Hirschman (1988). Unlike this literature, we focus on the
contracting imperfections which result in the coordination failures that make farmers choose
to produce low priced staples, despite seemingly more lucrative options being available.
Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) and Hausmann, Hwang and Rodrik (2007) portray development as a process of self discovery. Our model does not rely on the lack of self-knowledge
to explain the shortage of investment in non traditional products. With contractual frictions
farmers know about their options but choose not to avail of them because non traditional
product markets are thin and holdup is likely.
Our paper is also related to a literature that focuses on price transmission in agricultural
trade. Fafchamps and Hill (2008) analyze transmission of the export coffee price to the
Uganda farmer who sells at the farm-gate. They find evidence of incomplete pass-through
from the international price to farm-gate prices. They argue that the cause of this incomplete pass-through is the lack of information about world price movements on the part of
the farmer.4 Our model has no informational frictions and predicts that pass-through is incomplete in remote locations where farmers have no alternatives to farm-gate trade. When
farmers have the option to sell at a local market where price depends on the export price,
the pass-through of the world price into the farm-gate price is complete.
A good deal of attention has been paid recently to the role of infrastructure in facilitating
market access and encouraging development. Casaburi, Glennerster and Suri (2013) provide
4

In addition, Mitra et al. (2013) use an experimental framework to look at the role of information on
prices.

6

evidence that rural road reduce search costs and encourage intermediation. Using a regression
discontinuity framework, they show that the price of the local crop, i.e., rice, falls with the
construction of rural roads. This occurs due to competition from more efficient producers
outside the region. Since in our model the intermediated good is not consumed locally,
road improvements effectively reduce the cost of getting the export good to the market and
increase producer price whether at the farm-gate or the local market.
We proceed as follows. Section 1 lays out the model. Section 2 constructs the equilibrium
when farmers are risk neutral and examines its welfare properties. Section 3 incorporates
a local market where farmers can sell their produce into the model. This is in addition
to matching with a trader at the farm-gate. Section 4 explores various implications of the
model as well as policies to alleviate existing distortions. Section 5 concludes.

1

The Model

The modelling framework builds on Burdett and Mortensen (1998) and Galenianos and
Kircher (2008). The economy consists of a continuum of farmers of measure one and a
continuum of traders whose measure θ is determined endogenously in equilibrium. Farmers
can produce a staple or a perishable good. One unit of labour produces one unit of the
staple and α units of the perishable good. Each farmer is endowed with one unit of labour.
Farmers can either consume the staple or sell it at a fixed price which is normalized to unity.
The perishable good is traded in the competitive world market to which farmers have
no access without intermediaries. The trader buys the good from the farmer at price p and
sells it to the exporter with the objective of maximizing his expected profit π T (p). There
are an infinite number of potential traders who can become actual traders by paying a sunk
entry cost κF . Each trader who pays the sunk cost randomly meets a single farmer, and with
probability Pk he meets k competitors at the farm-gate. The farmer will sell his strawberries
to the trader offering the highest price.
The farmer chooses how much of his one unit of labour to allocate to the production of
the intermediated good l ∈ [0, 1], and how much to the production of the subsistence good
1 − l, to maximize his profit, π F . He produces strawberries if he expects a sufficient number
of intermediaries to enter, making producing it more profitable than producing wheat. The
equilibrium that we will characterize consists of three objects: l, θ, F (p), where F (p) is the
distribution of prices that traders offer upon entry into intermediation. All agents take the
strategies of all other traders and farmers as given, and choose their strategies simultaneously.
The strategies are played and the outcomes are revealed. Since all farmers and traders are
ex-ante identical and of measure zero, their individual actions do not affect the equilibrium
7

outcome.
We assume that the trader decides on the price offer to the farmer before he observes
the number of competitors. Alternatively, one could assume that price offers are made after
seeing the number of competitors. In fact, the expected price at the farm-gate as well
as trader profits are identical under the two assumptions, see Krishna (2009). Thus, the
equilibrium outcomes, such as the level of intermediation and the production decisions of
farmers are also the same in two scenarios. The key difference between the two assumptions
is that the latter produces a more realistic distribution of prices. When traders make the
price offer before observing the exact number of competitors a continuous distribution of
farm-gate prices with the upper bound of the support below the world price arises, which is
consistent with the documented price variations, e.g., see Fafchamps and Hill (2008).
Furthermore, the usual inefficiency in such models also exists here: a farmer may have
no traders matched with him or a trader may lose out to a competitor. Such events involve
waste relative to the operation of frictionless markets.
We begin by assuming that farmers and traders are risk neutral. This causes farmers to
specialize in either the export or the staple good. Adding risk aversion on the side of the
farmers moves the economy away from the corner solution.5

1.1

The Meeting Process

We assume that farmers and traders meet according to a Poisson process. This process arises
naturally when traders arbitrarily meet one out of N farmers producing for export, and is
convenient in modeling coordination frictions that result when there are many small market
participants.
Then, Pk , the probability that a trader who randomly arrives at a farm-gate meets k
rivals can be derived as follows. Let λ = N1 be the probability that a given trader visits this
T
farmer. Then, if T and N go to infinity while their ratio is equal to θ, i.e., θ = N
,

Pk =


T −1 k
θk
λ (1 − λ)T −1−k = e−θ .
k
k!

(1)

It can be shown that the probability that k traders arrive at a farmer’s gate Qk is identical
to Pk , the probability that a trader at the farm-gate meets k rivals.
5

We incorporate risk aversion in an Appendix available on request.

8

1.2

The Trader’s problem

The trader’s problem consists of two parts. For a given level of market intermediation, θ, a
potential trader needs to decide whether to enter the intermediation market or not. Upon
entry he has to decide what price to offer to the farmer he visits. As usual, we need to solve
this backwards. First, consider the problem of optimally choosing the price to post given
the distribution of prices of all other traders.
Let p be the price that the trader offers to the farmer. The most important piece of
information for the trader is the distribution of prices that other traders offer, F (p).6 For
an arbitrary p, the probability that a given trader makes the highest bid in a meeting with
k rivals is given by [F (p)]k7 . The unconditional probability that a trader offering price p is
the highest bidder involves summing over the number of rivals the trader could potentially
meet and is given by
∞
X

k

Pk [F (p)] =

∞
X
k=0

k=0

e−θ

θk
[F (p)]k = e−θ(1−F (p)) .
k!

When αl∗ is the equilibrium output of the intermediated good the trader who wins offering
price p makes (P w − p) αl∗ . Thus, the expected profit of a trader offering price p is
π T (p) = (P w − p) αl∗ e−θ(1−F (p)) .

(2)

Let R be the farmer’s reservation price, i.e., the farmer’s outside option. As mentioned
earlier it could be a price offered by a local canning factory, or it could be 0 if no such option
is available. Let
pmax = P w (1 − e−θ ) + Re−θ .
The following proposition summarizes the properties of the equilibrium:
Proposition 1. In the unique equilibrium, traders mix over the interval [R, pmax ] according
to F (p), where
(
F (p) =

0 for p < R
,
P w −R
1
max
ln(
)
for
R
≤
p
≤
p
w
θ
P −p

(3)

The traders’ expected profits equal (P w − R)αl∗ e−θ .
6

This distribution could arise because each trader charges a different price or each plays a mixed strategy.
How it arises is irrelevant.
7
If p is a random draw from F (p), then the distribution of the maximum of the k random draws, i.e.,
{pi }ki=1 , is given by [F (p)]k .

9

The proof that the distribution is continuous with a compact support on [R, pmax ] is
standard and is relegated to the appendix. Note that if F (p) is an equilibrium distribution,
for any price p in it’s the support the distribution the trader expected profits must be the
same. Evaluated at R, trader profits are
π T (R) = (P w − R) αl∗ e−θ = π T ,

(4)

so that for all p in the support of F (p):
π T (p) = (P w − p) αl∗ e−θ(1−F (p)) = π T .

(5)

This gives F (p) uniquely, see Burdett and Judd (1983). Each trader could charge one price,
with different traders choosing different prices so that F (p) emerges, or each trader could be
mixing over prices according to F (p). 8
The upper bound of the support pmax is a convex combination9 of the world price and the
farmer’s reservation price. As the level of intermediation increases, pmax increases, but as
e−θ < 1 for any value of θ, pmax remains below P w . The farmer’s reservation price, R binds
the value of pmax from below. Trader expected profits given in equation (5) are increasing
in P w , and decreasing in R and θ.
Note that these are exactly the profits of a trader, competing a la Bertrand, who sets
his price after knowing the number of competitors he faces at the farm-gate. If he has no
competitors at the farm-gate, he offers the farmer R, and makes profits of (P w − R)αl∗ . This
event occurs with probability e−θ . Otherwise, competition forces him to raise his price to P w
and he makes zero profits.
Now that we can evaluate the traders’ expected profits prior to entry, we can consider
their entry decision.
Proposition 2. The free entry level of intermediation is
(
θ=

ln( (P

w −R)αl∗

κF

) if l∗ ≥ lmin

0 if l∗ < lmin

where
lmin =

κF
.
α(P w − R)

8

,

(6)

(7)

All that matters to a trader is the probability that his price is the lowest and not the particular price
distributions other firms use which is irrelevant both to the traders best response and to welfare.
2
3
9
To see this note that: eθ = 1 + θ + θ2! + θ3! ... > 1 for any θ > 0 and thus, 0 < e−θ < 1.

10

Proof. Entry of traders will continue until:
π T (p) = κF .
Since profits are the same at every point in the support, we can solve for the level of
intermediation by equating profits at the lower end of the support, R, to the cost of entry,
κF :
(P w − R)αl∗ e−θ = κF .
(8)
Solving for θ gives

θ = ln

(P w − R)αl∗
κF


.

Thus, the equilibrium level of intermediation is increasing in the world price and the output
of the export good. It is decreasing in the sunk cost and the farmer’s reservation price. Note
that θ > 0 if and only if
 w

(P − R)αl∗
ln
> 0,
κF
or
κF
.
(9)
l∗ > lmin =
α(P w − R)

Proposition 2 means that positive levels of intermediation prevail when the output of the
export good, αl∗ , exceeds a minimum level, denoted by αlmin = (P wκF−R) . In other words, if
l∗ > lmin , intermediation occurs. The equilibrium level of intermediation rises with increases
in the world price and decreases in the farmers’ reservation price or the cost of intermediation.

1.3

The Farmer’s Problem

We now describe the problem of a risk neutral farmer. Let Gk (p) = [F (p)]k be the cumulative
density function of the highest price offered when the farmer meets k traders. Each farmer
has a linear utility function defined over the units of the staple good. A farmer who allocates
l units of labor to the intermediated good and 1 − l units to the staple earns a profit
π F (l, p) = (αp − 1) l + 1,
when he receives a price p from a trader for the intermediated good. Since the farmer is risk
neutral he maximizes expected profits, and since he only consumes the numeraire good, his
indirect utility is the same as his income.

11

Let E(p) be the price farmers expect to obtain for the export good at the arm-gate. If
αE(p) − 1 > 0, the farmer will produce only the export good. When evaluating the expected
price, farmers take the level of intermediation θ, the pricing strategy of traders F (·), and
the meeting process {Qk }∞
k=0 as given. Qk has been defined earlier as the probability that k
traders arrive at a farmer’s gate.
Lemma 3. Given the level of intermediation, θ,
the expected price at the farm-gate is given by

E(p) =

∞
X

pZmax

Qk

pdGk (p)

k=0

R

= P w 1 − e−θ (1 + θ) + Re−θ (1 + θ).

(10)

As 0 < e−θ (1 + θ) < 1, the expected price is a convex combination of the world price P w and
the farmer’s reservation price R.10
The direct proof is in the Appendix.
A useful intuition for the expression of the expected price comes from the observation
that in the first-price auction, the expected price is the same whether bids are made before
or after the number of competitors has been observed as discussed above. If at most one
intermediary shows up at the farm-gate, the farmer gets R. This happens with probability
e−θ (1 + θ). If more than one intermediary shows up at the farm-gate the price is bid up to
P w , which happens with probability 1 − e−θ (1 + θ). Hence the expression in equation 10.
The expected producer price increases with the world price P w , and productivity of the
export good α, and decreases with the cost of farm-gate intermediation κF . Changes in α
and κF operate via θ: a higher α and lower κF increase θ, raising the weight on P W . A higher
P w affects the expected price both directly, and through raising the level of intermediation.
A higher value of R, on one hand, increases the farmer’s outside option and therefore the
expected farm-gate price. On the other hand, it decreases the level of intermediation, which
pushes the expected farm-gate price down. The direct effect of an increase in R dominates
and the expected price rises:
∂E(p|θ(l = 1))
= e−θ > 0.
∂R

(11)

A risk neutral farmer allocates labor between production of the export good and the
staple depending on which is more profitable. Hence, the farmers’ labor supply as a function
of the expected price is given by
10 θ

e > 1 + θ so

1
1+θ

> e−θ or 1 > e−θ (1 + θ) .

12



 1 if αE(p) > 1
l(E(p)) =
[0, 1] if αE(p) = 1


0 if αE(p) < 1.
Note that if αR ≥ 1 so is αE(p), and farmers specialize in the export good even if no
intermediaries enter, i.e., θ = 0. When αR < 1 whether farmers specialize in the export
good depends on the prevailing level of intermediation. Define θmin as the minimum level
of intermediation necessary to induce farmers to produce the export good. An increase in θ
raises the expected price as it reduces the weight on R. As θ rises and E(p) exceeds α1 , farmers
specialize in the production of the export good and l(.) = 1. We can write the farmers’ choice
of labor as the best response function to the prevailing level of intermediation:


..1 when αR ≥ 1



 1 for θ > θ
min
l(θ) =

[0, 1] if θ = θmin when αR < 1



 0 for θ < θ .
min

(12)

Formally, θmin is the solution to αE(p) = 1 . It is easy to see that θmin does not depend
on κF and decreases as α , P w or R rise.

1.4

Equilibrium

We first discuss the possible equilibrium configurations in terms of the traders and farmers
best response functions. We then describe the relationship between the primitive parameters
and the equilibrium configurations that they imply.
In equilibrium, each farmer chooses what to produce, and each active trader chooses what
price to offer, so as to maximize their respective profits. All potential traders are indifferent
between becoming active or not, and the decisions of these agents are mutually consistent.
The equilibrium consisting of three objects: θ, F (p), l(θ), is pinned down by equations
(12), (6), and (3). Depending on the values of the primitive parameters there are four
possible equilibrium configurations, all depicted in Figures 1a-1d. Figures 1a and 1b show
the equilibrium outcomes when R < 1/α and farmers specialize in the staple unless there
is enough intermediation. In Figures 1c and 1d, R > 1/α, so that farmers will produce the
intermediated good regardless of the intermediation level.
In Figure 1a there is a unique equilibrium with complete specialization in the staple good.
θmin > θ(1) so that the best response functions l(θ) and θ(l) have only one intersection at
the origin. Even if all farmers make only strawberries, intermediation is not profitable. This

13

occurs when P w and α are low (e.g., agriculture is inefficient) and/or κF , the cost of entry
for traders, is high.
Figure 1b depicts multiple equilibria. The farmers best response function, l(θ), and
traders’ free entry condition, θ(l), intersect three times implying three equilibria. There
are two complete specialization equilibria where farmers produce either strawberries or the
staple, and an equilibrium where farmers are indifferent between producing ether one of the
two goods. When intermediaries enter, αE(P ) > 1, all farmers produce strawberries. If
intermediaries do not enter all farmers produce the staple. When θ = θmin and αE(P ) = 1
farmers are indifferent between making either wheat or strawberries. This last equilibrium
is unstable: small perturbations will move the economy to one of the two stable equilibria.
For this reason in the rest of the paper we focus on the two specialization equilibria.11
When R > α1 , it is profitable to make strawberries even if there are no intermediaries
so l ≡ 1. Figure 1c depicts the situation where the level of intermediation is positive. Figure
1d depicts the case where intermediaries do not enter, and the intermediated good is sold
locally at a fixed price R. This case occurs if intermediation is inherently unprofitable, i.e.,
when the profit margin of a trader who offers R and makes (P w − R)α falls short of the
intermediation cost κF , or
(P w − R)α < κF .
This occurs when R and/or κF is high or α and/or P w are low.
Next we outline the conditions on the primitive parameters that give rise to each of the
equilibrium types. Figure 2 depicts the possible equilibrium outcomes for different values of
the primitive parameters R and κF given α and P w .
When R < α1 and κF is relatively low, whether farmers produce the export good or not
depends on their beliefs about the prevailing level of intermediation. In this case, multiple
equilibria in the sense of Figure 1b are endemic. In Figure 2 we call this region M . When κF
becomes so high that farmers find it unprofitable to enter, none of the export good will be
made. In Figure 2 this region is labeled W for wheat production, which corresponds to the
situation in Figure 1a. The boundary between region M and W is defined by the condition
E(p|θ) = α1 as this is when farmers are indifferent between making the staple or the export
11

While we limit the discussion of the unstable equilibrium it is worth noting that this equilibrium may
involve pure or mixed strategies on the part of the farmer. To see this, note that trader profits are linear
in l, so the fee entry level of intermediation depends on the average output of the export good per farmer.
Let ˆl be the average level of output of strawberries per farmer such that θ(ˆl) = θmin , shown in Figure 1b.
It is easy to see that whether all farmers produce l = ˆl, or a fraction farmers ˆl make strawberries and the
rest make wheat both imply the average output per farmer ˆl. More generally, whatever is the output of the
individual farmer, as long as the average output per farmer is ˆl the the best-response level of intermediation
θ(ˆl) = θmin implies αE(P ) = 1, and farmers are indifferent between making either of the two goods.

14

good.12
When R is above α1 , the farmer’s outside option for strawberries is high enough so that
making strawberries becomes the dominant strategy. When R > P w − καF , intermediation
is unprofitable and no traders enter. Strawberries are sold to the canning factory which
pays R. In Figure 2 this corresponds to the region labeled S − N F for Strawberries and No
Farm-gate Intermediation. Only in the triangular area, labeled S − F for Strawberries and
Farm-gate Intermediation, is there a unique equilibrium where strawberries are produced
and sold to intermediaries. This case is depicted in Figure 1c. The two regions are separated
by the boundary condition for intermediary entry: R = P w − καF .

2

Efficiency Properties of the Equilibrium and Policy
Implications

We now examine the efficiency properties of the equilibrium. Our main result is that efficiency obtains when primitive parameters rule out multiplicity of equilibria. When multiple
equilibria are endemic, only the equilibrium where farmers specialize in the export good is
constrained efficient. In other words, the source of the inefficiency lies in the coordination
failure.
In this section will solve the social planner’s problem and describe the constrained efficient
allocation in detail.

2.1

Constrained Efficient Allocation

A social planner chooses the level of intermediation and the labor that farmers allocate to
the production of the export good to maximize the output subject to the constraint that
traders and farmers meet randomly. This is a standard notion of constrained efficiency in
models with search frictions, see for example Shimer (2005) or Shi (2001).
The planner maximizes the value of output by choosing θP and lP :
h
i

P
P
max P w (1 − e−θ ) + Re−θ αlP − κF θP I[lP > 0] + 1 − lP
lP ,θP

(13)

 w

Recall that θmin is defined implicitly by E(p/θmin ) = α1 and that θ(1) = ln (P κ−R)α
. Using the
F
expression for E(p) from equation (10) gives this boundary as the R and κF such that:


 w



 w

κF
(P − R)α
κF
(P − R)α
1
P w (1 −
)(1
+
ln
))
+
R
(1
+
ln
)= .
w
w
(P − R)α
κF
(P − R)α
κF
α
12

15

where I[lP > 0] is the indicator function taking the value 1 when lP > 0 and 0 otherwise.
For any positive value of lP the socially optimal level of intermediation solves the first
order condition
P
αlP e−θ (P w − R) − κF = 0.
This implies that for any given level of lP the socially optimal level of intermediation is

 P w

αl (P − R)
θ (l ) = max 0, ln
.
κF
P

P

(14)

Notice that this expression coincides with the trader best response function for a given level
of l, indicating that the level of intermediation is not distorted.
Given equation (14), the maximized welfare given in equation (13) is linear in lP so the
social planner will set lP = 0 or to 1. He will assign all farmers to produce the export good
and set l = 1 when
h
i
P
P
P w (1 − e−θ (1) ) + Re−θ (1) α − κF θP (1) ≥ 1.

(15)

The right-hand side of equation (15) corresponds to lP = 0 when only the staple is
produced so that welfare is 1. When lP = 1, welfare is as given in the left-hand side of
equation (15). At first sight this condition looks different from the farmers’ labor optimality
condition
αE(p) > 1.
(16)
However, using equation (14), the social planner’s rule for labor allocation can be shown
to be equivalent to that of the farmers’.13
Thus, the decentralized equilibrium is potentially inefficient only in the region with multiple equilibria, i.e., region M in Figure 2. Here the decentralized allocation could result in
wheat being made, while the social planner would prescribe specialization in strawberries.
The reason for the potential inefficiency is the coordination failure. In the following section we will explore policies that can resolve this coordination failure and ensure that the
decentralized allocation coincides with the constrained efficient one.
13

Consider:


α P w (1 − e−θ (1 + θ)) + Re−θ (1 + θ) α ≥ 1.

It can be rearranged as
 w

P (1 − e−θ ) + Re−θ α − α (P w − R) e−θ θ ≥ 1.
As α (P

w

− R) e

−θ

(17)

can be replaced by κF due to free entry, equation (15) coincides with equation (16).

16

2.2

Eliminating the Coordination Failure

We have shown that the only distortion in the competitive allocation is due to the coordination failure that generates the “bad” equilibrium in region M in Figure 2. The natural
question to ask is how policy can eliminate the bad equilibrium in the region with multiplicity. If we can ensure that it is the dominant strategy for the farmer to produce the export
good, then the bad equilibrium is eliminated and the economy will attain the constrained
efficient allocation. One way to do this is to offer a production subsidy. Another is to offer
a price support as is often done by export boards. We show below both policies can eliminate multiplicity. The production subsidy however, dominates the price support in terms of
welfare, as the later distorts the level of intermediation.
A Production Subsidy
Suppose the economy is in the region M and the government offers a per unit subsidy
slightly above s = α1 − R, say α1 − R + . Then farmers will specialize in the export good no
matter what the level of intermediation is. Even with no traders, farmers’ expected income
from making the export good exceeds that from making the staple: α( α1 − R + ) > 1. Thus,
in Figure 1b, such a subsidy makes l(θ) = 1 independent of θ. Knowing that farmers will
produce the export good, traders will enter, and the bad equilibrium is eliminated.
In other regions the production subsidy is either ineffective or welfare decreasing. In
region W , for example, farmers have a comparative advantage in the staple and specialize in
it. As a result, subsidizing production of strawberries reduces overall welfare. If the economy
is in S − F or S − N F farmers always specialize in strawberries and the production subsidy
will just be a transfer between the government and the farmers with no real effects on the
producer price or production decisions.
Proposition 4. A per unit production subsidy greater than or equal to 1/α−R can eliminate
the inefficient equilibrium and raise welfare if the economy is in region M . It will lower
welfare if the economy is in region W , and have no effect otherwise.
Export Board
What is the effect of an export board that commits to purchase strawberries from the
farmer at price R while it obtains R0 for them? When R rises beyond R0 , the board effectively
offers insurance to farmers who do not meet a trader. This raises the farmers’ reservation
price. Note that by offering an R above α1 , a board can ensure that farmers specialize in
strawberries regardless of the level of intermediation. In region M such an export board
eliminates the multiplicity of equilibria. However, in contrast to a production subsidy, a
17

higher R reduces the level of intermediation. A lower level of intermediation means that
a smaller share of the export good produced reaches the world market. Thus, even if all
farmers make strawberries, welfare is below what it would be with a production subsidy.
Figure 1b can be used to illustrate the effect of an export board in region M . An increase
in R raises the expected price as shown in equation (11). This makes the farmer require a
lower level of intermediation before switching over to strawberries so that θmin moves to the
left. Once R reaches α1 , farmers are willing to make strawberries even without intermediation
so that l(θ) = 1 for all θ, and the coordination failure is eliminated. In addition, at every
l there is less intermediation so that the θ(l) curve shifts up. As a result, the equilibrium
level of intermediation when strawberries are made falls.
Proposition 5. In region M both per unit production subsidy or an export board that sets R
greater than or equal to 1/α can resolve the coordination failure. However, welfare is higher
when the production subsidy is used.
This makes perfect sense as the only distortion in the competitive allocation is the coordination failure. A subsidy to production of more than α1 − R fixes this, leaving intermediation
unaffected, while a price support that eliminates multiplicity reduces intermediation, introducing an additional distortion.
Given that a board’s choice of R has real effects both in terms of eliminating multiplicity
and affecting intermediation, it is worth exploring how welfare changes with its choice of
R. We show that welfare is maximized when the export board sets R exactly equal to
R0 , as long as the export good is produced. In other words, an export board that pays
farmer R while selling the produce at R0 6= R distorts the level of intermediation in the
competitive allocation. This makes the case for boards that act in the farmer’s interests
once the coordination failure is resolved by setting R = R0 .
To see this let R0 be the price that the board receives from selling strawberries, and also
assume that the board uses no resources in its operation. Then welfare is given by
W = α(P W (1 − e−θ ) + R0 e−θ ) − κF θ.

(18)

Note that the share of output that is not sold to the intermediaries is sold at R0 , while
the level of intermediation θ is a function of R, the price set by the export board. Hence, an


∂θ
increase in R affects welfare only via its effect on θ. It reduces revenue by α (P W − R0 )e−θ ∂R

18

∂θ
but also reduces costs by κF ∂R
. The net effect is

∂W
∂R

 ∂θ
α(P W − R0 )e−θ − κF
∂R
 W

P − R0
∂θ
= κF
−1
PW − R
∂R
0
= 0 if R = R ,
=

where we substitute for e−θ from the free entry condition. Thus, welfare is maximized at
R = R0 . An increase in R reduces intermediation and raises the share of the output disposed
of at R0 rather than P w , which has a negative effect on welfare. It also reduces the resources
expended on entry. At R = R0 , these two just wash out.

3

Local Markets

An important aspect of agricultural trade in less developed countries is that farm-gate trade
coexists with organized markets. In this section we introduce local markets where farmers can
sell the export good at a market clearing price, thus endogenizing R. Often such markets
are located in regional centers and serve as a meeting point for exporters/intermediaries
and farmers. Whether such markets are viable depends on the cost of accessing them for
intermediaries and farmers. In the real world such costs are related to the quality of roads
and infrastructure.
Selling at the local market is an option that is always available to farmers: when no
trader shows up at the farm-gate, he can travel to the local market at cost TM and sell the
produce there at the market clearing price P M . TM captures the farmer’s travel and time
costs. Traders who go to the local market pay a sunk cost κM . The price in the local market
is pinned down by the trader’s free-entry condition
α(P w − P M ) = κM .
This condition requires that the profits made by a trader choosing to go to the local market
be just enough to cover the costs of getting there. Thus the price at the local market is
PM = Pw −

κM
.
α

(19)

Traders have a choice between going to the local market or the farm-gate. They can go
to the farm-gate by paying the sunk cost of κF and buy directly from the farmer if matched.
A trader going to the farm-gate understands that the farmer’s reservation price is given by
19

his pay-off from going to the local market, so that R = max{0, P M −
P M from equation (19) gives

TM
}.
α

Substituting for




κM + TM
w
.
R = max 0, P −
α

(20)

Note that the reservation price of the farmer depends only on the sum of the costs of accessing
the local market to the farmer and to the trader, and not their distribution over the two
agents. The higher the total cost of accessing the local market, the lower is the farmer’s
outside option. Once this joint cost of accessing the local market becomes so high that the
farmer’s pay-off to selling at the farm-gate turns negative his reservation price goes to zero.
14
Note also that as there is a continuum of agents, P M and R are not random.
With R given in equation (20) and assuming that l = 1, the level of intermediation is



min{αP w , κM + TM }
θ(l = 1) = max 0, ln
.
κF

(21)

The level of intermediation depends on whether the farmer finds it profitable to access the
M
local markets are not viable and the level if intermediation
local market. When P w ≤ κM +T
α
w
is the same as in the baseline model with R set to 0 so that θ = αP
. Local markets are viable
κF
κM +TM
w
. In this case the level of intermediation does not depend on the world
when P >
α
M
price, and depends only on the total costs of accessing the local market so that θ = κMκ+T
.
F
Note that the expression for the level of intermediation in equation (21) incorporates the
possibility of no intermediation, i.e. θ = 0.
Similarly the expected price at the farm-gate depends on whether the local market is
viable. The expected price in the two scenarios is given by
(
E(p) =

P w − κM α+TF (1 + θ)e−θ = P w − καF (1 + θ) if P w >
M
P w (1 − (1 + θ)e−θ ) if P w ≤ κM +T
α

κM +TM
α

.

(22)

Note that with local markets, the level of intermediation does not depend on the world
price, so that the farm-gate price adjusts one-to-one with the world price.15 Next we proceed
to describe the types of equilibria and their properties in the augmented model.
14
This suggests that the price at the farm-gate is not a linear price of distance but has a has a kink in it
where the regime changes. This seems a testable implication of the model.
15
M
An increase in the world price directly translates into a higher farmer outside option of P W − κMκ+T
,
F
κF
W
and a higher upper bound of the price distribution of pmax = P − α . Note that the lower bound and the
upper bound of the price offer distribution move by the same amount, so that the price offer distributions
shifts to the right but its shape is unchanged.

20

3.1

Equilibrium

An equilibrium consists of the objects: θ, F (p), l(θ) defined previously, P M defined in equation (19), and the farmer’s reservation price R given by equation (20). As in the baseline
model, both multiple and unique equilibria are possible. Figure 3 shows the possible equilibrium types as a function of the primitive parameters κM + TM and κF , for fixed values
of P W and α. The line labeled κM + TM = αP W defines the boundary where the farmer’s
pay-off from going to the local market is 0, so for values of κM + TM greater than αP W we
are back in the baseline setup with R = 0. Below the line, the payoff from going to the local
market pins down the farmer’s reservation price.
In the baseline case producing the export good becomes the dominant strategy for farmers
when R exceeds α1 . With local markets, the analogous condition is that the farmer’s pay-off
at the local market exceeds that of making the staple: αP w − (κM + TM ) > 1. In Figure 3,
the line κM +TM = αP w −1 gives the boundary where the farmer outside option just ensures
specialization in the export good. Below the line, strawberries are produced by all farmers
regardless of the prevailing level of intermediation. Above the line, the pay-off from growing
the staple is higher than the pay-off from selling at the local market. In this region, whether
farmers specialize in the export good or the staple depends on the level of intermediation.
The level of intermediation in turn depends on the ratio between the total cost of accessing
the local market, κM +TM , and the cost of farm-gate intermediation, κF . With access to local
markets, the export good can reach the world market in two ways: via the local market or
through an intermediary at the farm gate. When κM +TM < κF , the technology of farm-gate
intermediation is dominated by the technology of local markets, as the latter both costs less
and provides certain results. Thus, in Figure 3 farm-gate intermediation is not sustainable
below the 450 line. Above the 450 line, whether intermediaries enter and farm-gate trade
exists or not, depends on whether or not farmers make strawberries.
The region labeled S − F L lies below the κM − TM = αP w − 1 line and above the 450
line. In this region farmers make strawberries and intermediaries enter. Here the farmer’s
decision to make strawberries is independent of the the level of intermediation, because the
pay-off at the local market is higher than the payoff from making the staple.
Above the κM − TM = αP w − 1 line, the farmer’s pay-off from selling at the local market
is less than what he would obtain from growing wheat. Thus, the local market option no
longer ensures strawberry production. Whether strawberries are made or not depends on
the level of farm-gate intermediation. In Figure 3 regions M and W lie both above the line
κM − TM = αP w − 1 and above 450 line. In region M multiple equilibria are endemic. As in
the baseline model, in the “good” equilibrium farm-gate trade coexists with local markets,
and in the “bad” equilibrium farmers produce wheat and intermediaries do not enter. In
21

region W only wheat is produced. A higher κF reduces farm-gate intermediation until we
switch to the region W where only wheat is made. The switch occurs when farmers are
indifferent between wheat and strawberries, i.e., αE(p) = 1, with intermediation at the free
entry level. This condition can be rewritten as16
κM + TM = κF e

(

αP w −κF −1
)
κF

.

To summarize, in Figure 3, in region marked W only wheat is made, in region M there
is multiplicity of equilibria. Only strawberries are made in the regions S − F L and S − L.
In the S − F L region where both farm gate intermediation and local markets operate while
in the S − L region only local markets operate.

3.2

International Prices and Domestic Outcomes

In this section we explore the effect of changes in international prices on equilibrium outcomes
and welfare. The model predicts a very different pass through of changes in the world price to
the producer price depending on whether farmers have access to local markets. Proposition 6
summarizes the findings:
Proposition 6. white buffer
(i) Pass-through of world prices is complete when farmers have access to local markets
but is incomplete when they face a fixed outside option.
(ii) With an exogenous outside option, pass-through falls as the outside option rises.
(iii) A higher P w makes production of strawberries more profitable all else given, with or
without local markets. With local markets, having P w > 1+κMα+TM ensures specialization in
strawberries.
(iv) Welfare gains/losses from an increase/decrease in the world price P w are larger in
the presence of local markets.
Here we sketch the proof.
(i) Consider the pass-through of world price P w into the farm-gate price. With farmers
having access to local markets, a rise in the world price has no effect on the level of intermediation. So from equation (22), it is easy to see that the pass-through of changes in P w is
complete as the level of intermediation is unaffected. Intuitively, a rise in P w is accompanied
by the equivalent rise in the (endogenous) reservation price. Thus, traders’ profits remain
the same and the change in the world price is entirely passed into the farm-gate price.
w

M
Substituting for R from equation (20) into θ = ln α(PκF−R) gives θ = ln κMκ+T
. Substituting for these
F
values of R and θ into the expected price given in equation (22) yields the result.

16

22

Without access to local markets, the pass-through is incomplete. In contrast to the
previous case, a higher P w not only increases the farm-gate price directly but also through
greater intermediation. However, the reservation price remains constant at R, and those
farmers who do not meet a trader are not affected by a higher P w . So expected farm-gate
price rises by less than the world price.
More formally, the pass-through is given by differentiating equation (10) with respect to
w
P :
∂E(p|θ(l = 1))
∂E(p) ∂E(p) ∂θ
=
+
w
∂P
∂P w
∂θ ∂P w
−θ
= 1 − e < 1 for θ > 0,
where we take advantage of the fact that

∂θ
∂P w

=

(23)

1
.
P w −R

(ii) From equation (23) the extent of pass-through is equal to the probability of meeting
at least one trader. As R rises intermediation falls, and as intermediation falls so does the
probability of meeting at least one trader. Thus, pass-through is highest when R is zero.
Note that the pass through is also smaller in the short run (where the level of intermediation
is fixed) than in the long run where it adjusts.
An empirical study, Fafchamps and Hill (2008), finds that the pass-through of the changes
in world commodity price to the producer prices is only partial. Our model suggests that
this happens when farmers are in a remote location where local markets are not viable due
to high cost of travel for farmers and traders.
(iii) Figures 4 and 5 show how a higher P w makes production of strawberries more likely
both with and without local markets.
Without local markets, as depicted in Figure 4, a higher P w shifts the boundary condition
for intermediary entry R = P w − καF outward, as shown by the downward sloping dashed line.
The expected farm-gate price also rises, and the locus of points where farmers are indifferent
between wheat and strawberries, i.e., where αE(p) = 1, also shifts to the right. As a result
the regions S − F and M expand at the expense of regions S − N F and W respectively.
With local markets, Figure 5a shows the equilibrium types for a given level of αP w
while Figure 5b shows them after a 50% increase in P w . The line κM + TM = αP w − 1,
where pay-off at the local market just ensures the production of strawberries, and the line
κM + TM = αP w , where the pay-off at the local market hits zero, both shift up. As a result
the regions S − F L and S − L, where farmers always make strawberries expand. The region
M where the coordination failure is endemic now occurs at a higher level of κM + TM .
(iv) Finally, we show that welfare gains from an increase in the world price are higher when
23

farmers have access to local markets. This is because local markets remove the inefficiency
associated with intermediation. Without local markets, the export good produced by the
unmatched farmers is disposed of at R rather than being sold at P w through intermediaries.
In the baseline case, total welfare is given by equation (13). When l = 1 the expression
simplifies to
W = α(P w (1 − e−θ ) + Re−θ ) − κF θ.
(24)
Differentiating equation (24) with respect to P w shows the change in welfare is exactly
equal to the share of output that is sold at the world market:
 ∂θ
∂W
−θ
w
−θ
=
α(1
−
e
)
+
α(P
−
R)e
−
κ
)
F
∂P w
∂P w
= α(1 − e−θ ).

(25)

When farmers have access to a local market each unit of the export good made is sold
at P w . The expenditure on farm-gate intermediation is κF θ. With probability e−θ farmers
do not meet an intermediary at the farm-gate and sell the produce at a local market. The
total expenditure for traders and farmers at the local market is given by (κM + TM )e−θ . So
welfare in the constrained efficient allocation WL when the export good is made is given by
WL = αP w − κF θ − (κM + TM )e−θ .

(26)

In this case θ is independent of P w so a change in welfare is
∂WL
= α.
∂P w

4

(27)

Policy

In our model the interaction of several market frictions can prevent the efficient allocation
of resources. In fact, the economy can end up specializing in the commodity in which it
has a comparative disadvantage. In what follows, we take the existence of these frictions
as given and look at the efficacy of alternative policy instruments and their welfare implications. We consider the effect of reductions of transport costs, as would occur with better
roads or railways, agricultural extension programs, which raise α, and the relaxation of SPS
requirements.

24

4.1

SPS requirements

In the previous section, we discussed how changes in P w , the world price, affect welfare and
equilibrium outcomes. So far we have treated P w as a competitive price determined in the
world market. Here we argue that in developing countries exporters face low effective world
prices due to SPS requirements.
Meeting SPS requirements involves restrictions on agricultural practices. For example,
pesticide residue may be limited to lower levels than permitted domestically. In addition, the
produce has to be inspected. While the fees for SPS inspections may not be large, the risk
associated with failing to pass them can be substantial. For example, Ferrier, Petersen and
Landes (2012) estimates that in the case of Alphonso mangoes from India, the direct costs
of production and SPS inspection fees account for about 30% of the final price. This cost
estimate, however, ignores the risk of failing the SPS inspection, which reduces the effective
price that the exporters face. Roy and Thorat (2008), who focus on exports of grapes from
India, document that failure rates in meeting SPS requirements for new exports are as high
as 80%.
w
In short, we can think of the effective price that exporters face, i.e., PSP
S , as the function
of four things: the probability that the SPS requirements are met in the inspection λ, the
sunk SPS inspection fee ψ, the scrap value of the goods for export if they fail the inspection
w
S, and the price of the good after the SPS inspection has been passed P w . Then PSP
S can
be written as
w
w
PSP
S = P λ − ψ + (1 − λ)S.

(28)

Note, S can be 0 or positive. If the exports are inspected upon arrival, products that do
not meet the SPS requirements are destroyed, so S = 0. If they are inspected and certified in
the country of origin, then S may be positive, suggesting that ensuring SPS requirements are
satisfied domestically increases the effective price of exports. Similarly, policies that reduce
w
λ and ψ increase PSP
S , the effective export price. The effects of policies that ease SPS
requirements are identical to the effects of the lower world price described in the previous
section. Since a higher effective price expands the regions where strawberries are made, our
model suggests that SPS requirements could prove to a significant barrier to exports.
Furthermore, Roy and Thorat (2008) document that SPS inspection failure rates fell to
1% within a year of exporting, suggesting that λ falls as exporters gain experience in meeting
the SPS requirements. To the extent that exporters learn from one another, exporting may
raise λ not just for a particular exporter, but also for other actual or potential exporters.
For example, new exporters could hire knowledgeable workers from experienced exporters

25

as they prepare to enter. For such reasons pioneers may not internalize the benefits of a
lower λ in the future. As a result, even products that are viable in the long run may not
be produced without interventions of some kind. Partnering with multinationals who have
experience in meeting such requirements, providing insurance for early exporters, or direct
government involvement are possible remedies.

4.2

The Role of Agricultural Extension Programs

In many countries, including developed ones, considerable effort is devoted to agricultural
extension programs. These programs are usually directed towards raising productivity in
agriculture by introducing farmers to best practice techniques. In our model, we think of
agricultural extension programs as raising α, the productivity of the farmer in strawberries.
Increasing α can eliminate multiple equilibria and encourage production of the export good.
Whether local markets are viable or not, higher productivity in the export good increases
the farm-gate price, and welfare overall.
In the baseline model, the effect of a higher α is twofold. First, higher productivity raises
welfare directly. Second, it raises the level of intermediation as it increases traders’ expected
profits. In Figure 2 the line R = α1 shifts downward as α increases, and shrinks the M
region where multiple equilibria occur. A higher α also increases the level of intermediation,
especially for low values of R. This rotates the downward sloping line, where intermediation
is just viable, to the right. With a higher α farmers specialize in strawberries at lower farmgate price, which shifts the αE(p) = 1 condition separating the region M and W to the
right. All of these expand the region where strawberries are made.
In the presence of local markets a change in α has the same effect as a change in P w ,
which was discussed in section 3.2. We now turn to the implications of changes in α for
welfare.
Proposition 7. With or without local markets, expected price and welfare increase in α.
The increase is greater in the presence of local markets.
The effect on the farm-gate price is given by
κθ
∂E(p)
= 2 > 0 for θ > 0.
∂α
α
The effect on welfare is given by
∂W
κF
= Pw −
>0
∂α
α
26

(29)

When farmers can access a local market, the effect of a change on the farm-gate price
and welfare are given by
∂EL (p)
−κF (1 + θ)
=
,
(30)
∂α
α2
and
∂WL
= P w,
(31)
∂α
respectively.
The intuition behind the result has to do with the fact that with local markets the entire
output reaches the export market either via farm-gate trade or local markets, while without
local markets only a part does so.

4.3

The Role of Infrastructure

A good deal of attention has been paid recently to the role played by infrastructure in
facilitating market access and encouraging development. Our model suggests that connecting
farmers to local markets, i.e., reducing κM or TM , is more efficacious than connecting farmers
directly to intermediaries, i.e., reducing κF . This is for two reasons. First, reducing κM or
TM by enough eliminates multiplicity, while reducing κF has no such effect as is evident from
Figure 3 . Second, it can be shown that welfare is more responsive to changes in κM and
TM than to changes in κF . This suggests that if local markets are present and the cost of
reducing κM and κF are similar, then reducing κM or TM is the more effective policy.
Proposition 8. Welfare is more responsive to changes in κM than to changes in κF .
Welfare in the absence of local markets is given in equation(18) and welfare with local
markets is given in equation(26). Differentiate each expression with respect to κF to see that
the change in welfare in response to a change in κF is the same both with or without access
to local markets, and is given by
∂WL
∂W
=
= −θ.
∂κF
∂κF

(32)

This is because a change in κF has same effect on the level of intermediation, regardless of
whether farmers have access to a local market or not.
In the presence of local markets, the change in welfare due to a change in κM is given

27

by17
∂WL
= −e−θ ,
∂κM

(33)

and it is clearly larger than the corresponding change in welfare due to a change in κF .
Intuitively, this result follows from the observation that matches at the farm-gate are not
certain while those in the local market are.
Our results are consistent with the recent work on the importance of the lower transport
costs for development as discussed in the introduction. It is important to note, that while
we have treated κF and κM + TM as independent parameters, in reality policies that affect
one are likely to impact the other. For example, improvements to rural roads would reduce
κM + TM as well as κF .

5

Conclusion

In this paper we develop a model of intermediation in the absence of binding contracts and
apply it to a Ricardian setting. This provides a new reason for why developing countries
specialize producing staples despite the availability of what seem to be more lucrative options.
The inability of farmers and traders to contract on price makes farmers subject to hold-up.
The anticipation of such hold-up in turn prevents farmers from exploring seemingly lucrative
options.
A new role for marketing boards and for local markets emerges. Both can provide farmers
an outside option that discourages opportunistic behavior by intermediaries. Local markets
prove to be particularly effective policies in this regard. Their presence also enhances efficiency as the entire output finds its way to the world market despite intermediation frictions.
Conversely, SPS requirements are shown to be particularly damaging as they make the inefficiencies associated with hold-up more likely. A case for intervention arises when there
is learning by doing in meeting SPS requirements that spills over to other producers. Incomplete pass-through of export prices to producers at the farm-gate, a pattern observed
especially in remote areas, emerges naturally in this setting as well.

References
Antras, Pol, and Arnaud Costinot. 1993. “Intermediated Trade.” Quarterly Journal of
17

Also recall as far as facilitating local market access, it makes no difference whether the fall in cost is on
∂WL
L
the part of farmers or traders: only their sum matters so that ∂W
∂κM is the same as ∂TM .

28

Economics, 126(3): 1319–1374.
Antras, Pol, and C Fritz Foley. 2011. “Poultry in Motion: a Study of International Trade
Finance Practices.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2000. “Reputation Effects and the Limits
of Contracting: A Study of the Indian Software Industry.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(3): 989–1017.
Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T Mortensen. 1998. “Wage Differentials, Employer Size,
and Unemployment.” International Economic Review, 257–273.
Burdett, Kenneth, and Kenneth L Judd. 1983. “Equilibrium price dispersion.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 955–969.
Casaburi, Lorenzo, Rachel Glennerster, and Tavneet Suri. 2013. “Rural Roads and
Intermediated Trade: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Sierra Leone.” Available at
SSRN 2161643.
Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-country Income Differences.” Handbook
of Economic Growth, 1: 679–741.
Costinot, Arnaud, and Dave Donaldson. 2012. “Ricardo’s Theory of Comparative Advantage: Old Idea, New Evidence.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2012. “Evolving Comparative
Advantage and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from a
9 Million-Field Partition of the Earth.” Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.
Delgado, Christopher, C Narrod, and M Tiongco. 2003. “Policy, Technical and Environmental Determinants and Implications of the Scaling-up of Livestock Production in
Four Fast-Growing Developing Countries: A Synthesis.” International Food Policy Research Institute.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Ruth Vargas Hill. 2005. “Selling at the Farmgate or Traveling
to Market.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(3): 717–734.
Fafchamps, Marcel, and Ruth Vargas Hill. 2008. “Price Transmission and Trader
Entry in Domestic Commodity Markets.” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
56(4): 729–766.

29

Fafchamps, Marcel, Eleni Gabre-Madhin, and Bart Minten. 2005. “Increasing returns and market efficiency in agricultural trade.” Journal of Development Economics,
78(2): 406–442.
Ferrier, Peyton, Everett Petersen, and Maurice Landes. 2012. Specialty Crop Access
to US Markets: A Case Study of Indian Mangoes. United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service.
Galenianos, Manolis, and Philipp Kircher. 2008. “A model of Money with Multilateral
Matching.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(6): 1054–1066.
Greif, Avner. 2005. “Commitment, Coercion, and Markets: The Nature and Dynamics of
Institutions Supporting Exchange.” In Handbook of New Institutional Economics. 727–786.
Springer.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik. 2003. “Economic Development as Selfdiscovery.” Journal of Development Economics, 72(2): 603–633.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik. 2007. “What you Export
Matters.” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(1): 1–25.
Hirschman, Albert O. 1988. The Strategy of Economic Development. Westview Press
Boulder.
Kranton, Rachel, and Anand V Swamy. 2008. “Contracts, Hold-up, and Exports:
Textiles and Opium in Colonial India.” The American Economic Review, 967–989.
Krishna, Vijay. 2009. Auction Theory. Academic Press.
Lagakos, David, and Michael E Waugh. 2013. “Selection, agriculture, and cross-country
productivity differences.” The American Economic Review, 103(2): 948–980.
Macchiavello, Rocco, and Ameet Morjaria. 2012. “The Value of Relationships: Evidence from a Supply Shock to Kenyan Flower Exports.” Working paper.
McMillan, John, and Christopher Woodruff. 1999. “Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in Vietnam.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(4): 1285–1320.
Mitra, Sandip, Dilip Mookherjee, Maximo Torero, and Sujata Visaria. 2013.
“Asymmetric Information and Middleman Margins: An Experiment with West Bengal
Potato Farmers.”

30

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization
and the Big Push.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(5): 1003–1026.
Nurkse, Ragnar. 1966. “Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries.”
Osborne, Theresa. 2005. “Imperfect Competition in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from
Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics, 76(2): 405–428.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. 1943. “Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and Southeastern Europe.” The Economic Journal, 202–211.
Roy, Devesh, and Amit Thorat. 2008. “Success in High Value Horticultural Export
Markets for the Small Farmers: The Case of Mahagrapes in India.” World Development,
36(10): 1874–1890.
Shimer, R. 2005. “The Assignment of Jobs in an Economy with Coordination Frictions.”
Journal of Political Economy.
Shi, Shouyong. 2001. “Frictional Assignment. I. Efficiency.” Journal of Economic Theory,
98(2): 232–260.
Sotelo, Sebastian. 2013. “Trade Frictions and Agricultural Productivity: Theory and Evidence from Peru.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

31

5.1

Appendix 1

Proof of Proposition 1: First, we show that the support starts at R, has no gaps and
the distribution function is continuous, i.e., the density function has no mass points. Since
no farmer will accept a price below R, the support of F (·) cannot include any such points.
Suppose the support of F (·) starts at p > R. Then a trader who bids a price in the interval


R, p will only win if there are no other traders, i.e., with probability P0 = e−θ . His expected
profit is:
π T (p) = (P w − p)αl∗ e−θ ,
which are decreasing in p. Thus, the trader would be better off charging R, or any price in


R, p than offering p which contradicts the assumption that p is in the support of the mixed
strategy equilibrium.
Next, we establish that there are no gaps or atoms in the support of the distribution.
Let us first rule out gaps in the support of the distribution. Suppose there is a gap
in the support of F (·): no one bids in the interval (p0 , p00 ). If there is no mass point at
00
p00 , then a trader who posts a price p∗ ∈ (p0 , p00 ) will be better off than bidding p , as the
probability of winning does not decrease, but the profit margin rises. Hence, there are no
gaps in the support unless there is a mass point at p00 . Such a mass point would cause a
jump down in profits at prices just below p00 , and validate the gap in support of the posited
price distribution. Can we rule out such atoms at p00 ? Yes, we can. If there is an atom at p00 ,
then bidding p00 + ε causes a discrete jump in trader’s profits as he increases the offer price
only marginally, but this increases his probability of winning discretely.
The same argument rules out atoms at any pb in the interior of the support of the distribution or at R: bidding p = pb + ε causes a discrete jump in trader’s profits as he increases
the offer price only marginally, but this increases his probability of winning discretely. In
equilibrium all prices in the support must yield the same profits, hence such mass points
cannot occur. They cannot even occur at the upper end of the support. As will be confirmed
later, the upper end of the distribution support is given by pmax < P w . If there were a mass
point at pmax , raising p slightly above pmax must raise profits which rules out a mass point
at pmax .
Next we can use the property of the equality of payoffs at every point of the support to
obtain the explicit expression for the cumulative distribution of bids, F (p). Equating the
expected profits at an arbitrary price p and expected profits at the lower end of the support
R , i.e., setting π T (p) = π T (R), we can solve for the bidding function of the trader as a

32

function of world price (P w ), market thickness (θ), and the farmer’s outside option (R):
(P w − p)e−θ(1−F (p)) = (P w − R)e−θ
(P w − R)
e θF (p) =
(P w − p)
1
Pw − R
F (p) =
ln( w
).
θ
P −p
At the upper end of the support the cumulative density function equals unity. Hence
solving
1
Pw − R
max
F (p ) = 1 = ln( w
)
θ
P − pmax
for pmax yields the expression for the upper end of the support:
pmax = P w (1 − e−θ ) + e−θ R.

Proof of Lemma 1:
By definition, the expected value of the price the farmer gets is
∞
X

E(p) =

Qk Ek (p)

(34)

k=0

= Q0 R +
= Q0 R +

∞
X
k=1
∞
X

Z
Qk [

pmax

pgk (p)dp]

(35)

pk[F (p)]k−1 f (p)dp],

(36)

R

Z
Qk [

pmax

R

k=1
k

where Qk = θk! e−θ , Gk (p) = [F (p)]k , gk (p) = k[F (p)]k−1 f (p).
First we obtain the expected price when k traders show up and then take the expectations
over all possible k. The expected price conditional on the number of traders is
pmax

Z
Ek (p) =

pgk (p)dp
R

Z

pmax

= k

pf (p) [F (p)]k−1 dp

R

k
= k
θ

Z

pmax

[ln(
R

P w − R k−1 p
)]
dp for k ≥ 1
Pw − p
Pw − p

33

(37)

We start by solving for the indefinite integral, a key part of Ek (p)
Z
[ln(

P w − R k−1 p
)]
dp.
Pw − p
Pw − p

(38)

w

To do so we change variables. Let x = ln( PP w−R
), so that p in terms of x is p = P w −
−p
e−x (P w − R). and the corresponding differential dp = e−x (P w − R)dx. Using the change of
variables the integral (38) becomes
Pw
− 1]e−x (P w − R)dx
xk−1 [ex w
(P − R)
Z
Z
w
k−1
w
=P
x dx − (P − R) e−x xk−1 dx


Z
k
wx
w
k−1 −x
−x k−2
=P
− (P − R) x e (−1) − (k − 1) (−1)e x dx
k
 k−1

k
x
xk−2
wx
w
−x
=P
+ (P − R)e (k − 1)!
+
+ .. + 1
k
(k − 1)! (k − 2)!
k−1 j
k
X
x
wx
w
−x
=P
+ (P − R)(k − 1)!e [
]
k
j!
j=0
Z

Substituting back to obtain the expression above in terms of p
pZmax

[ln(

P w − R k−1 p
)]
dp = (1) + (2)
Pw − p
Pw − p

R

P w − R k pmax
Pw
[ln( w
)] |R
k
P −p
Pw
Pw − R k Pw
Pw − R k
=
[ln( w
)]
−
[ln(
)]
k
P − pmax
k
Pw − R
Pw
=
[ln(eθ )]k − 0
k
Pw k
=
θ ,
k

(1) =

34

(39)

and
w

P −R j
k−1
P w − p X [ln( P w −p )] pmax
w
(2) = (P − R)(k − 1)! w
[
]|R
P − R j=0
j!
w

−θ

= (k − 1)!{(P − R)e [

k−1
X
[ln(eθ )]j

j!

j=0

w

] − (P − R)[1 −

j=0

|
w

−θ

= (k − 1)!(P − R){e [

k−1 j
X
θ
j=0

w

−θ

= (P − R)(k − 1)!{e

j!

k−1 j
X
θ
j=0

j!

w
k−1
X
)]j
[ln( PP w −R
−R

{z

(P w −R)

] − 1}

− 1)}.

In evaluating the integrals we use the fact that P w − pmax = e−θ (P w − R).

35

j!

]}
}

R<

1
α

l
1

l
1

θ(l)

l(θ)

l(θ)

θ(l)
ˆl
lmin
lmin
0

θmin

0

θ

(a) Unique Equilibrium (W)

θ

θmin

(b) Multiple Equilibria (M)

R≥

1
α

l
lmin
1

l
l(θ)
1

l(θ)

θ(l)

θ(l)
lmin
0

0

θ

(c) Unique Equilibrium (S-F)

(d) UniqueEquilibrium (S-NF)

Figure 1: Types of equilibria.

36

θ

R

S − NF

S−F
1
α

M

W
αP w − 1

κF

Figure 2: Equilibrium Types in the R and κF space for sufficiently high P w and α

κM + TM

αP w
M

W

w

αP − 1
S − FL
S−L
45o
κF

0

Figure 3: Equilibrium Types in the κM + TM and κF space for sufficiently high P w and α

37

R

1.1P W
PW

S−F

1
α

S − NF

M

W
αP W

κF

1.1αP W

Figure 4: The dotted and the shifted blue line describe the new equilibria regions when P w
falls. The M region and the P-I regions shrink.

κM + TM

κM + TM

1.5αP w

1.5αP w
M

W

1.5αP w − 1

αP w
M

W

αP w − 1

S − FL

S−L

S − FL
S−L
45o

45o

κF

0

(a) α, P

κF

0

W

(b) A 50% increase in α or P

W

Figure 5: Effect of a 50% increase in α or a 50% in P w on the equilibria types with local
markets.

38

R
PW

S − NF

S − FL
1
α
1
1.5α

M
αP w − 1

κF

Figure 6: Effect of a 50% increase in α on the equilibrium types without local markets.

39

