                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TRENDS AND DEVIATIONS IN
                 FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL FINANCE




                          Jeffrey S. Zax




                      Working Paper No. 2063




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            November 1986




The project in State and Local Government Finance of the National
Bureau of Economic Research graciously supported the research
presented in this paper. Mary—Margaret Meagher assisted,
indispensably, with the empirical analysis. Harvey Rosen and
Douglas Holtz-Eakin have been generous with constructive comments.
Only I am responsible for the content. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2063
                                            November 1986




     Trends and Deviations in Federal, State and Local Finance




                             ABSTRACT



This paper contains a descriptive analysis of real per capita annual

revenues, expenditures1 deficits, debt levels and capital expenditures

for federal, state and local government finance in the United States for

the years 1952—83. It summarizes each time series as a deterministic

trend and an ARIN characterisation of the deviations around trend.

These summaries demonstrate that civil ian capital outlays are fall ing at

an accelerating pace in all levels of government; federal government

expenditures and debt are expanding at an accelerating rate; local

special districts are also growing   quadratically;   state governments have

a continuing surplus of revenues over expenditures; and local govern-

ments depend upon intergovernmental revenues to maintain balance between

revenues and expenditures while reducing debt. Stochastic persistence

tends to increase at more disaggregate levels of government. Experidi—

tures tend to have longer lags than do revenues.




                                           Jeffrey S. Zax
                                           NBER
                                           269 Mercer Street
                                           8th Floor
                                          New York, NY 10003
                                I. Introduction




This paper contains a descriptive analysis of qovernmeat finance in the

United States for the years 1952—83. It concentrates on three aeneral

aspects of   finance;   annual revenues, expenditures and deficits; annual

debt chanQes; and annual capital expenditures. It discusses each aspect

for federal, aggreaate state and aQgreaate local oovernments. This paper

bases its description on time series data published by the U. S. Census

Bureau1 adjusted to 1972 per capita dollars. It decomposes the time

series representing each aspect of government finance, for each level of

Qovernment, into a deterministic trend and an MRIMA characterisation of

the deviations around trend. It describes these components in terms of

their implications for four issues of public ol icy; fiscal p01

election cycles in government finance, fiscal federalism and 'crises' in

government finance.




   This naper serves several purposes. First, it completes the histori-

cal presentation of government finances begun b Fabricant and Copeland.

While these studies concentrated on constructing consistent raw data for

the first half of this century, this uses statistical techniques to

summarize more recent published statistics.




   Second. it brinQs a new perspective, throuqh these stat istica1 tech-

niques, to issues which have    been addressed elsewhere. For exam1e, Gold
presents a discussion and description of state finances in the 'ears

1949—81. Mills presents a description of recent federai budQets.

Mieszkowski and Stein provide a simple causal anayss o-F .aQgreqate

annual state and local expenditures, in the years 1929—32! thrcuqh

simulation of demand for local public services. Iriman, aoain throuQri

simulation, analyzes chanaes in finance •for forty larQe city overrirnents

between 1970 and 1980. This paper describes concisely the recent history

of finance at all levels of government by extractinQ statistical trends

from aQaregate time—series data.




   Third, it describes stochastic properties of government finance.

Holtz—Eakin describes these properties in detail for a sample of

municipalities. Ths paper presents them in a consistent format for all

levels of government. These properties, as shown by Ashenfelter and

Card, can serve as persuasive tests between alternative theories of

dynamic behavior. Unfortunately, no dynamic theory of government finance

exists. The stochastic results here, like those of Holtz—Eakin, are

dynamic characterizations with which any intertemporal theory of govern-

ment finance should be consistent.




   The descriptions of government finance in this paper reveal several

general observations. State and local governments are trending towards

persistent real per capita surpluses. while the federal government

trends towards persistent deficit. Similarly, real per capita debt 5

trending   downwards in state and local governments, and uowards for the

federal government. Real er capita capital expenditures are trending

downwards at all levels of government, with the exception of capital
outlays for defense. Stochastic persistence of shocks to Qovern(nent

•finance is greater at lower than at higher levels of qovernment.




     These descriptions have several implications. The federal government

can potentially exercise effective fiscal oolic on aQQreaate demand!

because the magnitudes of potential unanticipated shocks to federal

deficits are larae relative to the rnaqn,itudes c'f GNP   deviations   from

trend. Differences between Federal and state revenues and deficits

become significantly more negative in years which precede a presidential

election. Trends in government finance reveal few, if any, tendencies

towards devolution of government responsibilities from federal to state

and local levels, despite persistent support for 'fiscal federalisrn'

from   politicians   of many ideological traditions.




                              ii. Data and Method




The Bureau of the Census collects, through their annual Survey of

Governments and their quinquennial Census of Governments detailed

statistics of government finance. Its publications 1 report the time

series analyzed here; total revenues and expenditures, long—term debt

outstanding and total capital outlays. This paper occasionally discusses

components of these broad measures, taken from the same     sources.




 1
     Citations are in the references at the end of this paper.


                                     —3—
   These series are consistent and complete across time and levels of

government. Their principle de4ect as discussed b Gold and Skaperdas,

is that they do not distinguish between mandatory and discretionary

elements of finance. This is not an important problem For the descrip-

tive presentation in   this   paper. However! some of the most interesting

trends discussed below identify divergences in growth rates across

levels of government. The distinction between mandatory and discretion-

ary changes will be important to analytical work devoted to explaining

these divergences.




   All time series are in real per capita terms. Federal time series are

deflated by the aggregate implicit price deflator br federal purchases

of goods and services. All state and local time series are deflated b
                                                                        2
the aggregate implicit price deflator for state and local purchases.

All data are deflated b U.S. population levels in the appropriate year.




   The 'trends' referred to throughout this paper are OLS regressions of

government finance variables on a constant a trend and a squared trend

term. In the vocabulary of this paper l inear trends' are series for

which the coefficient on the quadratic term is insignificant or negli-

gible. 'Quadratic trends' are series for which the quadratic term is

significant and the linear term is of the same sin4 insignificant! or

negligible of opposite sign. Positive quadratic terms represent ac-

celerating Qrowth! negative terms represent accelerating shrinkage. For

reQressions in which linear and quadratic terms are of opposing sign.



   These deflators are ubl shed in the National Income and Product
   Accounts.


                                      —4—
 years to extrernurir represents the number of Years for which the deriva—

tve of the trend equation with respect to time is euai to zero. The

'deviation time series -for each Qovernrnent finance variable ——   the
residuals -from the trend regression —— are summarized below as

autoregressve—inteorated—rnoving average (AR1M::' models.




                 III. Revenues1 ExDenditures and Deficits




The discussion in this section analyzes federal, aggregate state and

aggregate local expenditures and revenues. Trends -for the federal

government suggest that expenditures are outgrowing revenues at an

accelerating pace. In contrast! state revenues are outgrowing expendi-

tures at an accelerated rate on all but the most general definitions.

Total local revenues, in particular those of special districts, are

outgrowing expenditures at an accelerated rate, but larqeT on the

strength of intergovernmental transfers. Federal government deviations

from trend exhibit the Jeast stochastic persistence, local government

deviations exhibit the most. Expenditure deviations are more persistent

than those of revenues.




                               .   Trends




Tables 1, 2 arid 3 present the trends in Qovernrnent revenues and expendi—


                                   —5—
tures for federal aggrecjate state and aggregate local governments.

respectively. Each table resents results for revenues1 expenditures,

and their difference.   These trend estimates suggest that real oer

capita 'qrowth-' in oovernment is correlated with the level of govern—

rnent. Federal government expenditures and excesses of expenditures over

revenues are growing at quadratic rates. State government expenditures

are growing linearly1 at most1 and are increasinoly exceeded by

revenues. Local government expenditures are growing at decelerating

rates, and are now, or will soon be increasingly exceeded by revenues.




1. Federal Finances




The coefficients in table I yield one general observation with regard to

trends in real cer capita federal finance: the federal government is

growing at an accelerating rate. Federal total revenues and expenditures

have significant positive quadratic terms. The trend difference between

them is also expanding, with expenditures exceeding revenues! at an

accelerating rate.




   The differences referred to in these tables are the algebraic
   differences between revenue and expenditure time series. Positive
   values represent excesses of revenues over exendi tures. negative
    values represent the opoosite relationship. The constant and trend
    coefficients in the difference equations are. by construction1
    identical tothe differences between constants and coefficients in
   the corresponding revenue and expenditure equations. These dif-
   ferences mat' not be consistent with accounting definitions of
    deficits or surpluses.
                                   Table 1.

                           Trend Coefficients in
                          Federal Finance1 1952—83


                                                                            Residual
                                                              Years to      Standard
                     Constant     Trend    Squared
                     ______________________________     R4    Ex trernurn    Error
Total Revenue         880.        3.96        .357     .852
                      (24.1)      (.774) (2.38>
Total Expenditure     901.        —.421      .702      .954         .3        50.2
                      (31.8)      (.106)   (6.03)
Difference            —21.5       4.38      —.345      .645       6.3        54.5
                        (.699)   (1.02)    (2.73)

Difference, Total     —21.8       2.68      —.211      .437      6.4         50.9
  General Revenue       (.760)    (.666)   (1.78)
  and Expenditure

Difference, Direct    —21.6      10.8       —.249      .228     21.7         58.8
  General Revenue       (.650) (2.32>      (1.82:)
  and Expenditure


Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.

                                                                                     -I




     Though these trends fit the totals well, as demonstrated b their R2,

broad categories of federal activity have very different histories. The

total trends depend on strong trends in revenues and expenditures from

federal trust funds (largely the Old Age, Survivors, Disability, and

Health Insurance (OASDHI) trust), and in transfers to lower levels of

government. Quadratic trends for total general revenues and expenditures
——   measures which exclude the trusts     ——   achieve R2's of only .45 and

.79, respectively. Direct general expenditures exclude the large amounts




     Total general revenues and expenditures also exclude utility and
     liquor store transactions. These are much more important for state
     and local governments than for the federal government.


                                    —7—
of federal transfers to lower governments, as well as the trust transac-

tions.         quadratic trend for these expenditures, on federally—provided

services such as national defence, national parks and federal highways,

achieves an R2s of only .38 .




     These comparisons imply that trust funds and intergovernmental trans-

fers may play a distinctive role in the growing excess of total expendi-

ture over total revenues. The trend difference between total general

revenues and expenditures, as given in table 1, is similar to that in

the total difference, but has less explanatory power. The trend dif-

ference between direct general revenues and expenditures has even less

explanatory power, but its coefficients are significant. They estimate

that these revenues have exceeded expenditures for most of the sample

period. However, the excess is shrinking at an accelerating rate. They

also predict that Federal direct general expenditures will begin to

exceed direct general expenditures in the early 1990's.




     In general, trends predict poorly the differences between federal

revenues and expenditures. However, the large federal deficits of 1983!

1984 and 1985 are surprisingly consistent with estimated trends. 6 These
                                                         7
trends underestimate the actual difference in 1983.          Of all the sanrnTe



     Direct! or own—source, general revenues include only a small quan-
     tity of intergovernmental revenues. Their trends are similar to
     those in total general revenues.

     The estimated quadratic trends for the differences between total
     revenues and total expenditures, and between total general revenues
     and total general expenditures, are always and increasingly neQa—
     t i ye.

 7
     1983 s the most recent year n the sampie used here.
years, the absolute prediction error for total and total general dif-

ferences in 1983 is qreatest. However, the relative prediction error is

small, only 34.5< of the actual difference. Furthermore, differences in

more recent years will     probably lie closer to the trends. Real per
capita deficits have fallen, and the trends predict increasingly neaa—
                     8
tive differences.




     Trends in detailed coriiporients   of   federal revenues and expenditures

reveal shifts in federal activity. mong own—source revenues, total
                                                        10
real taxes per capita exhibit no trend at all.               Income taxes have a

linear upward trend significant at 10<. In contrast, revenues from some

current charges are growing at quadratic rates. Interest earnings are

also growing at quadratic rates, but so are interest payments. Trends in

net interest earnings are negative throughout the sample period, and

increasingly so.




  Trends in components of federal expenditures provide even more

dramatic contrasts. Expenditures for administration (general control and

financial administration), 'law and order' <police protection and cor—


 B
     The Economic Report of the President, 1986 reports federal deficits
      in current dollars of $207.8 billion in 1983, $185.3 in 1984, *212.3
     bill ion in 1985. estimated $202.8 bill ion in 1986 and estimated
     $143.6 billion in 1987 (Table B—73). t4ith modest inflation and
     population growth, real per capita deficits in these years would not
     exceed that of 1983.

     The Census Bureau publishes data for detailed federal components
     beginning in 1958. Trend estimates for these series and for all
     series not reported in full are available from the author.
10 R2=.07 for the regression at real taxes per capita on a constant,
     trend and trend squared. The constant in this equation is equal to
     $618, significant at SX.


                                         —9—
rection) and oublic welfare (categorical and other cash assistance, and

other welfare expenditures) all follow trends with significant positive

ouadratic terms. However, expenditures for all forms cf tr.nspartation

( including highways) are fall ing at quadratic rates. Expenditures on

health are either growino linearly (hospitals) or at a decelerating cace

(health and social insurance administration). Expenditures on national

defense and international relations are also growing linearly. Expendi-

tures on eduction, for the most part, have not trended significantly.




2. State Finances




Trends in aggregate state real per capita revenues and expenditures.

presented in table 2, embody distinct contrasts to federal trends. These

trends predict state finances —— again as measured b'     —— much better

than they do federal finances. Generally, they demonstrate that growth

in state governments is entirely linear. The few significant quadratic

trends all indicate decelerating growth in expenditures and acceler-at—

ing excesses of revenues over expenditures.




   Specifically3 the difference between total state revenues and total

state expenditures is negi igble, and displays no trend. Neglecting

insurance trusts, utilities and liquor stores, the trend difference

between total general revenue and total general expenditures has been

increasingly positive since approximately 1976. the eighteenth 'ear of




                                 — 10 —
                                      Table 2.

                              Trend Coefficients in
                              State Finance 1952—83


                                                                                  Re; dual
                                                     Trend            Years to    Standard
                        Constant     Trend          Sciuared          Extremurn    Er r or
Difference, Total          2.92      —.140            .0500    .476      1.4        15.9
  Revenue and              (.324)    (.111>         (1.35)
  Expendi ture

Total General            201.        9.55             .0723    .945                 28.0
  Revenue                (12.7)     (4.32)          (1.11)
Total General            152.       15.5             —.0889    .969     87.2        21.7
  Expenditure            (12.4)     (9.03)          (1.76)
Difference                49.1      —5.92             .161     .518     18.4        13.7
                          (6.36)    (5.49)          (5.08)

Difference, Direct        29.3       —.729            .0615    .701      5.9         8.85
  General Revenue         (5.85)    (1.04)          (2.99)
  and Expenditure


Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.




               11
the series.         Own—source general revenue has always exceeded direct

general expenditures, by increasing amounts since about 1958, the sixth
                         1'
year of the series.




      Trends in components of state finance demonstrate striking corn—



 11
      This difference was negative between years 13 and 24 of the series,
      or approximately between 1965 and 1976. The largest deficit occurred
      in year 18, or approximately 1970.
 12
      The National Income and Product Accounts confirm the recent fiscal
      strength of state and local governments. They report a record
      nominal surplus for combined state and local governments in 1983,
      using standard measures, and a relatively large surplus when ad-
      justed for capital and financial transactions (Levin).


                                      —    11   —
parisons to those in components of federal finance. The sources of state

revenue growth are opposite to those of growth in federal revenues.

However federal and state allocations of expenditure growth are broadly

similar.




   Total state tax revenues, and general sales taxes, are growing

linearly. The trend in income taxes is positive and quadratic. Net

interest is also positive, and groting. Charges are growing along a

decelerating trend which predicts an end to growth in approximately a

decade. The trends in motor fuel and motor vehicle tax revenues have

been falling for nearly twenty years.




   State expenditures on general control and financial administration,

and all forms of public welfare display significant positive quadratic

trends. Expenditures for pol ice and correction are growing linearly.

Expenditures for hospitals and health expenditures are also growing,

more vigorously than at the federal level. State expenditures on all

forms of transportation peaked in the last decade, and are now declin-

ing. State education expenditures, which are growing on a trend that is

set to peak in the next decade, are the only expenditure component for

which the current state trend is noticeably at odds with the federal

trend.
3. Local Fnance




                                    Table 3.

                             Trend Coefficients in
                             Local Finance, 1952—83

                                                                                Residual
                                              Trend                Years to Standard
                                                               2
                     Constant     Trend      Scuared       R       Extrernurn    Error'

All Local Governments:

Difference; Total     —18.3        —.445        .0380     .517        5.9          8.15
  Revenues and         (3.97)      (.691) (2.01)
  Expendi ture

Total General        248.         10.9        —.0171      .944 318.7              24.4
  Revenue            (18.0)       (5.66)      (.302)
Total General        218.         16.1        -.189       .966       42.6         18.2
  Expenditures       (21.2)      (11.2)      (4.47)
Di fference           30.4       —5.24         .172       .623       15.2         11.1
                       (4.82)     (5.95)     (6.63)

Difference. Direct   —64.8       —6.44         .0525      .914       41.3         14.0
  General Revenue     (8.16)     (5.81)      (1.61)
  and Expenditure


Special Districts, 1964—1983:

Total General         16.7         .352        .0553      .988                     1.07
  Revenue            (21 .0)     <2.02)      (6.86)
Direct General        17.9         .529         .0090 3   935                      1.19
  Expendi ture       (20.2)      <2.72)      (1 .01 :




Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.




Table 3 presents the trends in aQreQate real per capita local Qovern—

ment finance. in contrast to federal and state governments. the dominant



                                    — 13 —
observation here is that, if anything, trends in local finance are

towards shrinkage. All measures of local revenues and exenditures, with

the exception of total general revenues, have siQnificant neqative

quadratic trends which eventually imply reductions.




   However, shrinkage is. for the most aart. a prediction of these

trends, rather than an experience within the sample period. As olven in

table   3, total eneral revenues and expenditures have iarge, sig-

nificantly positive linear terms. Despite the significant negative

quadratic term for expenditures, these equations predict continued

revenue and expenditure growth well beyond the sample period.




   Eauations for differences, presented in table 3, indicate that local

governments, in the aggregate, appear to be moving into a period o4

relative financial ease. This ease may be precarious, however. It

depends entirely on transfers from federal and state governments. Of all

local government revenue sources, these are least within the their

control




   According to the estimated trend, the difference between total

revenues and total expenditures has been positive and growing with

increasing rapidity since &pproximately 1980. This may actuail under—

state the sufficiency of total revenues. Disregarding the insignificant

linear trend, the equation predicts excesses beginning as early as 1974.




    Equations for total revenue, total expenditures and direct oeneral
    expenditures are similar.


                                  —   1—
                                      S
Trend differences between total aeneral revenues and total Qeneral

expenditures have been positive since approximately 1975, as well.




      Intergovernmental revenues play an important role in these corn—
             14
parisons.         The trend difference between own—source general revenues

and direct general expenditures does not include them, is negative, and

growing. Accepting the insignificant quadratic term, the excess of

direct general expenditures over own—source revenues will grow through

the first sixty—one years of the series. Neglecting this term, the

excess increases linearly. This trend indicates that own—source revenues

are increasingly inadequate support for the central functions of local
               15
government.




      Trends in local government revenue components demonstrate these

inferences explicitly. Transfers from federal to local governments are

growing quadratically. Growth in state transfers is slowing but

projected to continue for another 25 years. Utility revenues are also

increasing at quadratic rates. However, property taxes! traditionally

the most important own—source revenue, are deci ining. The trend in

property tax revenues peaked a decade ago. In another decade the trend




 14
      Census Bureau sectoral data ignore ntrasectaral transfers. For
      example, transfers from counties to cities —— which create identical
      additions to gross local intergovernmental revenues and gross local
      intergovernmental expenditures —— are netted out of published local
      intergovernmental totals.
15
      This analysis does not, of course, discriminate between two possible
      explanations: Intergovernmental revenues may be essential! because
      local resources are fundamentally inadequate. However, local govern-
      ments may choose not to tap underutilized local revenue sources,
      because intergovernmental revenues are available.


                                     — 15 —
will imply real per capita property tax revenues no greater than those

of 1952. Among own—source revenues! trends n sales taxes and charges

are positive.




      The trends in components of local government expenditures are oc-

casionally at variance to those in state and federal governments. As at

higher levels, expenditures on health and hospitals, police and correc-

tion, general control and financial administration are increasing.

However, local expenditures on all categories Qf welfare are decreasing,

beginning approximately ten years ago. Local school and library expendi-

tures are following a similar pattern, with the exception of expendi-

tures on higher education. Expenditures on many purely local functions,

such as fire, sanitation and sewerage, are increasing.




      Of the different types of local governments, counties,

municipalities, townships, special districts and school districts con—

form to the aggregate trends of table 3 during the years 1964—83.

However! the aggreQate of special districts is growing. As given in that

table, both linear and quadratic trends are positive for total general

revenues and direct general expenditures.       t4ith the exception of the

quadratic trend in expenditures, all are signilicant. These equations

imply that the difference between special district total general revenue

and direct general expenditure has been positive and growing for over




 16
      Total direct revenues 4or local governments include important net
      intergovernmental revenues. Direct general expenditures for local
      governments neglect only negligible net intergovernmental expendi-
      tures. Comparisons between the two are, therefore, reasonable in-
      dications of actual budget conditions.


                                    — 16 —
ten years.




                            B. Trend Irnplicatons




These trends summarize accurately the history of government finances

between 1952 and 1983. Their irnpl   icat ions   may encourage pol icy changes

which ensure that future trends are different. In particular, transfers

from the federal government are essential to the apparent 'health' of

local qovernments, and contribute to that of state governments. In the

current circumstances! federal government officials might be tempted to

reduce transfers to state and local governments in order to limit or

reduce federal deficits (Skaperdas).




   These trends contain implications for three other policy issues. They

provide a crude index of the scope for countercycl ical fiscal pol icr; a

simple test of the existence of electoral cycles in government finance

and descriptive measures of 'fiscal federal ism' —— the extent to which

government responsibilities and revenue sources have been reallocated

across government levels.




1. Fiscal Policy




The trends estimated above orovide     useful    indications   of the scope for

                                     — 17 —
                                     Table 4.

                             Averae Federal Real Per
                          Capita Differences, 1952—1983

                               Federal   Differences

Total Revenues            Total General Revenues       Direct General Revenues
and Expenditurs           and Expenditures             and Expenditures

   —72,60                         —53.16                    67.40




countercyclical      qovernrnent fiscal policy. Table 4 presents mean dif—

ferences between real per capita revenues and expenditures for the

federal government during the years 1952—83, using all three total

concepts. These differences are quite small in comparison to I3NP. The

—$72.60 per capita mean difference between federal total revenues and

total expenditures, the largest, is only 1.4< of mean real per capita

GNP ($5276.40) during this period. However, if the effective element of

fiscal policy is unanticipated deficits, and the appropriate target is

unanticipated deviations of GNP from trend (Barro), this comparison is

not conclusive.




   The estimates of table 1 demonstrate that a large proportion of

federal deficits can be 'anticipated' merely from simple trends.

Residual federal differences net of trends, are simple approximations

of unanticipated' deficit components. The detrended variance of Qovern—

rnent   deficits,   relative to the detrended variance of GNP,   is a   crude




                                      — 18 —
                                               17
approximation to the correct comparison.




     For the years studied here, 1952 through 1983, real per capita gross

national product has a substantial trend component. R4=.957 for a

regression of real per capita gross national product on a trend and a
                 18
squared trend.        The residual standard error of this equation, in 1972

dollars, is $195.40. As reported in table 1, the residual standard error

of the difference between federal total revenues and expenditures is

equal to $54.45. The standard error in this measure of the tederal

deficit is more than a quarter of that in detrended GNP. Reasonable

unanticipated changes in federal deficits, in combination with

reasonable macroeconomic multipliers, can produce deviations in GNP

around trend that are relatively large.




2. Election Cycles



If macroeconomic outcomes are sensitive to government fiscal pa1 icy,

incumbent politicians may be able to manipulate macroeconomic variables

in order to produce circumstances Favorable to reelection. Hanipulations




17
     This approximation should be taken only as illustrative. Detrended
     GNP and federal deficit series provide only 'upper bounds' on the
     'unanticipated' components of these series. More sophisticated time
     series or causal models would presumably reduce the residual
     variances in both.
18
     The dependent variable in this equation is gross national   product,
     deflated b implicit price deflator and U. S. population,    1952—83.
     The estimated equation, with t—statistics in parentheses,   is
     Real per capita GNP   3759   + 89.0(trend) + .276(squared   trend).
                            (34.1) (5.57)        (.607)


                                    — 19   -
of this sort would produce a political business cycle coinciding with

the chronology of government elections. Previous studies have produced

confl icting theories with reQard to the possibil it>' of such cycles, as

well as confi icting evidence with reaard to their existence. When ex-

panded, the simple trend analyses above demonstrate that, as an empiri-

cal matter, federal and state revenues fall relative to expenditures in

years preceding federal elections.




   Policy—induced business cycles could be a successful political

strategy if either the electorate is myopic (Nordhaus, MacRae) or if it

suffers information asymmetries under rational expectations (Rogaff and

Sibert). Nordhaus and MacRae present empirical evidence that unemploy-

ment cycles coincide with federal elections. However, this strategy

would be futile if fiscal po1 icy is ineffective; McCallum presents

evidence that unemployment is insensitive to election schedules. It

would also be futile if the electorate does not care about macroeconomic

outcomes; presidential popularity ratings appear to be insensitive to

macroeconomic outcomes Golden and Poterba).




   The evidence for election cycles in macroeconomic outcomes is mixed.

The existence of cycles in fiscal policy instruments is, logically, a

prior question. Here, previous evidence is negative. Dummy variables for

year in the federal election c>'cle do not contribute significantly to

the explanatory power of equations for quarterly federal deficits which

include other macroeconomic and political variables (Golden and

Poterba). This evidence is not conclusive, because the regression

specification includes the macroeconomic targets of election c'cle



                                 — 20   —
fiscal strategy among the explanatory variables for the election cycle

fiscal instrument. In contrast, regressions which include only trends,

squared trends and dummy    variables   for years prior to the years in which

federal elections are held do not identify causal ity, but do provide

strong evidence that federal and state fiscal deficits are sensitive to

e 1 ec t I on schedules.




      The impact of election cycles on federal government finances is
                                                 19
increasing. Coefficients on a trending dummy          are negative, sig-

nificant at 10Y for the differences between total and total general

revenues and expenditures, and at 5/ for the difference between own—
                                                               20
source general revenues and direct general expenditures.            These coef—

ficients indicate that the year before each successive election reduces

the total difference by an additional $7.44, the total general dif-

ference by $7.11, and the direct general difference by $9.72 per capita.

in 1983, the eighth pre—election year in the sample period, these reduc-

tions amounted to $59.52, $56.88 and $77.76 per capita, respectively.

The preelection effect on total and total general differences in that

year was equivalent to the average excess of total and total general

expenditures over revenues, as given in table 4. The effect on the



        trending dummy is the interaction between the standard dummy and
      the trend. In the year prior to a federal election year, it takes on
      the value of the trend. In all other years, it takes on the value of
      zero.
 20
      The coefficients on a conventional dummy variable reoresenting years
      before federal election years are negative for the differences
      between all three revenue and expenditure measures, but significant
      at 10> or less. Coefficients on both the dummy and the trending
      dummy are negative in revenue equations and positive in expenditure
      equations, but significant only in equations for the differences.
      Trend and squared trend coefficients are unaffected b the inclusion
      of either.


                                   —
direct general difference more than negated the mean surplus at that

level.




      The preelection effect on state finances has been also been sig-

nificant, but stable. Coefficients on a conventional dummy variable are

negative and significant at 5 for all three difference measures. This

is the on)>' variable that has a significant effect on the difference
                                            21
between total revenues and expenditures.         These coefficients indicate

that years prior to federal elections reduce state total, total general

and own—source surpluses by 315.13, 311.34 and $8.98 per capita, respec-

tively. These reductions are 82.2, 125Y. and 22.9'. of mean surpluses as

given in table 4.




      The descriptive evidence in these regression coefficients does not

demonstrate that fiscal policy actually induces political business

cycles or that political business cycles are effective electoral

strategy. However, it is consistent with the suggestion that incumbent

politicians manipulate fiscal policy in order to imProve electoral

prospects. Deficits in years prior to federal elections are large for

both federal and state governments. Coefficients on dummy variables for

other years in the federal election cycle are uniformly insignificant.

Qgregate local government finances are unaffected by the federal e)ec—

tion cycle, presumably because individual local government elections



 21
       gain, the inclusion of either the dummy or the trending dummy
       leaves trend coefficients unaltered. The dummy variable also nd—
       cates a Dreelection year reduction in state total revenues S1Q—
       nificant at iO7. Coefficients on the trendng dumrn::/ far areelection
       years are negative, but significant at only iU7 -for the three
       deficit measures.


                                    —
 take place in all years. More appropriate measures of election chronol—

oqy   rniQht reveal   fiscal   effects   at this level! as   well.




3.   Fiscal Federalism



In the U. S. federal system, qovernment services can be provided! and

public revenues collected, at any of three levels. Service at any level

of government depends on service provision, service mandates and sup-

porting grants from higher levels of government (ACIR, Craig and Inman).

Responsibilities and revenue sources may be shifted among federal, state

and local governments for three reasons. Theoretically, changes in the

publicness and congestibility of public services may change the level of

government from which provision is optimal. Ideologically, 'fiscal

federalism' embodies an imperative to allocate services to the most

local Jurisdiction.practicable. Practically, and probably most compell-

ingly, higher, general purpose Jurisdictions shift responsibilities to

more local or more specialized jurisdictions when they can no longer

afford to support them (Copeland, pg. xxiv).




     Despite changes in the technologies, ideologies and practicalities of

government administration, trends in the components of federal, state

and local revenues and expenditures reveal few shifts in the allocations

of either across government levels. Growth within particular expenditure

or revenue categories is often in the same direction at all levels of

government. Changes occur in expenditure or revenue shares over time,

but are more likely to derive from variations in growth rates rather



                                         —   23 —
than differences in growth directions.




      Intergovernmental transfers are the most obvious connection between

different government levels. The revenue—sharing aspect of 'fiscal

federalism' has become more important over the sample period. State

intergovernmental revenues have grown at a decelerating rate, on a trend

which predicts that growth will end in the year 2000. Local inter-

governmental revenues are growing linearly, mainly on the strength of

transfers from the federal government.




  Among most important own—source revenue categories, trends are

predominantly towards continued sharing among government levels, rather

than unique assignments. Income tax revenues are increasing at all

levels, though at quadratic rates for state governments. Charges are

also increasing at all levels, though here estimated trends predict that

state revenues will cease to grow after 1992. General sales tax revenues
                                                  22
are increasing for state and local governments.




      The property tax is the only major own—source revenue for which

revenue trends move in different directions at different levels of

government. Local property tax revenues have been decreasing at a Quad-

ratic rate since approximately 1972. State property tax revenues have

grown at a linear rate over the sample period. However4 this contrast is

not as strong as it appears. The time series of state property tax

revenues is poorly explained by a trend and squared trend (R.41) and


 22
      The federal government does not levy general sales taxes.


                                    —   24 —
state revenues have always been small.




   The contrast is more compelling for net interest revenues. They are

growing for state and local governments, and falling for the federal

government. Of course, these trends are the product of practical

problems in government finance, not the programmatic irnpl ications of

fiscal federal ism.




   The •fiscal 'federalism policy implies greater specialization in serv-

ices than in revenue collection. Expenditures in three major categories

have been substantially reallocated. However, only the change in non—

highway transportation finance is consistent with the directions dic-

tated by this policy. Federal and state expenditures for non—highway

(air and water. transportation services have been decreasing at a quad-

ratic rate for nearly twenty years. Local expenditures are increasing at

a linear rate. This shift is consistent with increased local autonomy.




   In contrast, welfare and education expenditures have shifted away

from local governments, and against the direction dictated by fiscal

federalism. The shift in welfare expenditures is probably in the service

of increased efficiency. Welfare expenditures by local governments are

decreasing, while those of state and federal governments are increasing.

Welfare provision at higher government levels minimizes adverse selec-

tion problems; local provision may induce client and taxpayer migrations

that penalize generous jurisdictions. Federal responsibility for educa-

tion is also increasing. Federal education expenditures have no trend.

while state and local expenditures are trending downwards.


                                 —25—
   In all other expenditure categor;es, trends are in the same direction

across all three levels of government. In all, e>penditures on Qeneral

administration, financial control4 police, hospitals and health have

been growing. Federal, state and local highway expenditures are trending

downwards.




                      C. Stochastic Deviations From Trends




The trend regressions discussed above do not exhaust the explanatory

power of simple, non—causal statistical models. ARIMA models summarize

conveniently the dynamic properties of deviations from trends. These

properties are useful in prediction, but they may be most important as

the interternporal 'facts' with which dynamic theories of government

finance should be consistent.




   f   presentation   of these facts for the purpose of testing such

theories is premature, since none exist. Rather, this presentation

should encourage experiments in the theoretical treatment of intertem—

poral public finance. There are two general themes: Stochastic persist-

ence is inversely related to the level of government. 'Persistence here

has two meanings; dynamic structures of trend deviations in lower levels

of government include more lagged terms, and lag coefficients tend to

have higher jalues. In addition, ARIM models for deviations from exoen—

diture trends require more lags than do those or revenue deviations.
                                            Table 5.

                              ARIMA Models for Federal, State
                            and Local Total General Revenue and
                            Expenditure Trend Residuals 1952—83

                                                                               Pr ob
                                    Autoregressi on                            Value
                                     Coeffic lents                Resi-   Ch i—square
                                        At Lag                    dual    on Lags to
                             1            2               3       S.E.     6            12
Federal
Total General                .466                                fl   -   .406         .505
  Revenue                  (2.76)
Total General               1.05         —.433                   30.4     .904         .842
  Expend i ture            (6.37)       (2.62)

State:
Total General                .874                                15.9     .300         .265
  Revenue                  (7.70)
Total General          *     .687        —.407            .399    7.69    .699         .564
  Expendi ture             (3.86)       (1.87)          (2.04)

Local:
Total General              1.16          —.315                   11.9     .586         .435
  Revenue               (6.49)          (1.72)
Total General      *         .373        -.355            .430   8.51     .463         .667
  Expend I tures        (2.15)          (2.05)          (2.45)


Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.




  Deviations from trends for federal, state and local total general

revenues and expenditures conform to simple AR characterizations,




                                            -    27 -
                            23
presented in table 5.            With the exception of    federal   total general

revenues, these models substantially augment the predictive power of                the
trends regressions. They reduce residual standard errors by ap-

proximately 40—65Y., in comparison to those given in tables 1 — 3 for

original deviation series.




         These models demonstrate that stochastic persistence is greater for

revenue measures at lower than at higher levels of government. First lag

coefficients increase in magnitude from            federal, to state to local
governments. In addition, local government revenues include a second

lag. Federal total general revenue deviations are an AR(1) with first

lag coefficient significantly less than one. State deviations are also

an AR(1). However, the first lag coefficient is greater than that of the

federal series. One is Just within the upper boundary of its confidence
•              24
interval




    23
         ARI1 models for federal total and direct general revenues and
         expenditures are similar to the total general models presented here.
         Models of these measures for state and local governments differ from
         those for total general revenues and expenditures, but are neverthe-
         less consistent with the conclusions drawn below.

             Uniquely, trend deviations for virtually all individual federal
         revenue sources are also AR<1). Those for income taxes other taxes
         and total current charges have first lag coefficients of magnitudes
         similar to that for total general revenue. Stochastic behaviors of
          individual state and local government revenue sources, and of in-
         dividual expenditure categories at all levels of government, are
         much more heterogeneous.

         First differences of both these series are white noise, but have
         higher residual standard errors than the series reported here.


                                        —   28 —
Local total revenue deviations are an MR(2). —   The first lag coeffi'-

cierrt in this model is greater than one, though not significantly so.




    First lag coefficients for total general expenditure models are

equivalent across government levels. However, state and local models

require two more lags than does the model for federal expenditures.

Trend deviations for federal total general expenditures are an AR(2),

with first lag coefficient approximately equal to one. Deviations for

state and local revenues are AR(3) in first differences. These models

imply a coefficient of one on the first lag in the undifferenced series.

In addition, they require four lags in the undifferenced series, in

contrast to the two lags of the federal model.




    Regardless of government level, models for total general expenditure

are more persistent than models for total general revenues. At any

level, expenditure models require more lags in the original, undif—

ferenced series than do revenue models. In addition, first lag coeffi-

cients are larger for expenditure than for revenue models in federal and



    Longer lags may be a stochastic artifact of aggregation. Ii time
    series for revenues of individual local governments have their own
    stochastic behavior, the characteristics of these series constrain
    the stochastic properties of aggregate local government revenues. As
    an example, the sum of two AR models is an auto—regressive moving—
    average <ARMA) model with autoregressive order equal to the sum of
    the two individual autoregressive orders, and with moving average
    order equal to the maximum of the two (Harvey1 pg. 43).
'6 This
*
         model is stable, but has complex roots;     +4    < O where
    is the coefficient on the first lag, •, that on the econd. Most
                                                                       2

    AR2) models reported here with first rder coefficient of ap-
    proximately one or greater, and second order coefficient, negative
    and of smaller magnitude, have acceptable representations as
    ARMA(1,1). First differences are often white noise, but with higher
    standard errors.


                                 — 29 -
state models, and of approximately equal magnitudes for local models.




      Table 5 demonstrates that stochastic behavior is more oersistent

state finances than for federal, and for local finances than for those

of states. Lag structures are typically longer for expenditure measures

than for corresponding revenue measures. These differences may be the

products of aggregation, differences in electoral processes, in budget

practices or in the formation of expectations at each level of govern-

ment. Theoretical models of these aspects of public finance can be
                                                          27
tested, in part, by their consistency with these facts.




                       IV. Debt and Capital SpendinQ




Changes in government debt and capital spending are dependent on, and

components of, changes in government revenues and expenditures.

Nevertheless, they both represent important issues for public pol icy1 in

their own rights. These summaries demonstrate that state and local

government debt burdens are falling. Real per capita government debt is

grot4ing only at the federal level. However, the adequacy of Amer icas

public infrastructure may be at risk. Real per capita non—defense capi—




 27
      The efficacy of fiscal po1 tcy and the frequency of budget crises may
      depend, in part, upon contrasting stochastic behavior in revenue,
      expenditure and GNP trend deviations. These dependencies could be
      explored in vector autoregressions if the relevant time series were
      sufficiently long. The thirty—two years analyzed here contain too
      few degrees of freedom to estimate such models.


                                   — 30 —
 tal outlays are fall in at all levels of Qovernment.




                                .   Debt




Local government debt levels have been a popular issue of concern since

the 1974 financial difficulties of New York City. Continuing concern

would be misplaced, because local government real per capita debts have

been fall ing at an accelerating pace since approximately that time. In

the past decade, it might better have been directed at state debt

levels, which have only recently ceased to grow. Now, however, changes

in the federal real per capita debt level are, and promise to continue

to be, most alarming. Real per capita 'guaranteed' debt levels are

growing only for the federal government. Debt levels for counties and

special districts are also growing, but probably through increases in

nonguaranteed debt only.




   Table 6 presents regression coefficients for trend and squared trend

terms on real per capita gross long—term debt outstanding for federal,

aggregate state and aggregate local governments. The contrasts between

levels of debt at different levels of government are evident. Real er

capita debt has been deci ining at an accelerating pace in local govern-

ments since approximately 1970. State debt is still growing, but should

peak and then fall, beginning in approximately 2000. Federal debt

reached a minimum in approximately 1980, and is now growing at an ac—



                                 — 31 —
                                   Table 6.

                     Trend Coefficients for Federal,
                     State and Local Gross Long—Term
                       Debt Outstanding. 1952—1983

                                                                              Residual
                                             Trend                Years to Standard
                                                             2
                    Constant     Trend      Squared      R        Extremurn    Error
Federal             3610.      —121.         2.52       .947          24.0      99.1
                     (64.4)     (15.5)   (11.0)
State                101.         8.68        —.0908    .978          47.8       8.34
                     (21.4)     (13.2)      (4.68)
Local                312.        22.3         —.582     .892          19.2      19.3
                     (28.7)     (14.7)   (13.0)

Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.

                                                                                    -4


celerating rate.




   Trends in state and local government debt levels are even less dis-
                                                                 28
turbing when they are disaggregated by type of debt.                  State and local

short—term debt levels have been shrinking for a decade or more.

Guaranteed, or full faith and credit debt —— debt supported by a

jurisdiction's general tax revenues —— in local governments began to

fall at the same time. It has recently peaked for state governments.

Revenue, or nonguaranteed debt —— debt backed only by the future

revenues of the project it finances ——      is   responsible for any tendency

towards growth in local government debt, and the remaining growth in

that of state governments.




28
     The Census Bureau reports only gross long—term debt outstanding for
     the federal government.


                                   — 32 —
                                   Table 7.

                  ARIW Models for Federal State and
                   Local Gross Long—Term Debt 1952—83

                                                            Pr ob
                             Moving Average                 Jalue
                              Coefficients     Resi—      Chi—square
                                 At Lag        dual       on Lags to
                         1             2       S.E.       6       12
Federal                —1.18          —.423    67.6      .565       .766
                        6.24)        (2.23)
State                   —.752         —.442     6.53     .517       .558
                       (4.42)        (2.58)
Local                  —1.24          —.634    11.8      .761       .451
                       (8.65)        (4.43)


Notes T—statistics are in parentheses.




   Table 7 presents ARIMA characterizations of deviations from debt

trends. Deviations from trends in debt for all levels of government are

consistent with similar second—order moving averages, MA(2). These

models reduce residual standard errors by 22—39. Most components of

state and local debt are autoregressions with one or two lags, fre-

quently representable as first differences.




  The trends in table 8 demonstrate that tendencies toward growth in

local government debt during the period 1964—83 are located entirely in

counties and special districts. In both; debt is growing at an ac-

celerating rate. This growth is probably not a threat to the fiscal

health of special districts; as it must legally be in revenue bonds

backed by dedicated revenue sources. If growth in county government debt


                                    — 33 —
                                   Table B.

                        Trend Coefficients for Levels
                        of Local Government Long—Term
                         Debt OutstandinQ, 1964—1983

                                                                          Residual
                                                 Trend           Years to Standard
                    Constant      Trend         Squared R Extremurn        Error
Counties              51.1         .222           .0725   .906      —        3.59
                     (19.1)       (.380) (2.67)
Municipalities       234.       —1.77            —.0346   .898               5.28
                     (59.5)      (2.05)          (.868)
                        13.9      —.244          —.00203 .874       —         .680
Townships
                     (27.4)     (2.20)           (.395)
Special Districts    117.       —2.01             .148    .718     6.8       5.25
                     (29.8)     (2.34)          (3.73)
School Districts     132.       —1.09            —.157    .990      —        2.76
                     (64.2)      (2.42:>        (7.52)

Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.




                                           29
includes growth in guaranteed debt,             counties max encounter financial

difficulties. s discussed above, their revenues are shrinking at a

quadratic rate. In contrast, municipal, township and school district

debt levels have fallen continuously. The decline in school district

debt is accelerating.




  These trends identify important changes, consistent with the themes

identified by Copeland, in the allocation of responsibilities across

levels of government. General—purpose local governments have, ir           oart,
recovered from the debt 'criss of the early 1970's by transferring

debt and debt—funded projects to special districts. The increasing



   The Census Bureau does not report type of debt by type of local
   government.

                                    - 34 -
burden of federal debt may eventually encouraqe the federal aovernment

to perform an analoqous transfer; to abandon its traditional role as

donor in the exchanqe of intergovernmental transfers, and require state

and local governments to maintain services out of own—source revenues.




                          B. Capital SpendinQ




Statistical descriptions of government capital spending are in distinct

contrast to those of debt. Trends in debt differ across levels of

government, but stochastic models of trend deviations are similar.

Trends in capital outlays are similar, but dynamic behavior of trend

deviations varies. The implications of these comparisons are unfavorable

to capital spending. While 'crises' in debt seemed restricted to the

federal government and perhaps, counties, crises in capital formation

may be endemic.




   Table 9 presents trend regressions for real per capita capital outlay

at various levels of government from 1952 through 1983. Total federal

capital outlays are unique; they are currently growing at a quadratic

rate, having reached a minimum in approximately 1977. However, this

growth is entirely due to capital outlays on defense, which average

82.5Y of the total. The trend in civilian federal capital outlays is

identical to those in aggregate state and aggregate local outlays;




                                 -   35 —
                                 Table 9.

                     Trend Coefficients for Levels of
                     Capital Outlay in Federal, State
                     and Local Government1 1952—1982

                                                                          Residual
                                            Trend         2
                                                               Years to Standard
                    Constant    Trend       Squared   R        Extremum  Error
Federal              249.      —12.3          .246    .912         25.0     14.1
                     (30.6)    (10.5)       (6.92)
Federal Excluding     14.7       1.25        —.0329   .253         19.0      5.28
  Defense             (4.84)    (2.85)      (2.48)
State                 32.8      5.16       -.159      .872         16.2      4.57
                     (12.5)    (13.6)    (13.8)
Local                 70.6      2.05       —.0501     .704         20.5      3.68
                     (33.4)     (6.73)    (5.41)

Notes: T—statistics are in parentheses.


                                                              30
accelerated decline from a peak reached around 1970.




   Broadly, these trends are replicated in category—specf Ic capital

expenditures. Among federal capital expenditures, only those for high-

ways are increasinQ. Utilities are the only functions of local aovern—

ment for which the trend in capital expenditures is significantly posi-

tive. Captial expenditures on all other functions in these governments,

and on all state government functions, are now trending downward.




   Table 10 presents ARIMA models for deviations from capital outlay



    Hulten and Peterson report similar trends for the aQaregate state
    and local government sector, using data from the National Income and
    Product Accounts.


                                   — 36 —
                                      Table 10.

                   ARIMA Models for Federal, State and
                   Local Total Capital Outlays 1952-82
                     and Local Government, 1952—1982

                                                                      Pr ob
                           Moving Average                              Value
                            Coefficients                    Resi-   Chi—square
                               At Lag                       dual    on Lags to
                              2           3         4       S.E.     6       12
Federal       *     .364      .522        .378     — .376   13.9    .510      .333
                  (1.96)    (2.81:)     (2.01)    (1.98)
Federal Excluding —           -          —
                                                             3.93   .832      .728
  Defense    *
State            — .929      —.457       —                   3.18   .125      .372
                  (5.47)    (2.68:'
Local              —.521      .702       1.12                2.32   .579      .514
                  (9.27) (10.13) (18.00)

Notes T—statistics are in parentheses. Equations marked with an
asterisk (*) are in first differences.




trends. As with debt, these deviations are best represented as moving

averages. Trend deviations of total federal outlays conform to an MA(4)

in first differences which explains little of the deviation variance.

The unsatisfactory properties of this model are entirely the fault of

defense outlays; federal civilian outlays are white noise in first

differences. Among civil ian federal, state and local outlays, the number

of significant lags increases as government becomes more local. These

three models account for 25—37< of the deviation standard errors.




  The trends in per capita government capital outlays conform better to

conventional wisdom than do any others presented in this paper; civil ian

capital outlays began a universal decline soon after 1970. They may be

related, nevertheless, to results that conform less well. For exarnple


                                       — 37 —
reductions in debt levels discussed above may be oartiy resonsible 'for

reduced capital expenditures.




   The state and local trends are also a contrast to trends 'from 1900—

55. During that period, the 'federal share in national debt increased

much more rapidly than did the 'federal share in national tangible assets

(Kuznets, in the 'forward to Copeland). The comparison between recent

trends in Federal debt and capital outlay is similar. However, in the

earlier period state and local governments increased their share o4

tangible assets while reducing their share o'f debt. Currently! debt

levels are 'fall ing but capital outlays are, i'f anything! 'falling 'faster.




   Hul ten and Peterson discuss some o'f the conditions, such as overin—

vestinen t in long—lived cap i tal ,   under   wh I ch secular deci i nes in cap i tal

expenditures are acceptable public poi icy. 14 these conditions are not

currently being met, the trends in government capital outlays imply

'future di4'ficulties in the provison o-f          public   services.




                                 V. Conclusion




The descriptive regressions and ARIMA models presented here summarize

concisely the important developments in government flnance during the

years 1952 through 1983. Among the secular themes which emerge, -Hue are

preeminent. First, civilian capital outlays are 'falling at an accelerat—



                                        -      —
ing pace in all levels of government. Second1 federal government expen-

ditures are expanding at an accelerating rate, presumably fueled by

similarly rapid growth in federal debt. Third4 local special districts

are also growing quadratically, again fueled by debtq but debt which is

probably revenue bonded rather than guaranteed. Fourth, state govern—
rnents, in aggregates have a healthy and continuing surplus of revenues

over expenditures. Fifth local governments depend upon intergovernrnen—

tal revenues to maintain balance between revenues and expenditures while

reducing debt.




   Deviations from these trends conform to three stochastic themes.

Stochastic persistence tends to increase at more disaggregate levels of

government. Expenditures tend to have longer lags than do revenues.

Revenues and expenditures are typically autoregressions, while debt

levels and capital outlays are typically moving averages.




  These findings demonstrate that important interternporal changes occur

in levels and distribution of government economic activity. Yet no

theory of public finance addresses the intertemporal structure of

government of public finance addresses the intertemporal structure of

government activity so as to predict them. The secular and stochastic

'facts' established here are sufficiently interesting to justify new

efforts to develop such a theory, and sufficiently complete to serve as

initial tests.




                                — 39 —
                               References


ACIR (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations), The Federal
Influence on State and Local Roles in the Federal System, Washington, D.
C., November, 1981.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, uTime Series Representations of
Economic Variables and Alternative Models of the Labour Market", Review
of Economic Studies, Vol. 49, 1982, pgs. 761—782.

Barro, Robert J., "On the Output Effects of Government Purchases",
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89, No. 6, December, 1981, pgs. 1086—
1121.

Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce, Annual Survey o4
Governments, various years and titles, Washington, 0. C.

Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce, Historical Statis—
tics on Governmental Finances and Employment, 1957, 1967, 1972, 1977,
1982, Washington, D. C.

Copeland, Morris A., Trends in Government Financing, Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1961.

Craig, Steven 6. and Robert P. Inman, "Education, Welfare, and the 'New'
Federalism: State Budgeting in a Federalist Public Economy", in Studies
in State and Local Public Finance, Harvey S. Rosen, ed., University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, 1986, pgs. 187—222.

Fabricant, Solomon, The Trend of Government Activity in the United
States Since 1900, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York, 1952.

Gold, Steven D., "Recent Developments in State Finances", National Tax
Journal, Vol. 36, No. 1, March, 1983, pas. 1—29.

Golden, David 0., and James M. Poterba, "The Price of Popularity: The
Political Business Cycle Reexamined", American Journal of Political
Science, Vol. 24, November, 1980, pgs. 696—714.

Harvey, A. C., Time Series Models, Haisted Press, John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 1981.

Hoitz—Eakin, Douglas, "Short Run Dynamics of Municipal Budgets", Discus-
sion Paper Series No. 320, Columbia University Department of Economics,
March, 1986.

Hulten, Charles R. and Georqe E. Peterson, "The Pubi Ic Capital Stock:
Needs, Trends, and Performance', The American Economic Review, May,
1984, Vol. 74, No. 2. ps. 166—173.

lnman, Robert P., "Dissecting the Urban Crisis: Facts and Counterfacts",
National Tax Journal, Vol. 32. No. 2. June, 1979, pgs. 127—142.


                                 - 40   —
Levin, David J., 'The State and Local Government Fiscal Position: An
Alternative Measure", Survey c'f Current Business, United States Depart-
ment o-f Commerce4 Bureau c-f Economic Analysis, Vol. 64, No. 3, March,
1984, pQs. 23—25.

MacRae, C. Duncan4 "A Political Model of the Business Cycle"4 Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 2 April4 1977, pgs. 239—263.

McCallum, Bennett T., 'The Political Business Cycle: An Empirical Test",
Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 44, No. 3, January, 1978, ogs. 504—515.

Mieszkowski, Peter and Robert N. Stein, "Trends and Prospects in State
and Local Finance", Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 14, 1983, pgs. 224—
241

Mills, liregory B., "Prospects for the Restraint of Federal
Expenditures", National Tax Journals Vol. 37, No. 3, September, 1984,
pgs. 361—365.

                      "The Political Business Cycle", The Review of
Nordhaus, 1.41 111am D. ,
Economic Studies, Vol. 42, No. 2, April4 1975, ps. 169—190.

Rogoff, Kenneth and Anne Sibert, Elections and Macroeconomic Pol icy
Cycles, National Bureau o-f Economic Research Working Paper No. 1838,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, February, 1986.

Skaperdas, Peter D., "State Wand Local Governments: An Assessment of
Their Financial Position and Fiscal PcI icies, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York Quarterly Review, Vol. 8, No. 4, Winter, 1983—84, pgs. 1—13.




                                 — 41 —
