                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ADAM SMITH'S "TOLERABLE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE" AND THE WEALTH
                            OF NATIONS

                                         Douglas A. Irwin

                                       Working Paper 20636
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20636


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




I thank my colleague Meir Kohn for many helpful discussions, as well as Henry Clark and Dan Klein
for useful comments. All references are to the Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence
of Adam Smith. WN = Wealth of Nations, TMS = Theory of Moral Sentiments, LJ = Lectures on
Jurisprudence, LRBL = Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres, Corr = Correspondence, followed
by the page number. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Douglas A. Irwin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Adam Smith's "Tolerable Administration of Justice" and the Wealth of Nations
Douglas A. Irwin
NBER Working Paper No. 20636
October 2014
JEL No. B12,B25,B31,K2,O43,P14,P16,P48

                                             ABSTRACT

In the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues that a country's national income depends on its labor
productivity, which in turn hinges on the division of labor. But why are some countries able to take
advantage of the division of labor and become rich, while others fail to do so and remain poor? Smith's
answer, in an important but neglected theme of his work, is the security of property rights that enable
individuals to "secure the fruits of their own labor" and allow the division of labor to occur. Countries
that can establish a "tolerable administration of justice" to secure property rights and allow investment
and exchange to take place will see economic progress take place. Smith's emphasis on a country's
"institutions" in determining its relative income has been supported by recent empirical work on economic
development.


Douglas A. Irwin
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu
      Adam Smith’s “Tolerable Administration of Justice” and the Wealth of Nations



Introduction

        Perhaps the most fundamental question in all of economics is explaining why some

countries are rich and others are poor. That was the central question posed by Adam Smith in

the Wealth of Nations, justly regarded as the discipline’s foundational text. Smith’s answer is

found in the first three chapters of Book I: a country’s income depends upon the productivity of

its labor force, which in turn depends on specialization and the division of labor driven by

exchange (trade) and limited by the extent of the market.

       But that explanation leads to another question: why are some countries able to take

advantage of the division of labor and others not? Book III, “Of the different Progress of

Opulence in different Nations,” promises an answer, but fails to deliver. By far the shortest of

the five books in Smith’s treatise, Book III examines the symbiotic relationship between town

and country, but does not give a clear answer to the question implicit in its title.

       Yet, ultimately, Smith does provide an answer to this second question: the security of

property rights. Without the protection of property, the division of labor will be severely

retarded. Secure property rights provide the necessary incentive to align effort and reward, to

enable people to reap what they sow, and to allow individuals and firms to plan for the future and

invest in economic improvements. The protection of private property makes economic progress

possible and, consequently, in Smith’s view, it is the most important duty of government.

       In 1755, more than a decade before the publication of the Wealth of Nations, Smith wrote

a single sentence that encapsulates much of his thinking about economic development: “Little

else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence from the lowest barbarism, but



                                                  2
peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice; all the rest being brought about by the

natural course of things.”2 Smith believed that a “tolerable administration of justice” required

the establishment of a legal system to protect private property from encroachment and enforce

contracts and the repayment of debts. The administration of justice – a term Smith used

frequently – was more than just a means of enabling individuals to “secure the fruits of their own

labor” and provide an incentive for productive effort, it was also a matter of peacefully

adjudicating disputes and ensuring just relations between individuals. And such justice was

absolutely essential for society to subsist at all; without the “administration of justice,” society

itself would disintegrate and dissolve. The administration of justice did not have to be perfect,

just tolerable, and an independent judiciary was critical, in Smith’s view, to ensuring that this

would happen.

         Smith provides a compelling explanation as to why secure property is important to a

country’s development and, in turn, why the judicial system is important in ensuring such

security. He also provides several illustrations of the impact of secure versus insecure property

rights on economic development, much in the way that economists working on comparative

economic systems do today. Unfortunately, Smith’s discussion of these issues was scattered

throughout the Wealth of Nations, the Theory of Moral Sentiments, and his Lectures on

Jurisprudence. Perhaps because of this fragmentary treatment, Smith’s emphasis on the link

between the administration of justice and the wealth of nations has never been fully appreciated.3


2
  Smith continued: “All governments which thwart this natural course, which force things into another channel, or
which endeavour to arrest the progress of society at a particular point, are unnatural, and to support themselves are
obliged to be oppressive and tyrannical” (EPS IV 25). This is taken from a short paper that Smith wrote to establish
his priority in these ideas. Smith wrote the piece out of fear that his ideas, which were presented in lectures at the
University of Glasgow, might be plagiarized. Dugald Stewart quotes from the manuscript in his memoir of Smith,
but unfortunately the document was later destroyed.
3
  Previous studies of Smith’s views on the importance of the legal system (Lieberman 2006) and on the role of
government in economic development (Robertson 1983) touch on these matters, but only tangentially. Billet (1975)
comes closest to making the same point as this paper.

                                                          3
       Smith’s analysis of these matters is worthy of study because only recently have

economists returned to focus on the role of a country’s institutions, including the legal system

and the security of property rights, in fostering economic development. These factors were

neglected both by the classical economists (such as David Ricardo and Thomas Malthus) and by

later neoclassical economists (such as Alfred Marshall), although Jeremy Bentham and John

Stuart Mill appreciated their importance. Not until the work of Douglass North and others drew

renewed attention to the importance of institutions in economic development, and really only in

the past decade has there been much research on the role of property rights (Besley and Ghatak

2011), political institutions (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012), and the legal system (La Porta,

Lopez-de-Salinas, and Shleifer 2008) in fostering economic growth and development. In doing

so, recent research has provided empirical support for many of the propositions that Smith

advanced, including the importance of an independent judiciary for ensuring the protection of

property and the sanctity of contracts.

       This paper attempts to provide a coherent account of Smith’s important but neglected

views on the relationship between the administration of justice, the security of property, and the

wealth of nations. After examining Smith’s views on the importance of having a system of

justice so that property rights can be protected, the paper sets out his case for why security of

property provides an essential incentive for economic activity to take place. Smith describes the

attributes of a system for the impartial administration of justice and proposes a positive theory

for its emergence in Great Britain, but has less to say about how it can be established elsewhere.

The paper then briefly examines why the classical economists neglected Smith’s views on this

matter and how Bentham and Mill extended Smith’s discussion. Finally, the paper concludes by




                                                  4
showing how recent empirical studies on “institutions” and the wealth of nations have provided

support for the factors that Smith highlighted in his writings more than two centuries ago.



Justice and the System of Natural Liberty

        In the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith advocated a “system of natural liberty,” a system

of free enterprise, as his preferred framework for organizing economic activity. In his view, such

a system did not require the government to allocate resources, manage the economy, or direct

business enterprises; instead, decentralized, competitive markets could be left to determine what

goods and services would be produced.4 To create such a system, the government had to

eliminate existing policies that prevented individuals from pursuing any economic activity that

they saw fit. Government preferences for selected industries or classes of citizens, or regulations

and monopoly privileges that prohibited entry into certain markets or occupations, were unjust,

unwise, and should be abolished. As Smith put it:

        “All systems either of preference or of restraint, therefore, being thus completely taken

        away, the obvious and simple system of natural liberty establishes itself of its own

        accord. Every man, as long as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free

        to pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry and capital into

        competition with those of any other man, or order of men” (WN 687).5

        However, the caveat in the last sentence – the requirement that individuals “not violate

the laws of justice” – suggests that Smith did not really mean that the system would simply



4
  “The sovereign is completely discharged from a duty, in the attempting to perform which he must always be
exposed to innumerable delusions, and for the proper performance of which no human wisdom or knowledge could
ever be sufficient; the duty of superintending the industry of private people, and of directing it towards the
employments most suitable to the interest of the society” (WN 687).
5
  Of course, Smith was not an advocate of “laissez faire” and acknowledged many exceptions to simple system of
natural liberty; see Hollander (2013).

                                                       5
“establish itself of its own accord” by having the government step out of the way. Instead, the

government had a very important role to play in fostering the conditions under which the system

of natural liberty could flourish. Smith believed that government had three main duties:

providing for the national defense, “protecting, as far as possible, every member of the society

from the injustice or oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of establishing an exact

administration of justice,” and establishing and maintaining certain public works (WN 687).

         This second duty, the administration of justice, was a critical one. In his Lectures on

Jurisprudence, Smith held that “the first and chief design of every system of government is to

maintain justice; to prevent the members of a society from incroaching on one anothers property,

or seizing what is not their own.” Indeed, the very purpose of government was “to give each one

the secure and peacable possession of his own property” (LJ 5).

         Smith viewed the establishment of justice, meaning the protection of each individual’s

person and property, as absolutely essential to the very existence of society.6 Smith made these

points in the Theory of Moral Sentiments, where he argued that humans have an innate and

instinctive reaction against injustice and injury to others.7 The sight of injustice or injury gives

rise to resentment, which naturally leads to the desire for punishment or retaliation. This

resentment, Smith believed, is “the safeguard of justice,” while the desire for retribution “seems

to be the great law which is dictated to us by Nature” (TMS 79, 82).8


6
  Smith wrote that “few men have reflected upon the necessity of justice to the existence of society,” but it was a
key concern to those writing in the Scottish enlightenment (TMS 89). Other major thinkers also considered the
societal and economic importance of justice and the security of property, but in a somewhat less systematic way
(Pascal 1938, Stein 1970, Bowles 1985).
7
  “Nature has implanted in the human breast that consciousness of ill-desert, those terrors of merited punishment
which attend upon its violation, as the great safe-guards of the association of mankind, to protect the weak, to curb
the violent, and to chastise the guilty.” (TMS 86).
8
  “As mankind go along with, and approve of the violence employed to avenge the hurt which is done by injustice,
so they much more go along with, and approve of, that which is employed to prevent and beat off the injury, and to
restrain the offender from hurting his neighbors” (TMS 79).

                                                          6
         But if there was no established means for punishing injustice, then resentment could not

be kept in check because “there is no greater tormentor of the human breast than violent

resentment which cannot be gratified” (TMS 119). If resentment at an unpunished injustice was

not pacified in some way, individuals might take matters into their own hands and retaliate,

possibly threatening the peace and order of society. This could lead to a breakdown in society

because no society could function if everyone is injuring one another. As he put it:

         “Society . . . cannot subsist among those who are at all times ready to hurt and injure one

         another. The moment that injury begins, the moment that mutual resentment and

         animosity take place, all the bands of it are broken asunder, and the different members of

         which it consisted are, as it were, dissipated and scattered abroad by the violence and

         opposition of their discordant affections. If there is any society among robbers and

         murderers, they must at least, according to the trite observation, abstain from robbing and

         murdering one another” (TMS 86).9

In short, the absence of justice can lead to a breakdown of society. As he concluded, “society

cannot subsist unless the laws of justice are tolerably observed, as no social intercourse can take

place among men who do not generally abstain from injuring one another” (TMS 87).

         In this respect, justice plays a much more important role in holding society together than

other virtues such as beneficence. Indeed, Smith seemed fond of drawing attention to the limited

role that benevolence plays in society.10 In the Theory of Moral Sentiments, he argued that


9
  Late, Smith also writes: “As the violation of justice is what men will never submit to from one another, the public
magistrate is under a necessity of employing the power of the commonwealth to enforce the practice of this virtue.
Without this precaution, civil society would become a scene of bloodshed and disorder, every man revenging
himself at his own hand whenever he fancied he was injured. To prevent the confusion which would attend upon
every man's doing justice to himself, the magistrate, in all governments that have acquired any considerable
authority, undertakes to do justice to all, and promises to hear and to redress every complaint of injury” (TMS 340).
10
   In the Wealth of Nations, he observed that self-interest, not beneficence, is the driving force in a commercial
society. As he famously wrote, “it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we
expect our dinner, but with regard to their own interest” (WN 26-7).

                                                          7
beneficence “is less essential to the existence of society than justice. Society may subsist,

though not in the most comfortable state, without beneficence; but the prevalence of injustice

must utterly destroy it” (TMS 86). Here Smith memorably compared society to a building,

writing that beneficence is an “ornament which embellishes, not the foundation which supports

the building,” but justice “is the main pillar that upholds the whole edifice. If it is removed, the

great, the immense fabric of human society . . . must in a moment crumble into atoms” (TMS

86).11

         What do individuals need to do to behave in a just manner? By Smith’s definition, it is

not doing good deeds for others (beneficence), but simply refraining from directly harming them:

“Mere justice is, upon most occasions, but a negative virtue, and only hinders us from hurting

our neighbor” (TMS 82). Indeed, the “foundation of justice and humanity” is having a “sacred

regard” for the life and property of others (TMS 153).12 For example, the poor cannot simply

take from the rich, even if that redistribution would pass a utilitarian cost-benefit test, because

such an act would inflict harm on others.13



11
   David Hume also pointed to justice as the foundation of society, arguing before Smith that it was “absolutely
requisite to the well-being of mankind and existence of society” (EPM3:2:159) and that “without justice society
must immediately dissolve” (EPM 199).11 Similarly, rules about property that gave stability of possession are “not
only useful, but even absolutely necessary to human society” (EPM 501).
12
   Indeed, Smith ranked the severity of the infringement in descending order: a person’s life, their property, and
their personal rights. “The most sacred laws of justice, therefore, those whose violation seems to call loudest for
vengeance and punishment, are the laws which guard the life and person of our neighbor; the next are those which
guard his property and possessions; and last of all come those which guard what are called his personal rights, or
what is due to him from the promises of others” (TMS 84).
13
   “One individual must never prefer himself so much even to any other individual, as to hurt or injure that other, in
order to benefit himself, though the benefit to the one should be much greater than the hurt or injury to the other.
The poor man must neither defraud nor steal from the rich, though the acquisition might be much more beneficial to
the one than the loss could be hurtful to the other.” Not only would that injury be “contrary to nature,” but any such
infringement would deserve punishment “for having thus violated one of those sacred rules, upon the tolerable
observation of which depend the whole security and peace of human society” Why? “for one man to deprive another
unjustly of anything, or unjustly to promote his own advantage by the loss or disadvantage of another, is more
contrary to nature, than death, than poverty, than pain, than all the misfortunes which can affect him, either in his
body, or in his external circumstances” (TMS 138).


                                                          8
         If injustice – harm to someone’s person or property or rights – naturally gives rise to the

demand for retribution, what was needed to tame this potentially dangerous passion and prevent

it from destroying society? The answer is to satisfy the demand for justice by punishing the

unjust act by establishing a system for the administration of justice and the resolution of disputes.

This would resolve the injustice peaceably and pacify those potentially destructive passions.14

         Smith saw this as the original purpose of government, believing that “the object of Justice

is the security from injury, and it is the foundation of civil government” (LJ 398). The institution

of government arose for the protection of life and property:

         “The first and chief design of every system of government is to maintain justice; to

         prevent the members of a society from encroaching on one another’s property, or seizing

         what is not their own. The design here is to give each one the secure and peaceable

         possession of his own property . . . Law and government, too, seem to propose no other

         object but this, they secure the individual who has enlarged his property, that he may

         peaceably enjoy the fruits of it” (LJ 5).15

         In Smith’s view, once individuals and groups began to accumulate property, they created

an institution – government – for their protection against domestic and foreign encroachment.

“The acquisition of valuable and extensive property, therefore, necessarily requires the

establishment of civil government,” he wrote. “Where there is no property, or at least none that

exceeds the value of two or three days labour, civil government is not so necessary.” Thus,

“property and civil government very much depend on one another” (LJ 401).



14
   This is another example of Rosenberg’s (1960) classic interpretation of Smith as exploring the role of institutions
in diverting destructive passions into serving constructive goals.
15
   In the Wealth of Nations, Smith repeated that “the duty of establishing an exact administration of justice” meant
“protecting, as far as possible, every member of the society from the injustice or oppression of every other member
of it” (WN 708-9).

                                                          9
          Of course, this means that government protects those who have property from those who

do not.16 Smith admitted that “civil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of

property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have

some property against those who have none at all” (WN 715).17 Smith accepted that such a

system led to and perpetuated inequality – “wherever there is great property there is great

inequality” – and suggested that inequality was a natural condition that would always exist.18

          Smith was unapologetic for the resulting inequality that came with the protection of

property. The protection of property served the important purpose of preventing people from

getting rich simply by taking from others. An economy simply could not function if some

groups were constantly taking from others. “[I]t is next to impossible that any accumulation of

stock can be made” where there is plundering, pillaging, and perpetual wars. “When people find

themselves every moment in danger of being robbed of all they possess, they have no motive to

be industrious,” he argued. “Nothing can be more an obstacle to the progress of opulence” (LJ

522).19


16
   “Men may live together in society with some tolerable degree of security, though there is no civil magistrate to
protect them from the injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition in the rich, in the poor the hatred of
labour and the love of present ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt [them] to invade property,
passions much more steady in their operation, and much more universal in their influence. . . . The affluence of the
rich excites the indignation of the poor, who are often both driven by want, and prompted by envy, to invade his
possessions. It is only under the shelter of the civil magistrate that the owner of that valuable property, which is
acquired by the labour of many years, or perhaps of many successive generations, can sleep a single night in
security. He is at all times surrounded by unknown enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never
appease, and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the powerful arm of the civil magistrate continually
held up to chastise it” (WN 709-10).
17
   Therefore, “laws and government may be considered in this and indeed in every case as a combination of the rich
to oppress the poor, and preserve to themselves the inequality of the goods which would otherwise be soon
destroyed by the attacks of the poor, who if not hindered by the government would soon reduce the others to an
equality with themselves by open violence” (LJ 208).
18
   “By law and government all the different arts flourish, and that inequality of fortune to which they give occasion
is sufficiently preserved” (LJ 213).
19
   Smith was exposed to these ideas from his teacher, Francis Hutcheson. In his 1726 book An Inquiry into the
Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue, Hutcheson (2004, 284-85) discusses the incentive effects of property.
“It is well known, that general Benevolence alone, is not a Motive strong enough to industry, to bear labour and toil,
and many other difficultys which we are averse to from self-love.” Therefore assuring that people can enjoy the

                                                         10
         Consequently, the poor would enjoy much higher standard of living under a system in

which property was kept secure than one in which property was left insecure. Security of

possession was a precondition for economic progress from which all groups could prosper.20

“The establishment of perfect justice, perfect liberty, and of perfect equality, is the very simple

secret which most effectually secures the highest degree of prosperity” to all classes of citizen,

he argued (WN 669).

         In this context, Smith examined the role of secure property rights in promoting the wealth

of nations.



Security and the Incentives for Economic Activity

         In the Wealth of Nations, Smith made this sweeping summary statement:

         “Commerce and manufactures can seldom flourish long in any state which does not enjoy

         a regular administration of justice, in which the people do not feel themselves secure in

         the possession of their property, in which the faith of contracts is not supported by law,

fruits of their labor strengthens “our motives to industry.” Without that assurance, “the depriving of persons of the
fruits of his own innocent labour, takes away all motives to industry from self-love, and the nearer ties; and leaves us
no other motive than general benevolence: nay, it exposes the industrious as a constant prey to the slothful, and sets
self-love against industry. This is the ground of our right of dominion and property in the fruits of our labours;
without which right, we could scarce hope for any industry, or anything beyond the product of uncultivated nature.”
In his Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy (1747), Hutcheson returned to this theme. “Our sense of right and
wrong also shows, that it must be inhuman and ill-natured for one who can otherways subsist by his own industry, to
take by violence from another what he has acquired or improved by his innocent labors.” Property was needed to
provide a motive for industry because “no man would employ his labours unless he were assured of having the fruits
of them at his own disposal: otherways, all the more active and diligent would be a perpetual prey, and a set of
slaves, to the slothful and worthless.” Therefore, the need for security of possession to the formation of government
for the purpose of establishing justice; “that justice is necessary cannot be a question.” Without the enforcement of
justice, “if laws and justice don’t prevail,” he held, “all industry must languish.”
         20
            In addition, protecting property gave the right incentive to those without property: rather than acquire
goods from taking them from others, such individuals could either stay poor or could acquire possessions by
participating in the economy and the division of labor. “The government and laws hinder the poor from ever
acquiring the wealth by violence which they would otherwise exert on the rich; they tell them they must either
continue poor or acquire wealth in the same manner as they [the rich] have done” (LJ 208).


                                                          11
       and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to be regularly employed in

       enforcing the payment of debts from all those who are able to pay. Commerce and

       manufactures, in short, can seldom flourish in any state in which there is not a certain

       degree of confidence in the justice of government” (WN 910).

Note that Smith identifies three factors associated with the administration of justice: the security

of possessions, the fulfillment of contracts, and the payment of debts. This is the closest that

Smith actually comes to defining what we today call “property rights,” which he viewed as the

security of possession (and presumably freedom of disposal) and the enforcement of promises

(contracts and debts).

       Smith illustrated his statement by comparing countries where property was secure to

countries where property was insecure. In places where property was secure, people would be

willing to accumulate capital and put it to work; in places where property was insecure, people

would lack the incentive to accumulate capital and would seek to move or hide what capital they

possessed. By slowing capital accumulation, a key factor in the wealth of nations, the insecurity

of property held back economic development. “In all countries where there is tolerable security,

every man of common understanding will endeavour to employ whatever stock he can command

in procuring either present enjoyment or future profit,” he wrote. “In those unfortunate

countries, indeed, where men are continually afraid of the violence of their superiors, they

frequently bury and conceal a great part of their stock, in order to have it always at hand to carry

with them to some place of safety, in case of their being threatened with any of those disasters to

which they consider themselves as at all times exposed” (WN 284-85). As examples of the latter

he pointed to Turkey, India, and most governments in Asia.




                                                 12
           Differences in the security of property rights could even be found within countries. He

contrasted the prosperity of cities, where the administration of justice and the enforcement of

property rights was effective, with the country, where such enforcement was more tenuous:

           “Order and good government, and along with them the liberty and security of individuals,

           were . . . established in cities at a time when the occupiers of land in the country were

           exposed to every sort of violence. But men in this defenceless state naturally content

           themselves with their necessary subsistence, because to acquire more might only tempt

           the injustice of their oppressors. On the contrary, when they are secure of enjoying the

           fruits of their industry, they naturally exert it to better their condition, and to acquire not

           only the necessaries, but the conveniences and elegancies of life” (WN 405).

           Smith did not believe that the administration of justice had to be perfect, just as other

government policies did not have to be perfect, to allow economic growth to occur. Instead, the

administration of justice only had to be “tolerable.”21 The underlying, driving force that

generated economic progress is the desire of individuals to improve their condition. As he put it,

“the great purpose of human life” is to “better our condition” (TMS 50). This motive was

powerful enough to overcome many obstacles put in its way, even an imperfect administration of

justice. As Smith famously said, “The uniform, constant, and uninterrupted effort of every man

to better his condition, the principle from which publick and national, as well as private opulence

is originally derived, is frequently powerful enough to maintain the natural progress of things

toward improvement, in spite both of the extravagance of government, and of the greatest errors

of administration” (WN 343).

           Indeed, Smith criticized Francois Quesnay, the French physiocrat, for his belief that “the

exact regimen of perfect liberty and perfect justice” was a prerequisite for economic progress:
21
     Indeed, Smith believed that “[n]othing is more difficult than to perfectly secure liberty” (WN 480).

                                                            13
       “He seems not to have considered that, in the political body, the natural effort which

       every man is continually making to better his own condition is a principle of preservation

       capable of preventing and correcting, in many respects, the bad effects of a political

       œconomy, in some degree, both partial and oppressive. Such a political œconomy, though

       it no doubt retards more or less, is not always capable of stopping altogether the natural

       progress of a nation towards wealth and prosperity, and still less of making it go

       backwards. If a nation could not prosper without the enjoyment of perfect liberty and

       perfect justice, there is not in the world a nation which could ever have prospered. In the

       political body, however, the wisdom of nature has fortunately made ample provision for

       remedying many of the bad effects of the folly and injustice of man, in the same manner

       as it has done in the natural body for remedying those of his sloth and intemperance”

       (WN 674).

       The basis for Smith’s belief that the effort of every individual to better their condition

could overcome the extravagance of government and the errors of administration was the

historical experience of Great Britain. Though government policies had been far from perfect,

Britain’s economic condition had steadily improved over time because individuals had been

allowed to pursue their own interests within an institutional framework that protected property.

The security of property through the administration of justice encouraged capital accumulation

and allowed economic progress to take place more than bad government policies retarded that

progress:

       “That security which the laws in Great Britain give to every man that he shall enjoy the

       fruits of his own labour is alone sufficient to make any country flourish, notwithstanding

       these and twenty other absurd regulations of commerce . . . . The natural effort of every



                                                14
       individual to better his own condition, when suffered to exert itself with freedom and

       security, is so powerful a principle, that it is alone, and without any assistance, not only

       capable of carrying on the society to wealth and prosperity, but of surmounting a hundred

       impertinent obstructions with which the folly of human laws too often incumbers its

       operations; though the effect of these obstructions is always more or less either to

       encroach upon its freedom, or to diminish its security” (WN 540).

       Elsewhere he pointed out that

       “In the midst of all exactions of government, this capital has been silently and gradually

       accumulated by the private frugality and good conduct of individuals, by their universal,

       continual, and uninterrupted effort to better their own condition. It is this effort, protected

       by law and allowed by liberty to exert itself in the manner that is most advantageous,

       which has maintained the progress of England towards opulence and improvements in

       almost all former times, and which, it is to be hoped, will do so in all future times” (WN

       345).

       Smith was famous for his critique of the monopolies and exclusive privileges that existed

under the mercantile system, but at least, he observed, England allowed freedom of trade without

government direction. That freedom to trade, along with the impartial administration of justice,

made all the difference:

       “In England, . . . the natural good effects of the colony trade, assisted by other causes,

       have in a great measure conquered the bad effects of the monopoly. These causes seem to

       be: the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstanding some restraints, is at least equal,

       perhaps superior, to what it is in any other country; the liberty of exporting, duty free,

       almost all sorts of goods which are the produce of domestic industry to almost any



                                                 15
         foreign country; and what perhaps is of still greater importance, the unbounded liberty of

         transporting them from any one part of our own country to any other without being

         obliged to give any account to any public office, without being liable to question or

         examination of any kind; but above all, that equal and impartial administration of justice

         which renders the rights of the meanest British subject respectable to the greatest, and

         which, by securing to every man the fruits of his own industry, gives the greatest and

         most effectual encouragement to every sort of industry” (WN 610).

         In this regard, England stood apart from other European countries, such as Spain and

Portugal, which had equally bad policies but which lacked both free internal trade and secure

property rights. Consequently, “this bad policy is not in those countries counter-balanced by the

general liberty and security of the people. Industry is there neither free nor secure, and the civil

and ecclesiastical governments of both Spain and Portugal are such as would alone be sufficient

to perpetuate their present state of poverty, even though their regulations of commerce were as

wise as the greater part of them are absurd and foolish” (WN 541).

         As noted earlier, Smith did not limit the administration of justice to simply the security of

possession, but also the enforcement of contracts and the ability to collect on debts, although he

did not seem to emphasize these factors as much. With regard to contracts, Smith thought that

“imperfections in the law with regard to contracts” was “another thing which greatly retarded

commerce” in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire (LJ 528).22 In explaining the relative

poverty of Spain and Portugal, Smith pointed to the inability to collect on sovereign debts.
22
   Smith’s view that a central duty of the sovereign was the preservation of property via a proper legal framework is
also emphasized in the following: “When the law does not enforce the performance of contracts, it puts all
borrowers nearly upon the same footing with bankrupts or people of doubtful credit in better regulated countries.
The uncertainty of recovering his money makes the lender exact the same usurious interest which is usually required
from bankrupts. Among the barbarous nations who over-ran the western provinces of the Roman Empire, the
performance of contracts was left for many ages to the faith of the contracting parties. The courts of justice of their
kings seldom intermeddled in it. The high rate of interest, which took place in those ancient times, may perhaps be
partly accounted for from this cause” (WN 112).

                                                          16
Those countries remained poor for various reasons, “but above all, that irregular and partial

administration of justice, which often protects the rich and powerful debtor from the pursuit of

his injured creditor, and which makes the industrious part of the nation afraid to prepare goods

for the consumption of those haughty and great men to whom they dare not refuse to sell upon

credit, and from they are altogether uncertain of repayment” (WN 610).

       Smith also pointed to China, where economic development was held back because the

protection of property was unequal and uneven. He speculated that the country could be doing

much better with a different set of laws and institutions.

       “China seems to have been long stationary, and had probably long ago acquired that full

       complement of riches which is consistent with the nature of its laws and institutions. But

       this complement may be much inferior to what, with other laws and institutions, the

       nature of its soil, climate, and situation might admit of. A country which neglects or

       despises foreign commerce, and which admits the vessels of foreign nations into one or

       two of its ports only, cannot transact the same quantity of business which it might do with

       different laws and institutions. In a country too, where, though the rich or the owners of

       large capitals enjoy a good deal of security, the poor or the owners of small capitals enjoy

       scarce any, but are liable, under the pretence of justice, to be pillaged and plundered at

       any time by the inferior mandarines, the quantity of stock employed in all the different

       branches of business transacted within it, can never be equal to what the nature and extent

       of that business might admit” (WN 112).

       Smith also believed that the administration of justice trumped the availability of natural

resources as a factor in economic development. In 1779, when asked why Ireland remained poor

and whether manufactures from the country might ever pose a threat to those in England, Smith



                                                 17
replied that he doubted Ireland would develop extensive manufacturing because it lacked coal

and wood. But he added that the lack of “order, police, and a regular administration of justice

both to protect and to restrain the inferior ranks of people, [are] articles more essential to the

progress of industry than both coal and wood put together” and that its absence would hold

Ireland back “as long as it continues to be divided between two hostile nations, the oppressors

and the oppressed, the protestants and the Papists” (Corr 243-44).23

        Of course, the administration of justice was a valuable service that had to be paid for.

For this reason, although he sympathized with the Americans in their brewing conflict with

Britain, he also believed that they owed their economic success to British institutions and

therefore they should pay taxes to defray the cost of protection provided by the crown.

        “It is not contrary to justice that both Ireland and America should contribute towards the

        discharge of the public debt of Great Britain. That debt has been contracted in support of

        the government established by the Revolution, a government to which the Protestants of

        Ireland owe, not only the whole authority which they at present enjoy in their own

        country, but every security which they possess for their liberty, their property, and their

        religion; a government to which several of the colonies of America owe their present

        charters, and consequently their present constitution, and to which all the colonies of

        America owe the liberty, security, and property which they have ever since enjoyed. (WN

        944).

        In sum, Smith believed that security of possession – protecting property from

encroachment by others – and the enforcement of promises (contracts and debt) were key factors

in providing an incentive for investment and economic growth. While Smith did not discuss the


23
  Of course, he hastened to add that, should Ireland, “in consequence of freedom and Good Government,” develop
industry equal to that of England, “so much the better would it be” for both countries.

                                                      18
importance of the administration of justice in securing property rights in any single part of the

Wealth of Nations, as he did with the division of labor, he referred to it repeatedly throughout his

work. But did he offer any guidance as to how the tolerable administration of justice could be

established?



Establishing a Tolerable Administration of Justice

        Smith’s plan for a third book on “the general principles of law and government” never

came to fruition, so he never went into detail on how the administration of justice was to be

provided (TMS 3). But he does provide extensive hints about his views.

        In all his works, Smith argued that the “impartial” administration of justice required a

judicial system that was independent of executive power. An independent judiciary was “the

foundation of that greater Security which we now enjoy both with regard to Liberty, property,

and Life” (LRBL 176). By contrast, if the judiciary was controlled by the executive, the

administration of justice would be liable to corruption and abuse.24 As he put it:

        “When the judicial is united to the executive power, it is scarce possible that justice

        should not frequently be sacrificed to what is vulgarly called politics. The persons

        entrusted with the great interests of the state may, even without any corrupt views,

        sometimes imagine it necessary to sacrifice to those interests the rights of a private man.

        But upon the impartial administration of justice depends the liberty of every individual,

        the sense which he has of his own security. In order to make every individual feel himself

        perfectly secure in the possession of every right which belongs to him, it is not only



24
   “When the sovereign or chief exercised his judicial authority in his own person, how much soever he might abuse
it, it must have been scarce possible to get any redress, because there could seldom be anybody powerful enough to
call him to account” (WN 717).

                                                       19
         necessary that the judicial should be separated from the executive power, but that it

         should be rendered as much as possible independent of that power” (WN 723).

         What could be done to ensure judicial independence so that it was not compromised by

politics? Here Smith describes some of the characteristics of such a system without saying how

it could be brought about. Specifically, judges “should not be liable to be removed from his

office according to the caprice of that [executive] power.” And a judge’s salary should not be

paid at the discretion of the executive or by those involved in the legal process.25 Instead, it

should be paid out of ordinary revenue because a system of justice benefits everyone in society.26

Smith also praised juries as a valuable institution for ensuring the impartial administration of

justice: “Nothing can be a greater security for life, liberty, and property than this institution,” he

argued. “The law of England, always the friend of liberty, deserves praise in no instance more

than in the carefull provision of impartial juries” (LJ 425).

         Although Smith did not give advice as to how to establish an independent judiciary, he

provided an historical account of how they had arisen in England. As Smith had already

explained, with the accumulation of property there came a demand for protective services.

Property owners were willing to create an institution – government – to do so, or to pay the

sovereign to protect their land and possessions and to levy fines on those found guilty of

violating someone’s property. This tied revenue to the administration of justice. Speaking about

the period after the fall of the Roman empire with regard to the Germans in Europe and the


25
   “This scheme of making the administration of justice subservient to the purposes of revenue could scarce fail to
be productive of several very gross abuses. The person who applied for justice with a large present in his hand was
likely to get something more than justice; while he who applied for it with a small one was likely to get something
less” (WN 716).
26
  “The expence of the administration of justice, too, may, no doubt, be considered as laid out for the benefit of the
whole society. There is no impropriety, therefore, in its being defrayed by the general contribution of the whole
society” (WN 814).


                                                         20
Tartars of Asia, Smith held that “the administration of justice not only afforded a certain revenue

to the sovereign, but to procure this revenue seems to have been one of the principal advantages

which he proposed to obtain by the administration of justice.” However, Smith noted, “[t]his

scheme of making the administration of justice subservient to the purposes of revenue could

scarce fail to be productive of several very gross abuses” and it led to corruption (WN 716).27

Indeed, in Europe during this period “the administration of justice appears for a long time to

have been extremely corrupt; far from being quite equal and impartial even under the best

monarchs, and altogether profligate under the worst” (WN 717). “During the continuance of this

state of things, therefore, the corruption of justice . . . scarce admitted of any effectual remedy”

(WN 718).

         Smith offered two historical explanations for how judiciaries became independent from

executives. One story is that the increasing threat of foreign invasion or conflict required the

sovereign to shift attention to ensuring national defense against foreign attack. The higher

expenses of maintaining national defense required a new set of taxes, rather than just collecting

fees for the administration of justice. This separated revenue from the administration of justice

and led to the delegation of the administration of justice to others rather than the person of the

sovereign (WN 718).

         Elsewhere, Smith argues the separation was simply due to the growing number of tasks

facing the executive and the need to take advantage of the division of labor. This division of

labor also helped regularize the administration of justice (since lower authorities could not

collect fees for themselves) making it less corrupt and insulating it from politics. As he put it:

27
   “The person who applied for justice with a large present in his hand was likely to get something more than justice;
while he who applied for it with a small one was likely to get something less. Justice, too, might frequently be
delayed in order that this present might be repeated. The amercement, besides, of the person complained of, might
frequently suggest a very strong reason for finding him in the wrong, even when he had not really been so. That such
abuses were far from being uncommon the ancient history of every country in Europe bears witness” (WN 716-17).

                                                         21
“The separation of the judicial from the executive power seems originally to have arisen from the

increased business of the society, in consequence of its increasing improvement. The

administration of justice became so laborious and so complicated a duty as to require the

undivided attention of the persons to whom it was entrusted” and so the task was delegated. (WN

722).

         In either case, whether it was an external threat that led to more revenue demands or the

eventual division of labor within government, judicial independence was introduced “by

chance”:

         “This Separation of the province of distributing Justice between man and man from that

         of conducting publick affairs and leading Armies is the great advantage which modern

         times have over antient, and the foundation of that greater Security which we now enjoy

         both with regard to Liberty, property and Life. It was introduced only by chance and to

         ease the Supreme Magistrate of this the most Laborious and least Glorious part of his

         Power, and has never taken place untill the increase of Refinement and the Growth of

         Society have multiplied business immensely” (LRBL 176).

         Thus, Smith describes a well-functioning, independent judicial system, but does not have

much to say on how it can be established. He did praise the British system, with the House of

Commons and an independent judiciary, for having “government properly restrained” and

ensuring something close to “a perfect security to liberty and property” (LJ 422).28 But he does

not elaborate on how other societies could develop those institutional checks on executive power.



28
   Smith pointed to the North American colonies as having institutions that limited the power of the executive. “In
everything, except their foreign trade, the liberty of the English colonists to manage their own affairs their own way
is complete. It is in every respect equal to that of their fellow-citizens at home, and is secured in the same manner,
by an assembly of the representatives of the people, who claim the sole right of imposing taxes for the support of the
colony government. The authority of this assembly over-awes the executive power, and neither the meanest nor the

                                                         22
Lost Lessons: From Political Economy and Economics

         Most of the English classical economists writing in the early nineteenth century did not

elaborate on the importance of property rights for promoting economic development. David

Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, Nassau Senior, Robert Torrens, and others, were more interested in

questions of rent, value, and population than in identifying the underlying prerequisites for

economic development, which were largely satisfied in Britain.29 Most of the classical

economists did not completely ignore the importance of property rights, but only mentioned it in

a paragraph or two without much analysis.30 They also followed Senior in dismissing such

questions as being in the realm of politics rather than political economy.31 They did not feel the


most obnoxious colonist, as long as he obeys the law, has anything to fear from the resentment, either of the
governor or of any other civil or military officer in the province” (WN 584-85).
29
   Ricardo (1951, 204) does dissent from Adam Smith’s view on land taxes by saying “Rent often belongs to those
who, after many years of toil, have realized their gains, and expended their fortunes in the purchase of land or
houses; and it certainly would be an infringement of that principle which should ever be held sacred, the security of
property, to subject it to unequal taxation.”
30
   For example, Malthus (1820, 346, 251) noted that “No people can be much accustomed to form plans for the
future, who do not feel assured that their industrious exertions, while fair and honourable, will be allowed to have
free scope; that that the property which they either poses, or may acquire, will be secured to them by a known code
of just laws impartially administered.” But this was a matter of politics: “Security of property, without a certain
degree of which, there can be no encouragement to individual industry, depends mainly upon the political
constitution, the excellence of its laws, and the manner in which they are administered.” Other less notable authors,
such as Richard Whately (1831, 144), also called brief attention to the importance of such security for ensuring that
the division of labor would take place: “Let a Nation, though still in a rude state, possess the knowledge of some of
the simplest and most essential arts—a certain degree of division of labour—and above all a recognition, and
tolerable security, of property; and it will not fail, unless very grievously harassed by wars, inundations, or some
such calamities, to increase its wealth, and to advance, more or less, in civilization. I have spoken of security of
property as the most essential point, because, though no progress can be made without a division of labour, this
could neither exist without security of property, nor could fail to arise with it. No man, it is plain, could subsist by
devoting himself either wholly or partially to the production of one kind of commodity, trusting to the supply of his
other wants by exchanging part of that commodity with his neighbours, unless he were allowed to keep it, and to
dispose of it, as his own. On the other hand, let property be but established and secured, and the division of labour
would be the infallible result; because the advantages of it to each individual, in each particular instance, would
catch the attention of every one who possessed but a moderate degree of forethought.”
31
   “To explain what are the causes of the relative increase of subsistence and population is rather the business of a
writer on politics than of a Political Economist. At present we will only say that knowledge, security of property,
freedom of internal and external exchange, and equal admissibility to rank and power, are the principal causes which

                                                          23
need to consider the political system that would best provide for the security of possession, but

rather began shifting the debate from political economy to more technical questions of

economics.

         Because the security of property rights was a significant theme in Adam Smith’s work,

and that of the Scottish enlightenment more broadly, it may not come as a surprise that the

classical economist who stressed its importance most was from Scotland, John Ramsay

McCulloch. In the first edition of his Principles of Political Economy, McCulloch (1825, 73-4)

argued that security of property, trade and exchange, and capital accumulation were the three

“circumstances, without whose conjoint existence and co-operation” countries would never

move from poverty to affluence. Of these, “security of property is the first and most

indispensable requisite to the production of wealth.” Like his Scottish predecessors, he held that

secure property is “the foundation on which almost all the other institutions of society rest,” but

he avoided speculation about the origins of property.

         By the fourth and final edition of his book, McCulloch (1849) expanded his discussion of

“the utility, or rather necessity, of making some general regulations, that should secure to every

individual the peaceable enjoyment of the produce he had raised, and of the ground he had

cultivated and improved.” McCulloch strongly rejected the idea that securing property rights

helped the rich at the expense of the poor, holding that all classes benefit from the system that

allowed a country to grow in wealth. Property, he insisted, was not the cause of poverty but the

source of wealth.32 McCulloch mentioned the incentive effects of aligning effort and reward and


at the same time promote the increase of subsistence, and, by elevating the character of the people, lead them to keep
at a slower rate the increase of their numbers” (Senior 1850, 49).
32
   McCulloch (1849, 82) stated that “where property is not publicly guaranteed, men must look on each other as
enemies rather than as friends. The idle and improvident are always desirous of seizing on the wealth of the
laborious and frugal; and, were they not restrained by the strong arm of the law from prosecuting their attacks, they
would, by generating a feeling of insecurity, effectually check both industry and accumulation, and sink all classes
to the same level of hopeless misery as themselves.”

                                                         24
allowing individuals to enjoy the fruits of their labor.33 But he also recognized that it may

sometimes be in the interest of society to appropriate private property for a public purpose,

although he warned that property “should never be wantonly taken for such purposes” until it

had been reviewed by a competent tribunal and “full compensation” paid to the property owners

(89).

         Finally, McCulloch argued that economic development was nearly impossible when

governments did not respect property rights:

         “The finest soil, the finest climate, and the finest intellectual powers, can prevent no

         people from becoming barbarous, poor, and miserable, if they have the misfortune to be

         subjected to a government which does not respect and maintain the right of property.

         This is the greatest of calamities. The ravages of civil war, pestilence, and famine, may

         be repaired; but nothing can enable a nation to contend against the deadly influence of an

         established system of violence and rapine.”34

“Let us not, therefore, deceive ourselves,” he concluded, “by supposing that it is possible for any

people to emerge from barbarism, or to become wealthy, prosperous, and civilized, without the

security of property.”

         Because of their broader interest in law and government, in addition to economics,

Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill showed a much greater interest in exploring the role of

property rights, although in different ways. Bentham, of course, put enormous stress on the

important of laws, legislation, and the legal system as a foundation of government and the


33
   “If A climb a tree and bring down fruit, which, as soon as he comes to the ground, is taken from him by others, he
will not again engage in any similar undertakings, till he be well assures that he shall be permitted exclusively to the
profit by what has been obtained through his sole exertions; nor will others engage in any such undertaking without
a similar assurance” (McCulloch 1849, 80).
34
   McCulloch (1849, 84) pointed to contemporary examples of this, saying that “the want of security, or of any
lively and well-founded expectation among the inhabitants of their being permitted freely to dispose of the fruits of
their industry, is the principal cause of the present wretched state of the Ottoman dominions.”

                                                          25
economy. In Principles of the Civil Code, Bentham (1843, 307, 311) argued that the objective of

law is security, which is “the foundation of life, of subsistence, of abundance, of happiness;

everything depends on it.” Law helps establish security and all the benefits that follow;

“Without law there is no security; and consequently no abundance, nor even certain subsistence.”

       Bentham (1843, 308) argued that law is essential because “property is entirely the

creature of law”. By protecting property, law provides security, aligns effort and reward, and

provides the incentive for work and investment:

       “The Law does not say to a man, ‘Work and I will reward you;’ but it says to him, ‘Work,

       and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will ensure to you the fruits of

       your labor, its natural and sufficient reward, which, without me, you could not preserve.’

       If industry creates, it is the law which preserves: if, at the first moment, we owe

       everything to labour, at the second, and every succeeding moment, we owe everything to

       the law.”

The assurance that investment today will be protected against confiscation tomorrow gives

everyone an expectation about one’s property in the future. “If I despair of enjoying the fruits of

my labour, I shall only think of living from day to day: I shall not undertake labours which will

only benefit my enemies” (310).

       Bentham also believed that an oppressive government could prove to be a major obstacle

in this regard. A temporary or passing calamity that destroys one’s possessions or productive

capital, he argued, does not destroy the spirit of industry and the adverse effects would only be

temporary. By contrast, “nothing less is requisite for freezing up industry, than the operation of

a permanent domestic cause, such as a tyrannical government,” which can cause lasting damage.

Yet, unlike Smith, Bentham opposed having an independent judiciary that was not accountable



                                                26
to the legislature or the public. He was also skeptical of lawyers and the jury system. Instead,

Bentham placed his faith in a legislature that was accountable to the people to ensure secure

property rights.

         John Stuart Mill agreed with many but dissented from several of Bentham’s conclusions.

For Mill as well, the administration of justice was the basis of civilization.35 In his Principles of

Political Economy, Mill described the primary reasons why productivity differences existed

across countries (including natural advantages such as the fertility of land and the skill and

knowledge of the workforce) and the secondary reasons. Of the secondary reasons, Mill ranked

“security” against predation as the most important. Once again, such security was necessary to

align reward with effort. As Mill (1909 [1848], 115) put it, “the efficiency of industry may be

expected to be great, in proportion as the fruits of industry are insured to the person exerting it:

and that all social arrangements are conducive to useful exertion, according as they provide that

the reward of every one for his labour shall be proportioned as much as possible to the benefit

which it produces.”36 When such security is not provided,

         “it means uncertainty whether they who sow shall reap, whether they who produce shall

         consume, and they who spare today shall enjoy tomorrow. It means not only that labour

         and frugality are not the road to acquisition, but that violence is. When person and

         property are to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions of the weak are at the mercy

         of the strong” (Mill 1909 [1848], 881).


35
   “In savage life there is little or no law, or administration of justice; not systematic employment of the collective
strength of society, to protect individuals against injury from one another . . . . We accordingly call a people
civilized, where the arrangements of society, for protecting the persons and property of its members, are sufficiently
perfect to maintain peace among them” (Mill 1963, 28: 120).
36
   In his Considerations upon Representative Government, Mill argued that “The greater security of property is one
of the main conditions and causes of greater production, which is progress in its more familiar and vulgarest aspect.”
(386, Considerations.) Mill also believed that “the security of person and property are the first social interests not
only of the rich but of the poor, is obvious to common sense” (CW-JSM, 18: 80).


                                                          27
        Mill believed that providing security was an important function of government and that

“person and property cannot be considered secure where the administration of justice is

imperfect.” However, like Smith, Mill did not believe that the administration of justice had to be

absolutely perfect. Mill argued that “in attaching to this great requisite, security of person and

property, the importance which is justly due to it, we must not forget that even for economical

purposes there are other things quite as indispensable, the presence of which will often make up

for the very considerable degree of imperfection in the protective arrangements of government”

(882). For example, he pointed out that the domestic unrest afflicting Flanders and the Hanseatic

League had not been an insurmountable obstacle to economic progress. Even though

government failed to provide adequate protection for property in these cases, individuals could

still get a “tolerable means of self-protection.”

       More than Adam Smith had, Mill stressed that government itself was often the problem,

not just because its provision of security was inadequate but because it was a source of

insecurity. Mill distinguished between security as protection against others by the government

and security from the government itself, judging the latter as more important. “Where a person

known to possess anything worth taking away, can expect nothing but to have it torn from him,

with every circumstance of tyrannical violence, by the agents of a rapacious government, it is not

likely that many will exert themselves to produce much more than necessaries” (Mill 1909

[1848], 113). Like McCulloch and Bentham, Mill believed that government predation was much

more harmful than private predation. “The only insecurity which is altogether paralyzing to the

active energies of producers is that arising from the government or from persons invested with

authority. Against all other depredators there is a hope of defending oneself” (113-14).

       He elaborated on this point this way:



                                                    28
        “Insecurity paralyzes only when it is such in nature and in degree that no energy of which

        mankind in general are capable affords any tolerable means of self-protection. And this is

        a main reason why oppression by the government, whose power is generally irresistible

        by any efforts that can be made by individuals, has so much more baneful an effect on the

        springs of national prosperity, than almost any degree of lawlessness and turbulence

        under free institutions. Nations have acquired some wealth, and made some progress in

        improvement, in states of social union so imperfect as to border on anarchy: but no

        countries in which the people were exposed without limit to arbitrary exactions from the

        officers of government every yet continued to have industry or wealth. A few generations

        of such a government never fail to extinguish both” (882).

He concluded that “difficulties and hardships are often but an incentive to exertion: what is fatal

to it, is the belief that it will not be suffered to produce its fruits” (883). And that was the

problem with government acting as a taker of property.

        Unlike Bentham, Mill did not place great emphasis on law as securing property rights.

“Much of the security of person and property in modern nations is the effect of manners and

opinion rather than law,” Mill argued. For example, much of “the security of property in

England is owing (except as regards open violence) to opinion, and the fear of exposure, much

more than to the direct operation of the law and the courts of justice” (115). In particular, Mill

also pointed to two problems with the law. First, the legal system was costly and slow and could

even “make it preferable to submit to any endurable amount of the evils which they are designed

to remedy.” Second, the laws themselves could be either defective in protecting “idleness and

prodigality against their natural consequences” or unjust in protecting inequitable institutions

such as slavery.



                                                  29
         Mill did not elaborate on these matters as much as he could have. The economic effects

of security, property, law and customs were all important, but unfortunately Mill (1909, 888)

said that “these considerations introduce considerations so much larger and deeper than those of

political economy, that I only advert to them in order not to pass wholly unnoticed things

superior in importance to those of which I treat.”37

         However, Mill was the last major political economist to discuss these issues. By the late

nineteenth century, with the marginal revolution of W. Stanley Jevons and Philip Wicksteed, and

the emergence of neoclassical economics and Alfred Marshall, interest in property rights and the

wealth of nations largely faded away.



Empirical Evidence on Smith’s Interpretation

         For decades after Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill pointed to the importance of secure

property rights for economic growth and development, most economists chose to focus on other

matters. Not until Douglass North and others began writing about the importance of institutions,

and the incentives that they create, as shaping economic growth did the economics profession




37
   Mill stood apart from his predecessors (with the exception of Malthus) on one critical issue that was overlooked
by most of his predecessors: he was willing to ask hard questions about the origin of the existing distribution of
property ownership. Whereas many of his predecessors seemed to take that distribution as given, Mill (1909, 208)
questioned the fairness of that distribution. “The social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from a
distribution of property which was the result, not of just partition, or acquisition by industry, but of conquest and
violence: and notwithstanding what industry has been doing for many centuries to modify the work of force, the
system still retains many and large traces of its origin. The laws of property have never yet conformed to the
principles on which the justification of private property rests . . . . They have not held the balance fairly between
human beings, but have heaped impediments upon some, to give advantage to others; they have purposely fostered
inequalities, and prevented all from starting fair in the race.” For that reason, Mill was will to consider policies to
offset those inequalities, such as land reform and limits on inheritances. For the enormous contemporary debate in
Britain on the relationship between property and poverty, see Horne 1990.


                                                           30
return to this set of issues.38 Since then, however, there have been innumerable empirical and

historical studies on the role of property rights in shaping economic outcomes, including the

wealth of nations.39 This section will focus on two aspects of this large literature as it relates to

Adam Smith’s views. The first is an economic question: will a country providing greater

security to property rights enjoy a higher per capita income, other things being equal? The

second is a political question: is an independent judiciary the key political institution necessary

to ensure greater security to property rights?

         The demonstration of statistical causality between property rights – to the extent that such

rights can be measured – and a country’s per capita income has been elusive. An early paper by

Scully (1988) showed that countries with open political institutions that respected private

property, enjoyed the rule of law, and allowed markets to allocate resources enjoyed higher

productivity and more rapid growth than other countries. However, by taking those

“institutions” as exogenous, this approach was unable to determine if good institutions were

responsible for higher incomes or if higher incomes led to good institutions.40

         Subsequent research sought to find institutional variation across countries that is random,

exogenous, or independent of income. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) argue that the

mortality rates of colonial settlers can be used to identify the causal relationship between


38
   See, for example, North and Thomas (1973) and North (1991). Weingast (1993, 1997) has also focused on the
critical question of the structure of politics that is required to ensure that government does not become predatory and
infringe on property rights. Adam Smith seems to have agreed with the contention by North and Weingast (1989)
that the Glorious Revolution of 1688 gave the country better political institutions for economic activity, marking a
break-point in Britain’s economic development. Smith mentioned that the revolution “perfected” the legal security
for individuals to enjoy the fruits of their labor. “That security which the laws in Great Britain give to every man
that he shall enjoy the fruits of his own labour is alone sufficient to make any country flourish, notwithstanding
these and twenty other absurd regulations of commerce; and this security was perfected by the revolution” (WN
540).
39
   Besley and Ghatak (2010) and Haggard, MacIntyre, and Tiede (2008) provide surveys of recent research on the
economics and politics of property rights in economic development, respectively.
40
   Similarly, De Long and Shleifer (1993) showed that, in medieval times, absolutist governments were associated
with low economic growth, as measured by city growth, compared to other regimes.

                                                          31
institutional quality and income levels. They find that institutional quality has a persistent and

positive effect on a country’s income.41 Similarly, after also accounting for the endogeneity of

institutions (using settler mortality and the fraction of people speaking English as instruments),

Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2004) examined whether institutions, geography, or openness

was the most important determinant of a country’s income. They found that measures of

property rights and the rule of law always trumped geography and economic integration in

determining income and concluded that the presence of clear property rights for investors is a

key, if not the key, element of the institutional environment that shapes economic performance.42

         Acemoglu and Robinson (2005) also sought to determine which institutions were most

important for a country’s income. They considered two aspects of property rights: protection

against expropriation and security of contracts. They found that countries with greater

constraints on politicians and more protection against expropriation had substantially higher

income, investment rates, and use of credit than others. However, after controlling for these

property rights institutions, contracting institutions have little economic effect. They conclude

that an economy can function reasonably well with weak contracting institutions, but not with

the presence of a significant expropriation risk. Private non-legal, non-governmental institutions

can emerge to help enforce contracts (Dixit 2009), but this is not something that Smith examined

in detail.

         A related literature has focused more directly on financial development under different

legal regimes. La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008) argue that common law countries


41
   In their view, settler mortality affected the type of institutions that were built in areas colonized by European
powers. Where the colonizers encountered relatively few health hazards, European settlers established institutions to
protect property rights and enforce the rule of law. In areas unsuitable for settlement, the colonists mainly sought to
extract resources and showed little interest in establishing high-quality institutions.
42
   Glaeser, La Porta, López-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004) note that property rights can be secured in authoritarian
regimes (poor political institutions in the sense of the rule of law), but that the economic development that occurs as
a result of those property rights can lead to demands for changes in political institutions.

                                                          32
provide greater legal protection of property rights and prevent expropriate of possessions and

financial rights than in civil law countries.43 Mahoney (2001) also finds that common‐law

countries experienced faster economic growth than civil‐law countries during the period 1960–

92 and then presented instrumental variables results suggesting that the common law produces

faster growth through greater security of property and contract rights. The question then

becomes: what aspect of common law countries gives rise to the greater security of property

rights? La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches, and Shleifer (2004) argue that judicial

independence accounts for some, though not all, of the beneficial effects of common law on

economic freedom. Voigt and Gutmann (2013) also find that judicial independence is required

to establish a credible commitment that the political system will respect property rights.

         There also appears to be strong support for Smith’s view that the protection of property

rights gives individuals an incentive to undertake investments (in the case of land ownership, see

the survey of Galiani and Schargrodsky 2011).44 Many recent papers have focused on the

difference between Bentham and Mill on formal law versus informal rules regarding the security

of property rights. A regular finding is that informal norms are more important than formal rules

in protecting property, implying that Mill was right in that non-state governance arrangements

are of key importance (Dixit 2009, Williamson 2009, Williamson and Kerekes 2011, Bubb

2013).


43
   Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2003) find that procedural formalism of dispute resolution is
systematically greater in civil than in common law countries. Furthermore, procedural formalism is associated with
higher expected duration of judicial proceedings, more corruption, less consistency, less honesty, less fairness in
judicial decisions, and inferior access to justice. Observing that a country’s legal system, whether it be common law
developed in England or civil law developed in France, is often determined exogenously by history (Glaeser and
Shleifer 2003), they find contracting rights are better established in common law than in civil law countries and
hence experience deeper financial development.
44
   This does not mean that property rights are immutable, or that any change in those rights will always undermine
economic incentives. As Naomi Lamoreaux (2011) points out, property rights have changed, sometimes in
significant ways, throughout the history of the United States without much adverse impact on economic incentives
for investment and exchange.

                                                         33
        At the same time, political scientists have pointed out the difficulty of providing any

precise definition of “property rights” and the “rule of law” (Hadfield and Weingast 2014) and

have argued that the many empirical indicators of these concepts may deliver different empirical

results (Haggard and Tiede 2010). Others have pointed out that democracy is a necessary but

insufficient condition for judicial independence and that judicial independence is not

synonymous with the rule of law (Helmke and Rosenbluth 2009). Furthermore, Rios-Figueroa

and Staton (2114) find important differences between de facto and de jure measures of judicial

independence.

        Despite the vagaries of determining the precise meaning of these terms, recent research

provides broad supports for the ideas that Adam Smith was proposing nearly 250 years ago, that

“institutions” to protect property rights are critical for economic development, and that they

include the administration of justice and judicial independence.



Conclusion

        In his writings, Adam Smith emphasized the importance of secure property rights both

for reasons of justice and for its effect on economic development. Smith did not believe that

government had to be proactive in generating economic progress. Rather, he heralded “the

establishment of a government which afforded to industry, the only encouragement which it

requires, some tolerable security that it shall enjoy the fruits of its own labour” (WN 256). Smith

explored this theme at length throughout his work, but in no single place, which might account

for its relative neglect.

        While the importance of property and security was accepted by participants of the

Scottish Enlightenment, this tradition was lost when the classical economists shifted the focus of



                                                 34
inquiry to the determinants of the distribution of income (wages, rent, and profits) within a

system that took such security for granted. Only over the past decade or so have many

economists finally turned their attention back to the institutional framework of economic activity

(property rights, legal system, non-legal norms, etc.) and its role in fostering or retarding

economic development. In doing so, they have found ample support for many of the

propositions that Smith advanced long ago.



References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson. 2005. “Unbundling Institutions.” Journal of Political
Economy 113: 949-995.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91, 1369-
1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005. “Institutions as the
Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth.” Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe
Aghion and Stephen Durlauf. Elsevier: North Holland.

Bentham, Jeremy. 1962 “Principles of the Civil Code.” In The Works of Jeremy Bentham,
Volume 1, edited by John Bowring. New York: Russell and Russell.

Besley, Timothy, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2010. “Property Rights and Economic Development.”
In Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 5, edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark R.
Rosenzweig. Elsevier: North Holland.

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2009. “The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights,
Taxation, and Policy.” American Economic Review 99, 1218-1244.

Billet, L. 1975. “Political Order and Economic Development: Reflections on Adam Smith’s
Wealth of Nations.” Political Studies 23, 430-441.

Bowles, Paul. 1985. “The Origin of Property and the Development of Scottish Historical
Science.” Journal of the History of Ideas, 46, 197-209.

Bubb, Ryan. 2013. “The Evolution of Property Rights: State Law or Informal Norms?” Journal
of Law and Economics 56: 555-594.



                                                 35
De Long, J. Bradford, and Andrei Shleifer. 1993. “Princes and Merchants: City Growth before
the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Law and Economics 36: 671-702.

Dixit, Avinash. 2009. “Governance Institutions and Economic Activity.” American Economic
Review 99: 3-24.

Djankov, Simon, Raphael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003.
“Courts: The Lex Mundi Project.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 452-517.

Galiani, Sebastian, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2011. “Land Property Rights and Resource
Allocation.” Journal of Law and Economics 54, S329-S345.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “Legal Origins.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
117, 1193-1230.

Glaeser, Edward, Raphael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth 9, 271-303.

Hadfield, Gillian K., and Barry R. Weingast. 2014. “Microfoundations of the Rule of Law.”
Annual Review of Political Science 17, 21-42.

Haggard, Stephan, Andrew MacIntyre, and Lydia Tiede. 2008. “The Rule of Law and Economic
Development.” Annual Review of Political Science 11, 205-234.

Helmke, Gretchen, and Frances Rosenbluth. 2009. “Regimes and the Rule of Law: Judicial
Independence in Comparative Perspective.” Annual Review of Political Science 12, 345-66.

Hollander, Samuel. 2013. “Adam Smith: Market Failure Pioneer and Champion of ‘Natural
Liberty.’” In Essays on Classical and Marxian Political Economy. New York: Routledge.

Horne, Thomas A. 1990. Property Rights and Poverty: Political Argument in Britain, 1605-
1834. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Hutcheson, Francis. 2004 [1726]. An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue in Two Treatises, edited by Wolfgang Leidhold. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.

Hutcheson, Francis. 1747. A Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy. Glasgow: R. & F. Foulis.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “Economic
Consequences of Legal Origins.” Journal of Economic Literature 46, 285-332.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
“Judicial Checks and Balances.” Journal of Political Economy 112, 445–70.

Lieberman, David. 2006. “Adam Smith on Justice, Rights, Law.” In Knud Haakonssen (ed.),
The Cambridge Companion to Adam Smith. New York: Cambridge University Press.

                                              36
Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 2011. “The Mystery of Property Rights: A U.S. Perspective,” Journal of
Economic History 71, 275-306.

McCulloch, John Ramsay. 1849. Principles of Political Economy. 4th edition. London:
Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.

Mahoney, Paul G. 2001. “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might Be Right.”
Journal of Legal Studies 30, 503-525.

Malthus, Thomas. 1820. Principles of Political Economy. London: J. Murray.

Mill, John Stuart. The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, edited by John Robson. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.

North, Douglass C. 1991. “Institutions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 97-112.

North, Douglass C., and Robert P. Thomas. 1973. The Rise of the Western World: A New
Economic History. New York: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R.Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century Britain.” Journal of
Economic History 49, 802-832.

Pascal, Roy. 1938. “Property and Society: The Scottish Historical School of the Eighteenth
Century.” Modern Quarterly 167-179.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” Journal of
Economic Growth 9,131-165.

Ricardo, David. 1951. On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. The Works and
Correspondence of David Ricardo, edited by Piero Sraffa. Volume 1. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Rios-Figueroa, Julio, and Jeffrey K. Staton. 2014. “An Evaluation of Cross-National Measures of
Judicial Independence.” Journal of Legal and Economic Organization 30, 104-137.

Robertson, John. 1983. “Scottish Political Economy beyond the Civic Tradition: Government
and Economic Development in the Wealth of Nations.” History of Political Thought 4, 451-482.

Rosenberg, Nathan. 1960. “Some Institutional Aspects of the Wealth of Nations.” Journal of
Political Economy 68, 557-570.

Scully, Gerald W. 1988. “The Institutional Framework and Economic Development.” Journal of
Political Economy 96, 652-662.

Senior, Nassau. 1850. Political Economy. London: J.J. Griffin.

                                              37
Smith, Adam. 1976 [1759]. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Smith, Adam. 1976 [1776]. An Inquiry in the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Smith, Adam. 1980. Essays on Philosophical Subjects. New York: Oxford University Press.

Smith, Adam. 1978. Lectures on Jurisprudence. New York: Oxford University Press.

Smith, Adam. 1983. Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Stein, Peter. 1970. “Law and Society in Eighteenth Century Scottish Thought.” Scotland in the
Age of Improvement, edited by Nicholas T. Phillipson and Rosalind Mitchison. Edinburgh:
University of Edinburgh Press.
Voigt, Stefan, and Jerg Gutmann. 2013. “Turning Cheap Talk into Economic Growth: On the
Relationship between Property Rights and Judicial Independence.” Journal of Comparative
Economics 41, 66-73.

Weingast, Barry R. 1993. “Constitutions as Governance Structures: The Political Foundations of
Secure Markets.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 149, 286-311.

Weingast, Barry R. 1997. “The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of Law.”
American Political Science Review 91, 245-263.

Whately, Richard. 1831. Introductory Lectures on Political Economy. London: Fellowes.

Williamson, Claudia R. 2009. “Informal Institutions Rule: Institutional Arrangements and
Economic Performance.” Public Choice 139: 371-387.

Williamson, Claudia R., and Carrie B. Kerekes. 2011. “Securing Private Property: Formal versus
Informal Institutions.” Journal of Law and Economics 54: 537-72.




                                              38
