NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INPUTS IN THE PRODUCTION OF EARLY CHILDHOOD HUMAN CAPITAL:
EVIDENCE FROM HEAD START
Christopher Walters
Working Paper 20639
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20639

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

A version of this article is forthcoming at The American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. I
am grateful to Joshua Angrist, Aviva Aron-Dine, David Autor, David Card, David Chan, Hilary Hoynes,
Guido Imbens, Patrick Kline, Alex Mas, Enrico Moretti, Christopher Palmer, Parag Pathak, Jesse Rothstein,
Tyler Williams, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at MIT, UC Berkeley, and the NBER
Education Program Spring meetings for useful comments and suggestions. This work was supported
by Institute for Education Sciences award number R305A120269 and a National Academy of Education/Spencer
Dissertation Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Christopher Walters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Inputs in the Production of Early Childhood Human Capital: Evidence from Head Start
Christopher Walters
NBER Working Paper No. 20639
October 2014
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
Studies of small-scale "model" early-childhood programs show that high-quality preschool can have
transformative effects on human capital and economic outcomes. Evidence on the Head Start program
is more mixed. Inputs and practices vary widely across Head Start centers, however, and little is known
about variation in effectiveness within Head Start. This paper uses data from a multi-site randomized
evaluation to quantify and explain variation in effectiveness across Head Start childcare centers. I
answer two questions: (1) How much do short-run effects vary across Head Start centers? and (2) To
what extent do inputs, practices, and child characteristics explain this variation? To answer the first
question, I use a selection model with random coefficients to quantify heterogeneity in Head Start
effects, accounting for non-compliance with experimental assignments. Estimates of the model show
that the cross-center standard deviation of cognitive effects is 0.18 test score standard deviations, which
is larger than typical estimates of variation in teacher or school effectiveness. Next, I assess the role
of observed inputs, practices and child characteristics in generating this variation, focusing on inputs
commonly cited as central to the success of model programs. My results show that Head Start centers
offering full-day service boost cognitive skills more than other centers, while Head Start centers offering
frequent home visiting are especially effective at raising non-cognitive skills. Head Start is also more
effective for children with less-educated mothers. Centers that draw more children from center-based
preschool have smaller effects, suggesting that cross-center differences in effects may be partially
due to differences in counterfactual preschool options. Other key inputs, including the High/Scope
curriculum, teacher education, and class size, are not associated with increased effectiveness in Head
Start. Together, observed inputs explain about one-third of the variation in Head Start effectiveness
across experimental sites.

Christopher Walters
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
crwalters@econ.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Studies of small-scale “model” early-childhood education programs show that preschool attendance can boost
outcomes in the short- and long-run. In the High/Scope Perry Preschool Project, a randomized trial that
took place in the early 1960s, 123 disadvantaged children were randomly assigned to either an intensive
preschool program or a control group without access to the program. Subsequent analyses showed that
participation in the Perry program increased average IQ at age 5 by nearly a full standard deviation, and
had lasting impacts on educational attainment, criminal behavior, drug use, employment, and earnings
(Anderson 2008; Berruta-Clement et al. 1984; Heckman et al. 2010b; Schweinhart et al. 1997, 2005).1
Heckman et al. (2010a) estimate the annual social rate of return to the Perry Project at between 7 and 10
percent. The North Carolina Abecedarian Project, another small-scale intervention, had similarly dramatic
effects (Campbell and Ramey 1994, 1995). The striking success of these programs has led some analysts to
argue that the returns to educational intervention peak early in life (Heckman 2011). These findings have
also motivated recent calls for expansion of publicly-provided preschool (Obama 2013).
In contrast, evidence on the effects of large-scale early childhood programs is more mixed. Early quasiexperimental studies of Head Start, the largest early childhood program in the United States, showed positive
effects on cognitive skills, child mortality, and long-term outcomes (Currie and Thomas 1995; Ludwig and
Miller 2007; Garces et al. 2002; Deming 2009).2 More recently, results from the Head Start Impact Study
(HSIS), the first randomized evaluation of Head Start, showed smaller, less-persistent gains. The HSIS
experiment involved random assignment of more than 4,000 children to Head Start or a control group at
over 300 childcare centers throughout the US. The HSIS treatment group outscored the control group by
roughly 0.1 standard deviations on measures of cognitive skill during preschool, but these gains did not
persist into kindergarten (US Department of Health and Human Services 2010, 2012). Moreover, the HSIS
experiment showed little evidence of effects for a wide range of non-cognitive and health outcomes (US
Department of Health and Human Services 2010).3
Inputs and practices vary widely across Head Start centers, however, and little is known about variation
in effectiveness within Head Start. This paper uses HSIS data to quantify and explain variation in effects
across Head Start childcare centers, with an eye towards reconciling the effects of model programs and
those of Head Start. Specifically, I assess the role that inputs, practices, and child characteristics play in
generating differences in effectiveness across Head Start centers. Some centers use inputs more similar to
successful model programs than others. For example, one-third of Head Start centers use the High/Scope
curriculum, the centerpiece of the Perry Preschool experiment. Head Start centers also differ with respect
1 Anderson

(2008) argues that the Perry Project produced significant long-term benefits only for girls.
studies finding positive effects of larger-scale programs include analyses of the Chicago Child-Parent centers and
some state pre-kindergarten programs (Reynolds 1998; Gormley and Gayer 2005; Wong et al. 2008). Cascio and Schanzenbach
(2013) find small effects of programs in Georgia and Oklahoma for poor children, and no effects for richer children. Fitzpatrick
(2008) finds small effects for Georgia’s program, though some subgroups benefit.
3 In other analyses of the HSIS data, Gelber and Isen (2013) show that Head Start participation increased parental involvement with children after the program ended, while Bitler et al. (2014) show larger quantile treatment effects at lower quantiles
of the distribution of Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test (PPVT) scores.
2 Other

2

to teacher characteristics, class size, instructional time, frequency of home visits, and instructor experience,
all of which have been cited as central to the success of model programs (Schweinhart 2007; Chetty et al.
2011). In addition, the characteristics of Head Start applicants and the availability of alternative preschool
options vary across centers. The aim of this paper is to assess the contribution of these key inputs and
characteristics to cross-center differences in Head Start effects.
My analysis proceeds in two steps. First, to ask whether there is meaningful variation to be explained
by program characteristics, I quantify heterogeneity in causal effects across Head Start centers. This investigation is complicated by non-compliance with random assignment in the HSIS experiment. Instrumental
variables (IV) is the standard procedure for dealing with non-compliance, but IV has poor properties in
small samples, and center-specific samples in the HSIS are small (Nelson and Startz 1990). To deal with
this problem, I use a random coefficients version of the Heckman (1979) sample selection model to directly
estimate the cross-site distribution of treatment effects, circumventing the need to work with poorly-behaved
center-specific instrumental variables estimates. The random coefficients estimates reveal substantial heterogeneity in short-run Head Start effectiveness: the cross-center standard deviation of short-run cognitive
effects is 0.18 test score standard deviations, larger than typical estimates of variation in teacher and school
effectiveness (Deming 2013; Chetty et al. 2013a; Kane et al. 2008).
In a second step, I ask whether this variation can be explained by differences in observed program and
child characteristics. My results show that some inputs play a role: Head Start centers offering full-day
programs boost cognitive skills more than other centers, while centers offering frequent home visits are
especially effective at raising non-cognitive skills. High/Scope Head Start centers are no more effective than
other centers, however, and short-run effects are uncorrelated with teacher education, class size, and center
director experience. Short-run cognitive effects are larger for children with less educated mothers, but Head
Start effectiveness is weakly related to other measures of family background and baseline skills. To investigate
the role of alternative preschoool options, I estimate the relationship between Head Start effectiveness and
the share of children drawn from other preschools rather than home-based care. This analysis suggests that
counterfactual preschool choices play a role: cognitive gains are smaller for centers that draw more children
from center-based preschool. Together, observed inputs, practices, and child characteristics explain about
one-third of the variation in Head Start effectiveness.
An important caveat to these findings is that inputs are not randomly assigned to Head Start centers.
While the experimental variation used here eliminates selection bias in comparisons of students offered and
not offered Head Start, centers with different observed characteristics may differ systematically on unobserved
dimensions. As a result, relationships between inputs and effectiveness may not reflect causal impacts of
changing inputs in isolation. Nevertheless, these relationships are important for two reasons. First, observed
predictors of program effectiveness can help policymakers to identify high- and low-performing programs.
The ability to target high- or low-performers is useful for policies that aim to expand effective programs
or improve ineffective ones. Second, my estimates of the relationships between inputs and impacts show

3

that some key inputs used by model programs are not sufficient to create effective preschools. For example,
Schweinhart (2007) argues that the High/Scope curriculum was central to the success of the Perry Preschool
Project. I find that High/Scope is not related to program effectiveness in Head Start. This shows that the
High/Scope curriculum alone does not guarantee a successful preschool program.
In addition to the literature on preschool effects, this paper contributes to several other strands of
research. A recent series of studies relates variation in effectiveness across education programs, including
charter schools, kindergarten classrooms, and teachers, to observed program characteristics (Kane et al. 2008;
Chetty et al. 2011; Hoxby and Murarka 2009; Angrist et al. 2013; Dobbie and Fryer 2013). I apply a similar
approach to study the relationship between inputs and Head Start effects. Hotz et al. (2005), Raudenbush
et al. (2012), and Allcott (2014) analyze variation in effects across sites in multi-site randomized controlled
trials, while Chandra et al. (2013) and Syverson (2011) use empirical Bayes and random coefficients methods
to measure variation in productivity across hospitals and other firms. The analysis here includes elements
of each of these approaches.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides background on Head Start and
describes the HSIS data. Section 3 summarizes the average impact of Head Start on summary indices of
cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Section 4 outlines the random coefficients model used to investigate effect
heterogeneity, and reports the results of this investigation. Section 5 analyzes the link between Head Start
effectiveness and observed inputs, practices, and child characteristics. Section 6 concludes.

2

Data and Background

2.1

Head Start and the Head Start Impact Study

Head Start, the largest early-childhood program in the United States, enrolls roughly one million 3- and
4-year-old children at a cost of about $8 billion annually. The program awards grants to public, private
non-profit, and for-profit organizations that provide childcare services to children below the Federal Poverty
Line, though up to 35 percent of children attending a Head Start childcare center can be from households
between 100 and 135 percent of this income threshold. Grantees are required to match at least 20 percent of
federal Head Start funding. Head Start is based on a “whole child” model of school readiness that emphasizes
non-cognitive social and emotional development in addition to cognitive skills. The grant-based nature of
the program allows for a wide variety of childcare settings and practices, though all grantee agencies must
meet a set of program-wide performance standards (US Department of Health and Human Services 2011;
US Office of Head Start 2012).
The data used here come from the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS), a randomized evaluation of the Head
Start program. The 1998 Head Start Reauthorization Act included a congressional mandate to determine
the program’s effects. As a result, the US Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) conducted
a nationally representative randomized controlled trial (DHHS 2010, 2012). The HSIS data includes in-

4

formation on 84 regional Head Start programs, 353 Head Start centers, and 4,442 children, each of whom
applied to a sample Head Start center in Fall 2002. Sixty percent of applicants were randomly assigned the
opportunity to attend Head Start (“treatment”), while the remaining applicants were denied this opportunity (“control”). Randomization took place at the Head Start center level; the HSIS data includes weights
reflecting the probability of assignment for each child, which are used to adjust for these differences below.4
The HSIS sample includes two age groups, with 55 percent of students entering at age 3 and 45 percent
entering at age 4. Three-year-old applicants could attend Head Start for up to two years before entering
kindergarten, and three-year-olds assigned to the control group could re-apply to Head Start centers as
four-year-olds the next year. Four-year-old applicants could attend for a maximum of one year. The data
used here follow the treatment and control groups through 1st grade. DHHS (2010) provides a complete
description of the HSIS experimental design and data collection procedures. The Online Appendix details
the procedure used to construct my sample from the HSIS data.

2.2

Outcomes

The HSIS data include a large number of outcomes, collected for up to 4 years after random assignment.
I organize these outcomes into summary indices of cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Table 1 lists the
outcomes included in each group. Cognitive outcomes include scores on the Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test (PPVT) and several Woodcock Johnson III (WJIII) measures of cognitive ability. Non-cognitive
outcomes, derived from parental surveys, include measures of social skills (making friends, hitting and fighting) and attention-span (concentration, restlessness). I exclude non-cognitive measures for which almost all
respondents (90% or more) gave the same answer.5
Following Kling et al. (2007) and Deming (2009), I construct indices to summarize the impact of Head
Start attendance across the outcomes listed in each column of Table 1. Specifically, I define the summary
index

L

Yi ≡

1X
L



`=1


yi` − µ`
,
σ`

(1)

where yi` is outcome ` for student i, and µ` and σ` are the control group mean and standard deviation
of this outcome. I define outcomes so that positive signs mean better performance, and standardize them
separately by year and age cohort.

2.3

Applicant Characteristics

Head Start applicants typically come from families with low socioeconomic status. This can be seen in the
first column of Table 2, which presents mean demographic characteristics for the HSIS control group. The
4 Some small centers were aggregated together to conduct the random assignment. Other centers conducted multiple rounds
of random assignment with differing admission probabilities, and the HSIS weights do not account for these differences. The
discussion in DHHS (2010) suggests that any such differences are likely to be small, however.
5 The HSIS data also includes measures of non-cognitive skills reported by teachers. I do not use these measures since they
are unavailable for many children before kindergarten, and my analysis focuses on outcomes during preschool.

5

demographic variables come from a baseline survey of parents conducted in the Fall of 2002; parents of
3,577 HSIS applicants (81 percent) responded to this survey. The Head Start population is disadvantaged
on observable dimensions: roughly two-thirds of children in the sample are non-white, and about half live in
two-parent households. Thirty-nine percent of mothers in the sample did not complete high school, and 17
percent are teenagers. The average household income in the sample is $1,507 per month.6
To check experimental balance, column (2) of Table 2 shows coefficients from regressions of baseline
characteristics on assignment to Head Start, weighting by the HSIS baseline child weights to adjust for
differences in the probability of assignment across centers. The treatment/control differences in means are
statistically insignificant for all baseline variables except special needs status, and the joint p-value from a
test of the hypothesis that assignment to Head Start is unrelated to all characteristics is 0.31. This suggests
that random assignment was successful.7
The last two rows of Table 2 show the effects of assignment to Head Start on applicants’ preschool choices.
Applicants assigned to Head Start were 66 percentage points more likely to participate in the program than
applicants from the control group in the first year after random assignment. Sixteen percent of students from
the control group attended Head Start, most likely by applying to other nearby Head Start centers outside
the experimental sample. Eighteen percent of children assigned to Head Start did not participate in the
program. Together, these facts show that non-compliance with experimental assignments is an important
feature of the HSIS data, which motivates the instrumental variables approach taken below. The last row
of Table 2 shows that a Head Start offer increases the probability of attending any center-based preschool
program by 44 percentage points. This implies that two-thirds (0.442/0.663) of children induced to attend
Head Start by the experimental offer would not have attended preschool otherwise, while the remaining
one-third would have attended another preschool center if denied the opportunity to attend Head Start.

2.4

Center Characteristics

In addition to background information on applicants, the HSIS data includes detailed information on Head
Start centers and their practices. I focus on inputs and practices that have been cited as central to the
success of small-scale model programs. Schweinhart (2007) offers one view of the inputs that drove the
success of the Perry Preschool Project:
“The external validity or generalizability of the study findings extends to those programs that
are reasonably similar to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program. A reasonably similar program
6 The parent survey includes two questions about household income. One question asks for exact monthly income. For
parents who do not answer this question, a followup question asks where income falls in a set of possible categories. For parents
who answer the second question, I impute income as the midpoint of the reported range.
7 Even with successful random assignment, non-random attrition has the potential to bias the experimental results. Appendix
Table A1 shows attrition rates for the HSIS sample by year and outcome group, as well as treatment/control differences
conditional on the controls included in Table 4. In preschool, outcomes are observed for 82 to 84 percent of children; the
follow-up rate falls slightly in elementary school. Cognitive outcomes in preschool are observed slightly more frequently for
children in the treatment group (3 to 5 percentage points). This modest differential attrition seems unlikely to drive the results
reported below.

6

is a preschool education program run by teachers with bachelor’s degrees and certification in
education, each serving up to 8 children living in low-income families. The program runs 2 school
years for children who are 3 and 4 years of age with daily classes of 2.5 hours or more, uses
the High/Scope model or a similar participatory education approach, and has teachers visiting
families at least every two weeks or scheduling regular parent events.”
This account of the Perry program’s effects emphasizes six key inputs: teacher education, teacher certification, class size, instruction time, the High/Scope curriculum, and home visiting. High/Scope is a participatory curriculum that emphasizes childrens’ hands-on choices and experiences rather than adult-driven
instruction (Epstein 2007). Schweinhart (2007) places particular weight on the High/Scope curriculum, arguing that results from the Perry Project and the followup High/Scope Preschool Curriculum Comparison
Study “[suggest] that the curriculum had a lot to do with the findings.”
No Head Start center replicates the Perry model, which used high levels of all six inputs and spent roughly
30 percent more than the average Head Start program on a per-pupil, per-year basis.8 There is substantial
variation in each of the six key Perry inputs within Head Start, however. This can be seen in Table 3,
which summarizes characteristics of centers in the HSIS sample. Thirty percent of Head Start centers use
the High/Scope curriculum. Thirty-five percent of Head Start teachers have bachelor’s degrees, and 11
percent hold teaching licenses, but the fractions with these credentials range from zero to 100 percent across
centers. The average Head Start center has 6.8 children for every staff member; the cross-center standard
deviation of class size is 1.7 children. Sixty-three percent of Head Start centers provide full-day service,
and 20 percent offer more than three home visits per year. Table 3 also reports information on years of
experience for Head Start center directors; Chetty et al. (2011) cite teacher experience as a strong predictor
of classroom effectiveness in the Tennessee STAR class size experiment. The average center director has 18
years of experience working in center-based preschools, and the standard deviation of director experience
across centers is 10 years. In Section 5, I explore whether this variation in inputs can explain differences in
effectiveness across Head Start centers.

3

Pooled Estimates

Before investigating heterogeneity in causal effects, I summarize the average impact of Head Start using
pooled equations of the form
Yi = α + βDi + Xi0 λ + i ,

(2)

where Yi is a summary index of outcomes for student i, Di is a dummy for Head Start attendance, and Xi
is a vector of the baseline controls from Table 2, included to increase precision. The attendance dummy is
8 Heckman et al. (2010a) report that the Perry program cost about $17,759 per child over 2 years (2006 dollars), or $8,880
per year. Per-child expenditure in Head Start was $7,600 in 2011, which is $6,800 deflated to 2006 dollars using the Consumer
Price Index series available at http://www.bls.gov (DHHS 2011).

7

instrumented with an indicator for assignment to Head Start, Zi , with first stage equation
Di = κ + πZi + Xi0 δ + ηi .

(3)

I estimate these equations by weighted two-stage least squares using the HSIS baseline child weights to
account for differences in the probability of assignment across centers. These weights multiply the inverse
probability of a child’s experimental assignment by the probability that a child’s center was sampled from the
national population (DHHS 2010). Estimates using other weighting schemes, or including center fixed effects
in equations (2) and (3), were very similar to those reported below. The coefficient β can be interpreted as a
a weighted average of center-specific local average treatment effects (LATEs), defined as effects of Head Start
attendance on students induced to attend by the experimental offer (Angrist and Imbens 1995).9 Standard
errors for these and all subsequent models allow for clustering by center of random assignment.
Estimates of equations (2) and (3) reveal that Head Start attendance boosts outcomes during preschool,
but these effects fade out quickly once children leave the program. Table 4 reports estimates of effects for
cognitive and non-cognitive skills, separately by grade and assignment cohort. Column (1) shows that in
the first year after random assignment, applicants assigned to treatment were 68 percentage points more
likely to attend Head Start than applicants in the control group. The corresponding second-stage estimates
for cognitive skills, reported in column (2), show that Head Start attendance increased cognitive skills by
0.17 standard deviations for three-year-olds and 0.09 standard deviations for four-year-olds. These estimates
are statistically significant at the 5-percent level. In contrast, estimates for non-cognitive skills, reported in
column (4), show no evidence of an effect: the point estimate for three-year-olds is positive, the estimate for
four-year-olds is negative, and neither is statistically significant.
In Spring 2004, members of the three-year-old cohort were still enrolled in Head Start. The cognitive
point estimate for this time period is comparable to the Spring 2003 estimate (0.15 standard deviations),
but is less precise (s.e. = 0.08). The decline in precision between 2003 and 2004 is driven by a decline in
compliance for the three-year-old cohort: many children in the control group re-applied to Head Start and
were admitted at age 4, reducing the first stage from 0.68 to 0.36.10 Similarly, the non-cognitive estimate
for three-year-olds in Spring 2004 is positive, but imprecise.
The remaining rows of Table 4 show that the effects of Head Start attendance dissipate once children
exit the program. The cognitive estimate for the three-year-old cohort in Spring 2005 is close to zero, and
the estimate for four-year-olds in Spring 2004 is negative and marginally significant. A positive effect of 0.1
standard deviations can be rejected at the 5-percent confidence level for the four-year-old cohort. Estimates
for both cohorts are small and statistically insignificant in later periods. Non-cognitive estimates are not
9 Angrist and Imbens (1995) show that two-stage least squares estimation of a system using all center-by-treatment interactions as instruments produces a weighted average of center-specific LATEs, with weights proportional to the variance of the
first stage fitted values. Estimates from this saturated model were similar to weighted least squares estimates of equations (2)
and (3).
10 Head Start participation in Spring 2004 is measured from the parental survey since an administrative measure of participation is only available in Spring 2003. See the Online Appendix.

8

statistically distinguishable from zero in any time period for either cohort. Together, these results show little
evidence of cognitive or non-cognitive effects of Head Start after children leave preschool.

4

Variation in Head Start Effects

4.1

Variation in Instrumental Variables Estimates

I next turn to the primary contribution of this paper: Quantifying and explaining variation in short-run
effects across Head Start centers. As a first look at cross-center heterogeneity, Figure 1 plots center-specific
reduced form coefficients against first stages. These coefficients come from regressions of cognitive skills and
Head Start attendance in Spring 2003 on the Head Start offer indicator, pooling the three- and four-year-old
cohorts. In the absence of treatment effect heterogeneity, reduced forms should be proportional to first stages
with the same constant of proportionality for every center, so a single line through the origin should fit all
points in Figure 1 up to sampling error. The red line shows a weighted least squares regression through the
origin, with weights proportional to sample size times the variance of the Head Start offer. The χ2 statistic
from a test that all points lie on this line is equal to the overidentification test statistic from a two-stage
least squares model using all center-by-offer interactions as instruments for Head Start attendance. The χ2
statistic is equal to 421.4 and has 318 degrees of freedom, so the null hypothesis of no cross-center effect
heterogeneity is rejected (p < 0.01).
The evidence in Figure 1 suggests that effects vary across Head Start centers. The magitude of this
variation is also of interest. Empirical Bayes (EB) methods are the conventional approach to quantifying
cross-site variation in treatment effects (Morris 1983). The EB approach involves specifying a prior distribution for the cross-site distribution of parameters, and then estimating the hyperparameters of the prior.
In cases where site-specific estimates are unbiased and have a known sampling variance, the EB estimator
takes an especially simple form: The variance of treatment effects can be consistently estimated by subtracting the average squared standard error from the sample variance of site-specific estimates (Jacob and
Lefgren 2008). With enough data at each site and many sites, this estimator non-parametrically identifies
the cross-site variance of effects. An efficient “shrinkage” estimator of the effect at a particular site can then
be constructed as a weighted average of the estimate for that site and the overall average effect.
This approach is inappropriate for the HSIS data. Figure 1 reveals substantial variation in compliance
with random assignment across centers; to account for this variation, it is necessary to study instrumental
variables estimates rather than intent-to-treat effects of assignment to Head Start. Instrumental variables
estimates have no finite moments and are not centered at the true parameter in finite samples (Nelson and
Starz 1990). In addition, conventional asymptotic standard errors provide a poor approximation to their
behavior in small samples (Mariano 1977). Center-specific samples in the HSIS are often small, so the finitesample behavior of IV is relevant for center-specific IV estimates. This can be seen in Figure 2, which shows
a histogram of the distribution of sample sizes across HSIS centers. More than half of centers have fewer

9

than 10 applicants, and few have more than 25.
Table 5 illustrates the poor finite-sample behavior of center-specific IV estimates for cognitive skills in
Spring 2003. The IV estimate for center j, β̂j , is the ratio of the center-specific reduced form and first
stage. The sample standard deviation of these estimates is large (1.44 test score standard deviations), and
estimates for some centers are implausible (as large as 14.8 standard deviations). The wide dispersion in
center-specific estimates is evident in Figure 3, which shows a histogram of β̂j , excluding estimates in excess
of 2 in absolute value to keep the scale reasonable.
Moreover, the asymptotic standard errors associated with these estimates yield nonsensical results. The
average standard error is 1.3 standard deviations. An estimate of the variance of βj is given by
σ̂β2 =


2
 2 
1X 
β̂j − β̄ − SE β̂j
.
J j

(4)

As a result of extremely large standard errors for some centers, this estimate is negative and large (-39.2
standard deviations), and the associated standard error shows that it is almost completely uninformative.
Since the IV asymptotic standard errors may be most inaccurate for the smallest centers, Table 5 also shows
a variance estimate that weights centers by sample size. This estimate is negative and similar in magnitude
to the unweighted estimate (-36 standard deviations); weighting improves precision, but the standard error
of the weighted variance estimate is still extremely large (35 standard deviations). These negative variance
estimates, and the associated sampling uncertainty, make it clear that the β̂j and their asymptotic standard
errors are not informative about the extent of effect heterogeneity across centers. I next describe a framework
that consistently quantifies variation in Head Start effects despite small within-center sample sizes.

4.2

Random Coefficients Framework

My approach to quantifying effect variation uses a sample selection model to describe potential outcomes
and Head Start participation conditional on Zi and center-specific parameters. I treat the parameters at
each center as draws from a prior distribution of random coefficients, and derive an integrated likelihood
function for the sample that depends only on the hyperparameters of this distribution. I then estimate the
hyperparameters by maximum likelihood. This approach circumvents the need to compute β̂j for every Head
Start center.
Let Yij (1) and Yij (0) denote potential outcomes in and out of Head Start for student i applying to Head
Start center j. Potential outcomes can be written
Yij (d) = αdj + idj , d ∈ {0, 1},

10

(5)

where E [idj ] = 0. The Head Start participation decision is described by
Dij = 1 {λj + πj Zij > ηij } .

(6)

The vector of parameters at center j is therefore
0

θj ≡ (α1j , α0j , λj , log πj ) .

(7)

The average effect of Head Start attendance at center j is α1j − α0j . Note that the parameter vector is
defined in terms of log πj , which guarantees that a Head Start offer weakly increases the probability of Head
Start participation for any value of θj .
I assume the following parametric structure for the within-center distribution of potential outcomes:
(i1j , i0j , ηij )0 |Zij ∼ N (0, Σ) .

(8)

Conditional on the center-specific parameters θj , assumption (8) yields a two-sided version of the Heckman
(1979) sample selection (Heckit) model. The likelihood of the observed outcomes for student i is given by
"
Lij (Yij , Dij |Zij ; θj ) = Φ

"
×

1−Φ

σ1 (λj + πj Zij ) − ρ1 (Yij − α1j )
p
σ1 1 − ρ21

σ0 (λj + πj Zij ) − ρ0 (Yij − α0j )
p
σ0 1 − ρ20

!!

1
φ
σ0

!



1
φ
σ1



Yij − α1j
σ1

Yij − α0j
σ0

#Dij
(9)

#1−Dij
,

where σd is the standard deviation of idj and ρd is its correlation with ηij .11
Next, I assume that the cross-center distribution of parameters follows a normal distribution:
θj |Zj ∼ N (θ0 , V0 ) ,

(10)

where Zj is the vector of experimental offers for children at center j. The variance matrix V0 captures
heterogeneity in outcome distributions and experimental compliance across Head Start centers. To estimate
θ0 and V0 , I integrate the site-specific parameters out of the likelihood function. The integrated likelihood
for center j is
LIj

(Yj , Dj |Zj ; θ0 , V0 ) =

ˆ Y

Lij (Yij , Dij |Zij ; θ)φm (θ; θ0 , V0 ) dθ,

(11)

i

where φm (x; µ, V ) is the multivariate normal density function. The integral in equation (11) does not have
11 There are two standard concerns with the Heckit model. First, without excluded instruments, the model is identified only
by functional form restrictions (Heckman 1990). This is not a problem in the present context because the Head Start offer
is a strong instrument. Second, even with an excluded instrument, the functional form assumptions may be incorrect. As a
check on the plausibility of assumption (8), Appendix Table A2 compares estimates from a version of the Heckit model with
no center heterogeneity to results from instrumental variables estimation. The maximum likelihood estimates of the first- and
second-stage parameters closely match the IV estimates, suggesting that the Heckit model is not badly misspecified.

11

a closed form, so I approximate it by simulation, using 1,000 draws of θj for each Head Start center. An
empirical Bayes (EB) estimator of θ0 and V0 maximizes the sum of logarithms of simulated likelihoods
across Head Start centers.

4.3

Random Coefficients Estimates

Table 6 reports key parameter estimates from the normal random coefficients model for Spring 2003, pooling
the three- and four-year-old cohorts.12 The full set of parameter estimates is reported in Appendix Table A3.
I focus on Spring 2003 because effects for this period are largest and most precisely estimated; in addition,
the evidence in Chetty et al. (2011) suggests that immediate impacts of early-childhood programs may
predict long-run effects better than impacts in later time periods. Results for Spring 2005 are reported in
Appendix Tables A3 and A4.
The estimated parameter distributions reveal substantial heterogeneity in parameters across Head Start
centers. Consistent with the first stage estimates in Table 4, the mean compliance probability is 0.74. Compliance rates vary substantially across sites: The cross-site standard deviation of the compliance probability
is 0.22. This implies that about 20 percent of centers have compliance probabilities below 0.5.
Table 6 also shows estimates of the cross-center distribution of causal effects. The estimate of the
average effect for cognitive skills is 0.11 standard deviations, while the mean non-cognitive effect is 0.02.
p
The cross-center standard deviation of Head Start effects, given by V ar(α1j − α0j ), is estimated to be
0.18 standard deviations for cognitive skills. This implies substantial treatment effect variation across Head
Start centers. For comparison, estimates of the standard deviations of school and teacher effectiveness are
typically around 0.1 test score standard deviations (Chetty et al. 2013a; Deming 2013; Kane et al. 2008).
My estimates therefore suggest that variation in short-run Head Start effectiveness is larger than variation
in value-added across teachers or schools. The standard deviation of effects for non-cognitive skills is smaller
(0.068 standard deviations). Figure 4 summarizes the estimated random coefficient distributions, comparing
them to histograms of center-specific first stage and IV estimates.13 The estimated parameter distributions
show much less dispersion than the distributions of center-specific estimates; nonetheless, these distributions
display substantively important heterogeneity.
The random coefficients estimates suggest that some Head Start centers have negative effects: 27 percent
of centers (Φ(−0.11/0.18)) are estimated to have cognitive effects below zero. To some extent, this is an
12 Within a center, three- and four-year-old applicants sometimes faced different probabilities of assignment to Head Start.
w
I reweight likelihood contributions to account for these differences. Specifically, the likelihood contribution of child i is Liji ,
where Lij is the expression for the likelihood given in equation (11) and wi is a weight proportional to child i’s base HSIS
weight, normalized to sum to the total sample size.
13 The first stage for center j is the difference in attendance probabilities between offered and non-offered applicants, given
by

F Sj = Φ (λj + πj ) − Φ (λj ).
Since (λj , log πj ) is assumed to be multivariate normal, the expression inside the first CDF is the sum of a normal random
variable and a correlated log normal, which is not normally distributed. This functional form implies that the first stage is
between 0 and 1 for all centers, a key assumption of instrumental variables models.

12

artifact of the assumed distribution for θj , which has full support on the real line. There is no reason to
expect Head Start effects to be positive for all centers or children, however. Head Start does not charge
tuition, and some parents who would otherwise spend money or time on higher-quality childcare may be
willing to forego quality in exchange for this subsidy. Cohodes and Goodman (forthcoming) find evidence of
this phenomenon in the higher education sphere: Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship program induces some
students to substitute from expensive private institutions to less expensive public ones, reducing degree
attainment in the process.
As a check on the robustness of the random coefficient results to changes in functional form assumptions,
I estimated an alternative version of the model assuming that θj is drawn from a finite set of possible types
rather than a normal distribution. The finite-type estimates are reported in Appendix Table A5. These
estimates also suggest substantial effect heterogeneity across Head Start centers. The implied cross-center
standard deviations of effects for three- and five-type models are 0.12 and 0.22 standard deviations, roughly
similar to the normal estimate of 0.18. This result implies that the key conclusions of the random coefficients
analysis are not sensitive to the assumed functional form for the distribution of θj .
To provide further context for these estimates, I next compute the implied earnings effect of an improvement in Head Start quality, using the relationships between test score effects and lifetime earnings reported
by Chetty et al. (2013b). Chetty et al. (2013b) show that a one-standard-deviation increase in teacher
value-added in a single grade translates into a 1.3 percent increase in lifetime earnings. If the mapping
between the short-run effect of Head Start on test scores and its effect on earnings is the same as this mapping for teachers, my results imply that a Head Start center at the 84th percentile of program quality (one
standard deviation above average) will boost lifetime earnings by 1.8 percent relative to the average Head
Start center. Assuming that children in the HSIS data will earn roughly the same amount as their parents
relative to the national median (a conservative assumption since earnings revert to the mean), and using
the same assumptions on lifetime earnings trajectories used by Chetty et al. (2013b), this translates into
an earnings effect of about $3,400 per child in 2010 dollars.14 This calculation shows that the magnitude of
cross-center variation in Head Start effectiveness is large enough to matter for later outcomes, and is also
large relative to the per-child cost of the program (roughly $7,600; DHHS 2011).

14 Chetty et al. (2013b) report that the standard deviation of teacher quality is 0.13 test score standard deviations. They
argue that a one-standard-deviation move upwards in this teacher quality distribution for one year raises students’ earnings
by 1.3 percent. The implied earnings gain per standard deviation of test scores is therefore (1.3/0.13) = 10 percent. I
estimate that the standard deviation of Head Start quality is 0.18 test score standard deviations, so a one standard deviation
increase in Head Start quality boosts earnings by 0.18·10 = 1.8 percent. Chetty et al. (2013b) estimate that the mean
present value of lifetime earnings is roughly $522,000 at age 12 in 2010 dollars, which is $434,000 discounted back to age
5 at a 3-percent rate. The average HSIS family earned $18,085 per year, or 44 percent of the US median in 2002 (see
http://www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/p60-221.pdf). The average present discounted value of earnings at age 5 for children in
the HSIS sample can therefore be conservatively estimated as 0.44 · $434, 000 = $190,960. The earnings impact of a 1 standard
deviation increase in Head Start quality can then be approximated as $190,960·0.018= $3,437.28.

13

5

Explaining Head Start Effects

5.1

Definitions of Inputs

The estimates reported above show that some Head Start programs are substantially more effective than
others. In the remainder of the paper, I ask whether this variation in effectiveness can be explained by
observed inputs. I assess the contributions of three sets of variables: Head Start center characteristics, child
characteristics, and counterfactual preschool choices.
The analysis of center characteristics focuses on the seven variables listed in Table 3: The High/Scope
curriculum, teacher education and certification, class size, instructional time, home visting, and center
director experience. These variables are often cited as key contributors to the success of model preschool
programs (Schweinhart 2007; Chetty et al. 2011). Child characteristics include mother’s education, family
income, and baseline cognitive and non-cognitive skills. These variables seem likely to be closely linked
with human capital. The Perry Preschool Project enrolled a population of very disadvantaged children
(Schweinhart 2005). The analysis here asks whether differences in child characteristics partly explain the
difference in effectiveness between Head Start and model programs.
I also investigate the role of differences in private preschool attendance rates across centers. Children in
the HSIS sample can participate in three types of childcare: Head Start, other center-based preschool, or
home care (no preschool). As shown in Table 2, the effect of a Head Start offer on the probability of Head
Start attendance is larger than its effect on preschool attendance. This implies that some applicants would
attend other preschools in the absence of Head Start. If private preschool affects cognitive skills relative to
no preschool, differences in private preschool participation rates may drive cross-center variation in Head
Start effects even if Head Start programs are of uniform quality.
To investigate this issue, I estimate the share of students drawn into Head Start from other preschools
at center j using the regression
C
Cij = τjC + ρC
j Zij + uij ,

(12)

where Cij is an indicator for attending non-Head Start center-based preschool. The coefficient ρC
j measures
the reduction in other center-based preschool attendance caused by a Head Start offer. Similarly, the share
of students drawn from no preschool is estimated using the regression
N
Nij = τjN + ρN
j Zij + uij ,

(13)

where Nij is an indicator for attending no preschool. Under the assumption that a Head Start offer does not
affect the choice of private vs. no preschool,15 the share of Head Start compliers drawn from other preschool
15 This assumption can be motivated by a revealed preference argument: The availability of private preschool is unaffected
by a Head Start offer, so preferences for private vs. no preschool should not be affected by the offer. A shift between private
and no preschool in response to a Head Start offer would violate the exclusion restriction required for the offer to be a valid
instrument for Head Start attendance.

14

centers is given by
SjC


−ρC
j

.
=
−ρN
+ −ρC
j
j

(14)

I estimate equations (12) and (13) by weighted least squares using the HSIS child weights, setting positive
coefficients to zero to keep SjC beween zero and one. Figure 5 shows a histogram of SjC . This figure reveals
that the share of compliers who would attend other preschools in the absence of Head Start varies across
centers. At about 10 percent of centers, all compliers attend other preschools if denied the opportunity to
attend Head Start. About twenty percent of centers appear to draw children only from home care. The
remaining 70 percent draw children from a mix of private preschool and no preschool.
I investigate the relationship between inputs and Head Start effects using two approaches. First, I
estimate interacted two-stage least squares models, with second- and first-stage equations of the form
0
Yij = α + Pij0 φ + βDij + Dij · Pij0 ψ + Xij
γ + ij ,

(15)

0
Dij = κ + Pij0 ν + πZij + Zij · Pij0 τ + Xij
δ + ηij ,

(16)

where Pij is a vector of child i’s characteristics and the characteristics of her center of random assignment.
The first stage equations for the interactions of Dij and Pij are analogous to equation (16). This approach
compares IV estimates for groups of centers and children with different values of Pij . Since samples at groups
of centers using different inputs are larger than samples at individual centers, this IV analysis is not subject
to the finite-sample issues discussed in Section 3. The vector ψ captures the relationship between the effect
of Head Start attendance and observed inputs. I estimate two sets of interaction models: bivariate models
that include inputs in Pij one at a time, and multivariate models that include all inputs simultaneously.
Equations (15) and (16) are estimated using binary measures of each input; for continuous variables, these
indicators equal one for centers above the sample median. An analysis using continuous measures yielded
similar but less-precise results.
Second, I extend the selection model to incorporate dependence between inputs and causal effects. The
potential outcome and selection equations are
Yij (d) = αdj + Pij0 ψd + ijd , d ∈ {0, 1},

(17)



Dij = 1 λj + Pij0 ν + exp log πj + Pij0 τ · Zi > ηij ,

(18)

where (i1j , i0j , ηij ) and (α1j , α0j , λj , log πj ) are assumed to be normally distributed as before. The vector
(ψ1 − ψ0 ) measures the relationship between inputs and Head Start effects. This approach relies in part on
parametric assumptions, so it is likely to be less robust than two-stage least squares. The advantage of the
random coefficients approach is that it generates an estimate of V0 , the residual variation in center-specific

15

parameters remaining after accounting for observed inputs. It can therefore be used to measure the share of
effect heterogeneity explained by Pij .

5.2

Relationships Between Inputs and Head Start Effects

Table 7 reports the results of the analysis of inputs. Panel A shows estimates of relationships between Head
Start effectiveness and center characteristics. The estimates reveal that centers offering full-day service and
frequent home visiting are more effective. On average, cognitive effects of full-day Head Start centers are
0.14 standard deviations larger than effects of centers that do not offer this service. Corresponding estimates
for the multivariate interaction and maximum likelihood models are somewhat smaller but still statistically
significant. This implies that the relative effectiveness of full-day centers is not explained by other inputs.
Centers that offer frequent home visits per year are especially effective at raising non-cognitive skills: The
bivariate model shows that centers offering more than three home visits per year boost non-cognitive skills
by 0.11 standard deviations more than centers providing three or less visits, and this estimate is statistically
significant. The multivariate and maximum likelihood estimates show that frequent home visiting is also
associated with larger effects on cognitive skills.
The remaining estimates in Panel A of Table 7 show that other center characteristics are mostly unrelated
to Head Start effectiveness, though these estimates vary in precision. High/Scope centers do not boost scores
more than non-High/Scope centers; the interaction terms associated with High/Scope are close to zero in all
models. Moreover, this difference is precisely estimated. The hypothesis that High/Scope centers are 0.15
standard deviations more effective than other centers is rejected at the 5-percent confidence level for both
cognitive and non-cognitive skills. This result weighs against the view that the High/Scope curriculum alone
generated the success of the Perry Preschool Project.
Estimates of the relationships between Head Start effectiveness and teacher education and licensing are
statistically insignificant in most models. This result is consistent with studies of teacher value-added, which
typically find weak relationships between teacher effectiveness and credentials (Kane et al. 2008). The
estimate for teacher education is reasonably precise. In the bivariate model, the interaction coefficient on
an indicator for any staff with a bachelor’s degree is 0.026, with a standard error of 0.063. The upper
bound of the 95-percent confidence interval associated with this estimate is 0.15. The mean share with a
bachelor’s degree among centers with any bachelor’s degrees is 0.6. This implies that I can reject relatively
small differences in effects between centers that differ substantially in mean teacher education. The results
for licensing are less clear. Licensing estimates are positive in all models; the cognitive bivariate estimate is
marginally significant, and the 95-percent confidence interval in the multivariate model includes effects as
large as 0.22 standard deviations. These estimates suggest that there may be a relationship between teacher
licensing and Head Start effectiveness, but the research design used here does not have the power to detect
it.
The results for student/staff ratios and director experience are more surprising. Estimates from both

16

experimental and quasi-experimental settings suggest that smaller classes and more experienced teachers
boost test scores (Krueger, 1999; Angrist and Lavy 1995; Chetty et al., 2011). In contrast, the results in
Table 7 suggest that Head Start centers with smaller classes and more experienced directors are not more
effective. In fact, the point estimates associated with a below-median student/staff ratio are negative in
all models. The 95-percent confidence interval rules out differences in effects as small as 0.074 standard
deviations between above- and below-median centers. I can also reject reasonably small differences (around
0.1 standard deviations) between centers with more- and less-experienced directors.
Panel B of Table 7 reports relationships between child characteristics and Head Start effects. The
estimates show that Head Start has larger effects for children with less educated mothers: Children of high
school graduates gain 0.13 standard deviations less than children of high school dropouts, and this estimate
is statistically significant at the 5-percent level. Corresponding estimates from the multivariate models are
smaller and insignificant, however. This implies that the larger effect for children of less-educated mothers
is mostly explained by other observed characteristics. The IV estimates for baseline skills and family income
are statistically insignficant, though the point estimates suggest slightly larger effects for lower-skilled and
lower-income students.16 Together, the estimates in Panel B suggest that Head Start is more effective for
more disadvantaged students, but this relationship is fairly weak and is therefore unlikely to explain large
differences in effects between Head Start and model programs.
Panel C reveals a significant negative relationship between Head Start effectiveness and the share of
experimental compliers drawn from other center-based preschools. Head Start centers above the median of
SjC boost cognitive skills by about 0.1 standard deviations less than centers below the median. Moreover, this
relationship is not explained by other observed characteristics: the estimate is highly statistically significant
and of similar magnitude in the multivariate two-stage least squares model. The choice between private
preschool and home care is endogenous, so effects on subgroups of children drawn from these two sources
cannot be directly estimated without further assumptions. The estimates in Panel C provide suggestive
evidence that children drawn from home care rather than other preschools may benefit more from Head
Start attendance.
The bottom of Table 7 reports estimates of

p

V ar (α1j − α0j ), the residual standard deviation of Head

Start effects after accounting for observed inputs. Residual standard deviations are 0.150 for cognitive skills
and 0.053 for non-cognitive skills. A comparison with Table 6 reveals that in an R2 sense, the inputs and
practices examined here explain a significant proportion of cross-center effect variation. Specifically, inputs
explains 34 percent of the variation in cognitive effects, and 39 percent of the variation in non-cognitive
effects.17 Nevertheless, a majority of the variation in Head Start effects is left unexplained, and several of
the key inputs emphasized by Schweinhart (2007) are unrelated to program effectiveness. This suggests that
16 Bitler et al. (2014) find larger effects of Head Start on PPVT scores for children with lower baseline PPVT scores. This is
consistent with the negative point estimate for baseline skills in column (1) of Table 7; however, I find that baseline skills are
less related to Head Start effects for the other components of the summary index used here.

2


0.053 2
17 The proportions of variation in cognitive and non-cognitive effects explained by inputs are 1− 0.150
and 1−
.
0.184
0.068

17

some important drivers of successful preschool programs have yet to be identified.18

6

Conclusion

Studies of small-scale model early-childhood programs show that early intervention can boost outcomes in
the short- and long-run. Randomized evidence from the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS) suggests that
the Head Start program produces smaller short-run gains. This paper uses data from the HSIS to quantify
impact variation across Head Start centers and ask whether differences in key inputs used by model programs
can explain this variation. Estimates of a random coefficients selection model reveal substantial variation
in effectiveness across Head Start centers, particularly with respect to cognitive skills. Centers that offer
full-day service and frequent home visiting are more effective than other centers, as are centers that draw
more students from home care rather than center-based preschool. Other inputs typically cited as important
to the success of small-scale programs, including the High/Scope curriculum, teacher education, and class
size, do not predict program effectiveness in Head Start. Children of high school dropout mothers benefit
more from Head Start, but family income and baseline skills weakly predict gains. Together, observed inputs
and characteristics explain about one third of the variation in short-run cognitive effects across Head Start
centers.
It is important to emphasize that educational practices and applicant populations are not randomly
assigned to Head Start centers, so the estimates reported here may not reflect causal impacts of changing
inputs in isolation. Since Head Start centers face budget constraints, spending more on observed inputs
may require cutting spending on unobserved dimensions. As a result, my estimates may be biased towards
zero relative to the causal effects of improving inputs. Nonetheless, this analysis shows that some inputs
predict Head Start effectiveness, while others do not. The results provide no evidence that adoption of
the High/Scope curriculum or teacher education requirements would improve program effectiveness in Head
Start. This finding is relevant to recent policy changes that mandate increased education levels for Head
Start teachers (DHHS 2008). My results show that full-day service and home visiting are most predictive
of short-run Head Start effectiveness, and that efforts to target children who would not otherwise attend
preschool might boost the effects of the program. Identifying factors that explain the large residual variation
in program effectiveness is an important task for future research.

18 While short-run effects are the focus of this paper, Appendix Tables A4 and A6 repeat the analysis of heterogeneity and
inputs for Spring 2005. There is much less effect variation in Spring 2005 than in Spring 2003, and relationships with inputs
are less precisely estimated in this period. The inputs that predict short-run gains do not seem to predict longer-run gains,
which suggests that larger short-run effects are not associated with less fadeout.

18

-2

-1

Reduced form
0

1

2

Figure 1: Center-specific Reduced Forms and First Stages

-.5

0

.5

1

First stage

Notes: This figure plots center-specific reduced form differences in cognitive skills in Spring
2003 against first stage differences in Head Start attendance rates. The red line comes from a
weighted least squares regression through the origin, with weights proportional to NP(Z)[1 P(Z)], where N is sample size and P(Z) is the fraction of applicants offered Head Start. The slope
is 0.14 (SE = 0.03). The chi-squared statistic from a test that all points lie on the line is 421.4
(degrees of freedom = 318, p = 0.00).

Figure 2: Histogram of Sample Sizes Across Head Start Centers

Notes: This figure shows the histogram of center-specific sample sizes in the
HSIS experiment. The data are grouped into bins of 5 children (0 to 5, 6 to 10,
etc.).

Figure 3: Histogram of Center-specific IV Estimates

Notes: This figure plots the histogram of center-specific IV estimates for
cognitive skills in Spring 2003. Estimates greater than 2 in absolute value are
excluded.

0

1

Density
2

3

4

Figure 4: Estimates of Cross-center Parameter Distributions

-.5

0

.5

1

First stage

0

0

1

.5

2

Density
1

Density

3

1.5

4

2

5

A. First stage

-2

-1

0
Cognitive effect

1

2

-2

-1

0
Non-cognitive effect

1

2

B. Cognitive effect
C. Non-cognitive effect
Notes: This figure plots maximum simulated likelihood estimates of the cross-center distributions of parameters in Spring 2003. The bars are
histograms of center-specific first stage and IV estimates. The red curves are kernel density estimates produced using 200,000 draws from the
distributions listed in Table A3. The densities are estimated with a triangle kernel. The bandwidth is 0.05 for panel A and 0.1 for panels B and
C.

0

.05

Fraction of centers
.1
.15

.2

Figure 5: Distribution of Center-based Preschool Complier Share

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Share of compliers attending center-based preschool

1

Notes: This figure shows the histogram of center-specific shares of
compliers attending non-Head Start center-based preschool. The data are
grouped into bins of width 0.05.

Table 1: Outcomes Included in Summary Indices
Cognitive skills
Non-cognitive skills
(1)
(2)
Peabody Picture and Vocabulary Test III (PPVT)
Takes care of personal things
Color names
Asks for assistance with tasks
Test de Vocabularioen Imagenes Peabody (TVIP adapted)
Makes friends easily
Woodcock-Johnson III Oral Comprehension
Enjoys learning
Preschool Comprehensive Test of Phonological and Print Processing (CTOPPP)
Has temper tantrums
Spanish CTOPPP
Cannot concentrate/pay attention for long
Woodcock-Johnson III Word Attack
Is very restless/fidgets a lot
McCarthy Draw-a-design
Likes to try new things
Letter naming
Shows imagination in work and play
Woodcock-Johnson III Letter-Word Identification
Hits and fights with others
Bateria R Woodock-Munoz Identificacion de Letras y Palabras
Accepts friends' ideas in playing
Woodcock-Johnson III Spelling
Bateria R Woodcock-Munoz Dictado
Woodcock-Johnson III Applied Problems
Woodcock-Johnson III Quantitative Concepts
Counting Bears
Bateria R Woodcock-Munoz Problemas Aplicados
Notes: This table lists the cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes used in the analysis. Summary indices are averages of standardized outcomes in each
category.

Table 2: Characteristics of Head Start Applicants
Control mean
Offer differential
Variable
(1)
(2)
Male
0.490
0.011
(0.023)
Black
0.259
0.009
(0.011)
Hispanic
0.411
0.000
(0.014)
Home language is Spanish
0.332
-0.013
(0.014)
Special needs
0.112
0.020*
(0.011)
Mother is married
0.478
-0.016
(0.020)
Both parents live at home
0.531
-0.016
(0.020)
Teen mother
0.165
-0.023
(0.016)
Mother is high school dropout
0.389
-0.022
(0.016)
Mother attended college
0.281
0.020
(0.018)
Monthly household income
1507.124
-25.060
(61.350)
Baseline cognitive skills
-0.003
0.014
(0.023)
Baseline non-cognitive skills
0.001
0.033
(0.022)
Three-year-old cohort
0.534
-0.001
(0.013)
Attended Head Start in 1st year

0.160

Attended any preschool in 1st year

0.460

Joint p-value for baseline characteristics

-

0.663***
(0.023)
0.442***
(0.025)
0.313

4,442
N (total)
3,577
N (completed survey)
Notes: Column (1) shows means of baseline characteristics for Head Start applicants
assigned to the control group. Column (2) shows coefficients from regressions of each
characteristics on assignment to Head Start. The means and regressions are weighted
using the HSIS baseline child weights. The p-value is from a test of the hypothesis that
coefficients for all baseline characteristics are zero. Standard errors are clustered at the
Head Start center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Variable
Fraction of teachers with bachelor's degree

Table 3: Characteristics of Head Start Centers
Head Start centers
Mean
Std. dev.
Min.
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.35
0.40
0.00

Max.
(4)
1.00

Other centers
Mean
(5)
0.41

Fraction of staff with teaching license

0.11

0.23

0.00

1.00

0.30

Student/staff ratio

6.79

1.71

2.33

13.50

8.76

Full day service

0.63

0.48

0.00

1.00

0.67

More than three home visits per year

0.20

0.40

0.00

1.00

0.13

High/Scope curriculum

0.30

0.46

0.00

1.00

0.28

Center director experience (years)

18.17

10.12

0.00

52.00

13.96

Number of randomized applicants

12.90

10.46

2.00

79.00

-

Fraction of applicants assigned to Head Start

0.59

0.06

0.25

0.83

-

302
319
N (centers)
Notes: This table summarizes characteristics of Head Start center in the HSIS data. Means and standard deviations are student-weighted
for variables other than number of applicants and fraction assigned to Head Start. The HSIS sample excludes centers where the center
director did not answer the HSIS survey, and centers where the fraction of students assigned to Head Start was zero or one. Column (5)
shows mean characteristics for other preschools attended by children not offered a seat.

Time period
Spring 2003

Spring 2004

Spring 2005

Spring 2006

Table 4: Effects of Head Start on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills by Cohort and Year
Cognitive skills
Non-cognitive skills
First stage
IV estimate
First stage
IV estimate
Cohort
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
3-year-olds
0.679***
0.171***
0.679***
0.053
(0.031)
(0.040)
(0.031)
(0.035)
2070
2070
2062
2062
4-year-olds

0.684***
(0.034)
1638

0.088**
(0.037)
1638

0.685***
(0.032)
1631

-0.041
(0.032)
1631

3-year-olds

0.362***
(0.031)
2046

0.152*
(0.079)
2046

0.358***
(0.031)
2032

0.083
(0.071)
2032

4-year-olds

0.693***
(0.033)
1535

-0.080*
(0.045)
1535

0.693***
(0.032)
1555

-0.035
(0.041)
1555

3-year-olds

0.375***
(0.033)
1927

-0.014
(0.090)
1927

0.379***
(0.033)
1996

0.045
(0.088)
1996

4-year-olds

0.668***
(0.034)
1527

0.003
(0.062)
1527

0.668***
(0.034)
1576

-0.064
(0.044)
1576

3-year-olds

0.367***
0.058
0.372***
0.030
(0.032)
(0.104)
(0.032)
(0.076)
1876
1876
1957
1957
Notes: This table reports estimates of the effect of Head Start attendance on summary indices of cognitive and non-cognitive
skills. Estimates come from instrumental variables models using assignment to Head Start as an instrument for Head Start
attendance. All models use the HSIS baseline child weights and control for the baseline covariates listed in Table 2. Missing
covariates are set to zero, and dummies for missing values are included. Standard errors are clustered at the Head Start center
level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Table 5: Finite-sample Behavior of Center-specific Instrumental Variables Estimates
Mean
Std. dev.
Min.
Max.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
IV estimate
0.238
1.437
-4.541
14.804
IV asymptotic standard error

1.304

6.299

0.047

91.122

-39.18 (1195.02)
Unweighted:
-35.98 (34.98)
Weighted:
Notes: This table summarizes the distribution of center-specific instrumental variables
estimates for cognitive skills in Spring 2003. The estimate for each center comes from a
separate IV regression of cognitive skills on Head Start attendance instrumented by
Head Start assignment, pooling the 3- and 4-year-old cohorts and using the HSIS child
weights.The sample excludes centers with less than 3 applicants and centers with first
stages equal to exactly zero. Two other centers with small samples and first stages very
close to zero are also dropped. The sample includes 286 centers. The implied crosscenter variance of effects is the sample variance of the IV estimates minus the average
squared standard error. The weighted variance calculation weights observations by the
reciprocal of the IV standard error Standard errors of variance estimates are in
parentheses.
Implied cross-center variance
of effects

Parameter
E[Φ(λj+πj) - Φ(λj)]

Table 6: Random Coefficients Estimates for Spring 2003
Cognitive skills
Estimate
Standard error
Description
(1)
(2)
Mean compliance probability
0.743***
0.022

Non-cognitive skills
Estimate
Standard error
(3)
(4)
0.744***
0.021

[Var(Φ(λj+πj) - Φ(λj))]1/2

Std. dev. of compliance probability

0.220***

0.011

0.203***

0.011

E[α1j]

Mean treated outcome

0.105***

0.026

0.024

0.017

E[α0j]

Mean non-treated outcome

-0.009

0.029

0.000

0.016

E[α1j - α0j]

Mean Head Start effect

0.114***

0.035

0.024

0.021

[Var(α1j - α0j)]1/2

Std. dev. of Head Start effects

0.184***

0.016

0.068***

0.007

Notes: This table lists maximum simulated likelihood estimates of parameters of the cross-center distribution of Head Start effects in Spring 2003. The
sample pools the three- and four-year-old cohorts, and observations are weighted using the HSIS baseline child weights. The MSL procedure uses
1,000 simulations for each Head Start center. Standard errors are robust to misspecification and are clustered at the Head Start center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Table 7: Relationships Between Inputs and Head Start Effects
Cognitive skills
Non-cognitive skills
Two-stage least squares
Maximum
Two-stage least squares
Maximum
Bivariate
Multivariate
Bivariate
Multivariate
likelihood
likelihood
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Center characteristics
Any staff with bachelor's degree

0.026
(0.063)

0.050
(0.048)

0.001
(0.043)

0.012
(0.051)

-0.041
(0.050)

-0.022
(0.032)

Any staff have teaching license

0.127*
(0.068)

0.090
(0.064)

0.034
(0.044)

0.087
(0.052)

0.085
(0.056)

0.030
(0.040)

Low student/staff ratio

-0.044
(0.059)

-0.061
(0.050)

-0.068
(0.049)

0.033
(0.053)

0.046
(0.051)

0.031
(0.032)

Full day service

0.138**
(0.055)

0.089*
(0.047)

0.083*
(0.043)

-0.043
(0.053)

-0.031
(0.050)

-0.002
(0.031)

More than three home visits per year

0.024
(0.070)

0.110*
(0.064)

0.092*
(0.055)

0.112**
(0.050)

0.088
(0.056)

0.094**
(0.037)

High/Scope curriculum

-0.009
(0.066)

0.005
(0.054)

-0.023
(0.048)

0.042
(0.053)

0.085
(0.057)

0.024
(0.035)

High center director experience

0.022
(0.061)

0.055
(0.053)

0.021
(0.044)

-0.011
(0.052)

-0.007
(0.053)

-0.013
(0.034)

-0.127**
(0.062)

-0.077
(0.057)

-0.024
(0.042)

0.015
(0.049)

-0.010
(0.046)

-0.034
(0.032)

High income

-0.011
(0.061)

-0.003
(0.054)

-0.079*
(0.044)

0.008
(0.047)

0.041
(0.043)

0.020
(0.027)

High baseline skills

-0.085
(0.055)

-0.004
(0.051)

0.019
(0.035)

0.023
(0.047)

-0.005
(0.049)

-0.020
(0.032)

-0.099*
(0.054)

-0.117**
(0.051)

-0.076*
(0.045)

-0.011
(0.047)

-0.019
(0.049)

-0.004
(0.032)

B. Child characteristics
Mother graduated high school

C. Counterfactual preschool choices
High center-based preschool complier share

Residual std. dev. of Head Start effects
0.150
0.053
R-squared
0.337
0.393
Notes: This table reports estimates of relationships between Head Start effects and inputs in Spring 2003. Two-stage least squares models instrument
Head Start attendance and its interactions with inputs using assignment to Head Start and its interactions with inputs, with the same weighting scheme
and controls as in Table 4. High (low) values of inputs are values above (below) the sample median. The bivariate models in columns (1) and (4)
estimate a separate interaction model for each input, while the multivariate models in columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) include all interactions
simultaneously. Main effects of interacting variables are included as controls. Bivariate models exclude observations with missing values for the
relevant input; multivariate models exclude observations with missing values for any input. Standard errors are clustered at the Head Start center
level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

References
1. Allcott, H. (2014). “Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation.” Mimeo, New York University.
2. Anderson, M. (2008). “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention:
A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 103(484).
3. Angrist, J., and Imbens, G. (1995). “Two-stage Least Squares Estimation of Average Causal Effects in
Models with Variable Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90(430).
4. Angrist, J., and Lavy, V. (1999). “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on
Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2).
5. Berruta-Clement, J., Schweinhart, L., Barnett, W., Epstein, A., and Weikart, D. (1984). Changed
Lives: The Effects of the Perry Preschool Program on Youths Through Age 19. Ypsilanti, MI:
High/Scope Press.
6. Bertrand, M., and Pan, J. (2013). “The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender Gap in
Disruptive Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(1).
7. Bitler, M., Domina, T., and Hoynes, H. (2014). “Experimental Evidence on Distributional Effects of
Head Start.” NBER Working Paper no. 20434.
8. Campbell, F., and Ramey, C. (1994). “Effects of Early Intervention on Intellectual and Academic
Achievement: A Follow-up Study of Children from Low-Income Families.” Child Development 65(2).
9. Campbell, F., and Ramey, C. (1995). “Cognitive and School Outcomes for High-Risk African-American
Students at Middle Adolescence: Positive Effects of Early Intervention.” American Educational Research Journal 32(4).
10. Cascio, E., and Schanzenbach, D. (2013). “The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool
Education.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
11. Chandra, A., Finkelstein, A., Sacarny, A., and Syverson, C. (2013). “Healthcare Exceptionalizm?
Productivity and Allocation in the US Healthcare Sector.” NBER Working Paper no. 19200.
12. Chetty, R., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D., and Yagan, D. (2011). “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4).
13. Chetty, R., Friedman, J., and Rockoff, J. (2013a). “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating
Bias in Teacher Value-added Estimates.” NBER Working Paper no. 19423.
14. Chetty, R., Friedman, J., and Rockoff, J. (2013b). “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher
Value-added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood.” NBER Working Paper no. 19424.
15. Cohodes, S., and Goodman, J. (forthcoming). “Merit Aid, College Quality, and College Completion:
Massachusetts’ Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics.
16. Currie, J., and Thomas, D. (1995). “Does Head Start Make a Difference?” American Economic Review
85(3).
17. Deming, D. (2009). “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence from
Head Start.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3).
18. Deming, D. (2013). “Using School Choice Lotteries to Test Measures of School Effectiveness.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 19803.

31

19. Dobbie, W., and Fryer, R. (2011). “Are High Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement Among
the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3).
20. Epstein, A. (2007). Essentials of Active Learning in Preschool: Getting to Know the High/Scope
Curriculum. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
21. Fitzpatrick, M. (2008). “Starting School at Four: The Effect of Universal Pre-Kindergarten on Children’s Academic Achievement.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8(1).
22. Garces, E., Thomas, D., and Currie, J. (2002). “Longer-term Effects of Head Start.” American Economic Review 92(4).
23. Gelber, A., and Isen, A. (2013). “Children’s Schooling and Parents’Behavior: Evidence from the Head
Start Impact Study.” Journal of Public Economics 101.
24. Gibbs, C., Ludwig, J., and Miller, D. (2011). “Does Head Start Do Any Lasting Good?” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 17452.
25. Gormley, W., and Gayer, T. (2005). “Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma: An Evaluation of
Tulsa’s Pre-K Program.” Journal of Human Resources 40.
26. Hanushek, E. (2009). “Teacher Deselection.” In: Creating a New Teaching Profession, D. Goldhaber
and J. Hannaway, eds. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
27. Heckman, J. (1979). “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica 47(1).
28. Heckman, J. (1990). “Varieties of Selection Bias.” The American Economic Review 80(2).
29. Heckman, J. (2011). “The American Family in Black and White: A Post-Racial Strategy for Improving
Skills to Promote Equality.” IZA Discussion Paper no. 5495.
30. Heckman, J., Moon, S., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P., and Yavitz, A. (2010a). “The Rate of Return to the
High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.” Journal of Public Economics 94.
31. Heckman, J., Moon, S., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P., and Yavitz, A. (2010b). “Analyzing Social Experiments
as Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence from the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.”
Quantitative Economics 1(1).
32. Heckman, J., Malofeeva, L., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013). “Understanding the Mechanisms
Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American Economic Review 103(6).
33. Heckman, J., Urzua, S., and Vytlacil, E. (2006). “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models
with Essential Heterogeneity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3).
34. Hotz, V., Imens, G., and Mortimer, J. (2005). “Predicting the Efficacy of Future Training Programs
Using Past Experiences at Other Locations.” Journal of Econometrics 125(1-2).
35. Imbens, G., and Angrist, J., (1994). “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects.” Econometrica 62(2).
36. Imbens, G., and Rubin, D. (1997). “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects in Randomized Experiments
with Noncompliance.” Annals of Statistics 25(1).
37. Jacob, B. (2002). “Where the Boys Aren’t: Non-cognitive Skills, Returns to School and the Gender
Gap in Higher Education.” Economics of Education Review 21.
38. Jacob, B., and Lefgren, L. (2008). “Principals as Agents: Subjective Performance Assessment in
Education.” Journal of Labor Economics 26(1).

32

39. Kane, T., Rockoff, J., and Staiger, D. (2008). “What does Certification Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City.” Economics of Education Review 27(6).
40. Kling, J., Liebman, J., and Katz, L. (2007). “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1).
41. Krueger, A. (1999). “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 114(2).
42. Ludwig, J., and Miller, D. (2007). “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances? Evidence from
a Regression Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1).
43. Mariano, R. (1977). “Finite Sample Properties of Instrumental Variable Estimators of Structural
Coefficients.” Econometrica 45(2).
44. Morris, C. (1983). “Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association 78(381).
45. Nelson, C., and Startz, R. (1990). “Some Further Results on the Exact Small Sample Properties of
the Instrumental Variable Estimator.” Econometrica 58(4).
46. Obama, B. (2013). The White House, Office of the Press Secretary. Remarks by the President in state
of the union address.
47. Raudenbush, S., Reardon, S., and Nomi, T. (2012). “Statistical Analysis for Multisite Trials Using
Instrumental Variables with Random Coefficients.” Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness
5(3).
48. Reynolds, A. (1998). “Extended Early Childhood Intervention and School Achievement: Age Thirteen
Findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study.” Child Development 69(1).
49. Schweinhart, L. (2007). “How to Take the High/Scope Perry Preschool to Scale.” Paper prepared for
the National Invitational Conference of the Early Childhood Research Collaborative.
50. Schweinhart, L., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W., Belfield, C., and Nores, M. (2005). Lifetime
Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
51. Schweinhart, L., and Weikart, D. (1997). Lasting Differences: The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum
Comparison Study Through Age 23. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
52. Syverson, C. (2011). “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature 49(2).
53. US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families (2008).
“Statutory Degree and Credentialing Requirements for Head Start Teaching Staff.” http://eclkc.ohs.acf.
hhs.gov/hslc/standards/IMs_and_PIs_in_PDF/PDF_IMs/IM2008/ACF-IM-HS-08-12.pdf. Accessed
March 27, 2013.
54. US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families (2010).
“Head Start Impact Study, Final Report.” Washington, DC.
55. US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families (2011).
“Head Start Program Facts, Fiscal Year 2011.” http://eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/mr/factsheets/docs/hsprogram-fact-sheet-2011-final.pdf. Accessed March 27, 2013.
56. US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families (2012).
“Third Grade Follow-up to the Head Start Impact Study.” Washington, DC .
57. US Office of Head Start (2012). “Head Start Services.” http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ohs/about/headstart. Accessed March 27, 2013.
58. Wong, V., Cook, T., Barnett, W., and Jung, K. (2008). “An Effectiveness-based Evaluation of Five
State Pre-kindergarten Programs.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(1).

33

Online Appendix
The data for this analysis come from the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS). The HSIS data includes information on 4,442 students. Each student applied to one of 353 Head Start centers in Fall 2002, and each center
is associated with one of 84 regional Head Start program areas. The data includes separate files with information on test scores, answers to parental surveys, and Head Start center characteristics. This Appendix
describes the procedure used to clean each data source and construct the data set used for analysis.

Test Score Data
Test score information comes from a series of assessments conducted in Fall 2002, Spring 2003, Spring 2004,
Spring 2005 and Spring 2006. From each assessment file, I extract raw scores for the 17 tests listed in
column (1) of Table 1. These 17 tests are the main outcomes examined by DHHS (2010). The data also
include a few other tests (for example, the Leiter Sustained Attention Task), but DHHS (2010) expresses
reservations about their reliability and hence they are excluded. Not all tests were administered every year,
and there were some differences in the tests administered to Spanish-speaking and English-speaking students;
for example, the TVIP and Spanish CTOPPP were administered to Spanish speakers only. To construct
the cognitive summary index outcome, I standardize each test relative to the control group among students
who took the test separately for each cohort and assessment period. I then compute the mean of observed
standardized outcomes for each child. Finally, I append together the data sets for each assessment period,
and use a unique student identifier to reshape the data into a wide format file with one observation per
student and a separate variable for the cognitive summary index in each assessment period.

Parent Survey Data
Baseline demographics
Information on student demographics is drawn from a baseline survey of parents conducted in Fall 2002.
Eighty-one percent of households responded to this survey (3,577 of 4,442). This demographic information is
supplemented with a set of derived variables from the HSIS “Covariates and Subgroups” data file. This file
combines the baseline survey with information collected during experimental recruitment to fill in missing
values for some demographic variables. When variables are present in both files, information from the
“Covariates and Subgroups” file is used.
Non-cognitive outcomes
Indices of non-cognitive skill are constructed from the baseline parental survey and follow-up surveys
conducted in Spring 2003, Spring 2004, Spring 2005 and Spring 2006. I begin with the all social and emotional
outcomes analyzed by DHHS (2010). Each outcome is redefined so that a positive sign is favorable, and
then standardized relative to the control group separately by cohort and survey period. I also retain raw
measures of each outcome. I then append together the files for all periods. To exclude outcomes without

34

meaningful variation, I compute the mean of each raw outcome over all survey periods, and drop outcomes
where more than 90% of responses were the same. This produces the set of outcomes listed in column (2)
of Table 1. I then compute the non-cognitive summary index for each survey period as the mean of the
remaining standardized outcomes. Finally, I use the unique student identifier to reshape the data into a
wide format file with one observation per student and a separate variable for the non-cognitive summary
index in each survey period.

Measuring Head Start Assignment and Attendance
Head Start assignment comes from an administrative variable generated at the time of random assignment.
Head Start attendance in Spring 2003 is also measured administratively. To measure Head Start attendance
in later periods, I combine this administrative measure with parental survey information. Specifically, I
set Head Start attendance equal to one for Spring 2004, Spring 2005 and Spring 2006 if the Spring 2003
administrative measure is one, or if a parent indicated Head Start attendance at any time up to the relevant
time period. For time periods after Spring 2003, the Head Start attendance variable is missing for children
whose parents did not respond to the survey, because attendance cannot be accurately measured for these
students. This restriction does not affect the main results, which focus on Spring 2003.

Center Characteristics
The characteristics of Head Start centers are measured from a childcare center director survey conducted in
Spring 2003. The survey attempted to collect information from directors of all childcare centers attended by
sample children, including members of the control group who attended childcare outside of Head Start centers
in the experimental sample. The director survey data set is a student-level file, with variables capturing
responses of the center director at the center attended by each child. The seven inputs listed in Table 3 are
derived from the following questions:
• High/Scope curriculum: “If your principal curriculum has a name, what is that name?” Centers
are coded as High/Scope if the director selected High/Scope from among a list of possible answers to
this question.
• Fraction of staff with bachelors degree: “Approximately what percentage of lead and assistant
teachers in your center have a bachelors degree or higher?”
• Fraction of staff with teaching license: “Approximately what percentage of lead and assistant
teachers in your center have a teaching certificate or license?”
• Student/staff ratio: This variable is an administrative measure that divides the sum of male female
enrollment at a center by the number of staff at the center.

35

• Full-day service: “What child care options are provided at the center?” Centers are coded as full-day
if the director selected “full-day” from a list of possible responses to this question.
• More than three home visits per year: “How many home visits are required per program year?”
Directors were given a list of possible responses to this question. About 1 percent of responses were
“1 visit,” 79 percent of responses were “2-3 visits,” and 20 percent of responses were “more than three
visits.”
• Center director experience: “How many years have you worked with the following types of centerbased and child care programs?” Directors were asked to answer this question for three categories:
“Head Start,” “Non-Head Start center-based programs,” and “Non center-based child care programs.”
Director experience is measured as the sum of years spent in Head Start and non-Head Start centerbased programs.
I use these questions to derive the characteristics of each center of random assignment. To this end, I keep
observations administratively coded as both assigned to the treatment group and attending Head Start.
In some cases, codes for the center director were different for such students within a center of random
assignment. I use responses for the center director most frequently associated with treated students at a
given center of random assignment. For 7 percent of centers, there were two center director interviews
associated with an equal number of treated students. I break ties randomly to determine which responses
to use in these cases. I then keep one observation per center of random assignment. The resulting data set
has information for 89 percent (314 out of 353) of centers in the HSIS experiment.

Constructing the Analysis Data Set
The procedure described above yields 5 data files: A test score file, a baseline demographic file, a noncognitive outcome file, a file coding Head Start attendance after Spring 2003, and a center characteristics
file. I merge the first four of these files using a unique student identifier. I then merge the resulting file with
the center characteristics file using an identifier for center of random assignment. Finally, I merge on a sixth
file containing the HSIS baseline child weights, which yields the final data set used for analysis.

36

Time period
Spring 2003

Spring 2004

Spring 2005

Spring 2006

Cohort
3-year-olds

Table A1: Attrition by Cohort and Year
Cognitive skills
Follow-up rate
Differential
(1)
(2)
0.842
0.027*
(0.015)
2449

Non-cognitive skills
Follow-up rate
Differential
(3)
(4)
0.838
0.003
(0.013)
2449

4-year-olds

0.814

0.047**
(0.019)
1993

0.813

0.018
(0.016)
1993

3-year-olds

0.835

0.021
(0.019)
2449

0.821

0.026
(0.020)
2449

4-year-olds

0.770

0.009
(0.022)
1993

0.780

0.015
(0.018)
1993

3-year-olds

0.787

-0.003
(0.019)
2449

0.819

0.008
(0.017)
2449

4-year-olds

0.766

0.010
(0.025)
1993

0.781

0.026
(0.025)
1993

3-year-olds

0.766

0.016
0.805
0.032*
(0.020)
(0.019)
2449
2449
Notes: This table reports attrition rates for the HSIS sample. Columns (1) and (3) show fractions of children with observed
outcomes by cohort and time period. Columns (2) and (4) report treatment/control differences. These differences are
coefficients from regressions of a dummy for an observed outcome on treatment status, with the same controls and
weighting scheme as in Table 4.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Table A2: Comparison of Instrumental Variables and Maximum Likelihood Estimates
Instrumental variables
Maximum likelihood
First stage
Head Start effect
First stage
Head Start effect
Outcome (Spring 2003)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Cognitive skills
0.681***
0.133***
0.719***
0.137***
(0.026)
(0.030)
(0.019)
(0.033)
Non-cognitive skills

0.681***
0.010
0.719***
0.026
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.018)
(0.021)
Notes: This table compares parameter estimates from instrumental variables to maximum likelihood
estimates of the selection model described in the text with no cross-center heterogeneity. The sample pools
the three- and four-year-old cohorts. IV models use the same controls and weighting scheme as in Table 4.
Standard errors are clustered at the Head Start center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Table A3: Random Coefficients Estimates By Time Period
Cognitive skills
Non-cognitive skills
Spring 2003
Spring 2005
Spring 2003
Spring 2005
Parameter
Description
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E[α1j]
Mean treated outcome
0.105***
-0.010
0.024
0.016
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.017)
(0.017)
E[α0j]
Mean non-treated outcome
-0.009
-0.021
0.000
0.015
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.017)
(0.017)
E[λj]
Mean of intercept in selection equation
-1.351***
-0.412***
-1.346***
-0.429***
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.017)
(0.017)
E[logπj]
Mean of log of offer coefficient in selection equation
0.838***
0.396***
0.837***
0.411***
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.017)
(0.017)
1/2
[Var(α1j)]
Std. dev. of mean treated outcome
0.223***
0.251***
0.103***
0.083***
(0.020)
(0.035)
(0.013)
(0.015)
[Var(α0j)]1/2
Std. dev. of mean non-treated outcome
0.256***
0.269***
0.092***
0.074***
(0.025)
(0.044)
(0.016)
(0.020)
[Var(λj)]1/2
Std. dev. of intercept in selection equation
0.921***
0.509**
0.883***
0.481***
(0.106)
(0.218)
(0.102)
(0.125)
1/2
[Var(logπj)]
Std. dev. of log of offer coefficient in selection equation
0.569***
0.434***
0.500***
0.410***
(0.064)
(0.072)
(0.060)
(0.064)
σ1
Std. dev. of error in treated equation
0.579***
0.649***
0.413***
0.450***
(0.011)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.010)
σ0
Std. dev. of error in non-treated equation
0.626***
0.699***
0.414***
0.461***
(0.015)
(0.018)
(0.010)
(0.015)
ρ1
Correlation between treated outcome and selection error
0.089
-0.038
0.011
0.041
(0.083)
(0.066)
(0.088)
(0.077)
ρ0
Correlation between control outcome and selection error
0.142***
0.076
-0.012
0.025
(0.053)
(0.069)
(0.051)
(0.065)
Notes: This table lists maximum simulated likelihood estimates of parameters of the cross-center distribution of Head Start effects by year. The sample pools the
three- and four-year-old cohorts, and observations are weighted using the HSIS baseline child weights. The MSL procedure uses 1,000 simulations for each
Head Start center. Standard errors are robust to misspecification and are clustered at the Head Start center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Parameter
E[Φ(λj+πj) - Φ(λj)]

Table A4: Random Coefficients Estimates for Spring 2005
Cognitive skills
Estimate
Standard error
Description
(1)
(2)
Mean compliance probability
0.520***
0.023

Non-cognitive skills
Estimate
Standard error
(3)
(4)
0.527***
0.022

[Var(Φ(λj+πj) - Φ(λj))]1/2

Std. dev. of compliance probability

0.184***

0.011

0.174***

0.011

E[α1j]

Mean treated outcome

-0.014

0.029

0.019

0.018

E[α0j]

Mean non-treated outcome

-0.029

0.097

-0.004

0.027

E[α1j - α0j]

Mean Head Start effect

0.015

0.095

0.022

0.033

[Var(α1j - α0j)]1/2

Std. dev. of Head Start effects

0.065**

0.028

0.033***

0.007

Notes: This table lists maximum simulated likelihood estimates of parameters of the cross-center distribution of Head Start effects in Spring 2005. The sample pools
the three- and four-year-old cohorts, and observations are weighted using the HSIS baseline child weights. The MSL procedure uses 1,000 simulations for each
Head Start center. Standard errors are robust to misspecification and are clustered at the center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

Table A5: Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Finite-type Models
Three-type model
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 1
Description
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Mean treated outcome
-0.055**
0.385***
0.069
-0.059**
(0.027)
(0.033)
(0.054)
(0.027)

Parameter
α1k

Type 2
(5)
0.355***
(0.039)

Five-type model
Type 3
Type 4
(6)
(7)
0.408***
0.116
(0.095)
(0.104)

Type 5
(8)
0.106
(0.064)

α0k

Mean control outcome

-0.184***
(0.032)

0.249***
(0.038)

0.281**
(0.133)

-0.171***
(0.032)

0.318***
(0.043)

-0.144
(0.109)

0.925***
(0.192)

0.005
(0.139)

α1k - α0k

Head Start effect

0.130***
(0.039)

0.135***
(0.046)

-0.211
(0.131)

0.112***
(0.040)

0.037
(0.052)

0.552***
(0.137)

-0.809***
(0.199)

0.101
(0.154)

Φ(λk+πk) - Φ(λk)

Compliance probability

0.760***
(0.020)

0.865***
(0.019)

0.214***
(0.079)

0.748***
(0.022)

0.842***
(0.024)

0.936***
(0.033)

0.552***
(0.103)

0.012
(0.099)

Type probability

0.524***
(0.051)

0.344***
(0.045)

0.133***
(0.032)

0.518***
(0.052)

0.263***
(0.047)

0.097**
(0.039)

0.034**
(0.017)

0.088***
(0.027)

Pk
1/2

#∑ P k ((α k − α k ) − (α 1 − α 0 ))2 %
1
0
$
&

0.116
0.222
Std. dev. of Head Start effects
Notes: This table reports maximum likelihood estimates of finite-type models for cognitive skills in Spring 2003. Columns (1)-(3) come from a model assuming Head Start centers belong to one of
three types, while columns (4)-(8) come from a model assuming centers belong to one of five types. Standard errors are robust to misspecification and are clustered at the center level.

Variable
A. Center characteristics
Any staff with bachelor's degree

Table A6: Relationships Between Inputs and Head Start Effects in Spring 2005
Cognitive skills
Non-cognitive skills
Two-stage least squares
Maximum
Two-stage least squares
Maximum
Bivariate
Multivariate
Bivariate
Multivariate
likelihood
likelihood
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.034
(0.077)

0.003
(0.069)

0.023
(0.050)

0.065
(0.072)

0.026
(0.069)

-0.003
(0.033)

Any staff have teaching license

-0.012
(0.083)

-0.011
(0.084)

0.038
(0.051)

0.003
(0.072)

-0.057
(0.079)

-0.008
(0.036)

Low student/staff ratio

-0.041
(0.077)

-0.044
(0.076)

-0.060
(0.050)

0.027
(0.071)

0.050
(0.069)

0.031
(0.034)

Full day service

-0.035
(0.080)

0.000
(0.075)

0.043
(0.049)

0.014
(0.074)

-0.020
(0.069)

-0.016
(0.032)

More than three home visits per year

0.028
(0.100)

0.009
(0.093)

0.093
(0.061)

0.008
(0.093)

0.002
(0.082)

-0.033
(0.041)

High/Scope curriculum

-0.070
(0.080)

-0.104
(0.078)

0.026
(0.051)

0.124*
(0.069)

0.123*
(0.067)

0.041
(0.033)

High center director experience

0.006
(0.077)

-0.024
(0.071)

0.004
(0.050)

0.026
(0.070)

0.027
(0.063)

0.010
(0.032)

0.117
(0.077)

0.119*
(0.072)

-0.028
(0.054)

-0.059
(0.060)

-0.108*
(0.062)

-0.024
(0.036)

High income

-0.065
(0.080)

-0.105
(0.072)

-0.104**
(0.047)

0.115*
(0.059)

0.126**
(0.058)

0.016
(0.034)

High baseline skills

0.112
(0.078)

-0.004
(0.066)

-0.052
(0.045)

0.008
(0.060)

0.039
(0.060)

0.029
(0.036)

0.059
(0.074)

0.080
(0.078)

-0.048
(0.052)

0.029
(0.061)

0.025
(0.063)

-0.023
(0.031)

B. Child characteristics
Mother graduated high school

C. Counterfactual childcare choices
High center-based preschool complier share

Residual std. dev. of Head Start effects
0.062
0.027
R-squared
0.099
0.345
Notes: This table reports estimates of relationships between Head Start effects and inputs in Spring 2005. Two-stage least squares models instrument
Head Start attendance and its interactions with inputs using assignment to Head Start and its interactions with inputs, with the same weighting scheme
and controls as in Table 4. Columns (1) and (4) estimate a separate interaction model for each input, while columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) include all
interactions simultaneously. Main effects of interacting variables are included as controls. Standard errors are clustered at the Head Start center level.
***significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%

