                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EVOLUTION OF CHARTER SCHOOL QUALITY

                                          Patrick L. Baude
                                           Marcus Casey
                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                          Steven G. Rivkin

                                        Working Paper 20645
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20645


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2014




This work was done in conjunction with the Texas Schools Project at the University of Texas at Dallas.
Ross Cole provided superb research assistance. The conclusions of this research do not necessarily
reflect the opinions or official position of the Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board, the State of Texas, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Patrick L. Baude, Marcus Casey, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Charter School Quality
Patrick L. Baude, Marcus Casey, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin
NBER Working Paper No. 20645
October 2014
JEL No. I21,I24,I28

                                              ABSTRACT

Studies of the charter school sector typically focus on head-to-head comparisons of charter and traditional
schools at a point in time, but the expansion of parental choice and relaxation of constraints on school
operations is unlikely to raise school quality overnight. Rather, the success of the reform depends in
large part on whether parental choices induce improvements in the charter sector. We study quality
changes among Texas charter schools between 2001 and 2011. Our results suggest that the charter
sector was initially characterized by schools whose quality was highly variable and, on average, less
effective than traditional public schools. However, exits from the sector, improvement of existing
charter schools, and positive selection of charter management organizations that open additional schools
raised average charter school effectiveness over time relative to traditional public schools. Moreover,
the evidence is consistent with the belief that a reduction in student turnover as the sector matures,
expansion of the share of charters that adhere to a No Excuses philosophy, and increasingly positive
student selection at the times of both entry and reenrollment all contribute to the improvement of the
charter sector.


Patrick L. Baude                                     Eric A. Hanushek
University of Illinois at Chicago                    Hoover Institution
pbaude2@uic.edu                                      Stanford University
                                                     Stanford, CA 94305-6010
Marcus Casey                                         and NBER
Department of Economics                              hanushek@stanford.edu
University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan UH725 M/C144                        Steven G. Rivkin
Chicago, IL 60607                                    Department of Economics
mcasey@uic.edu                                       University of Illinois at Chicago
                                                     601 South Morgan UH725 M/C144
                                                     Chicago, IL 60607
                                                     and NBER
                                                     sgrivkin@uic.edu
	  


1. Introduction

                                                           The role of charter schools in improving academic achievement is controversial, and existing

evidence has led to contrasting conclusions about appropriate future policies. Some studies of

oversubscribed charter schools in specific cities have indeed found positive achievement impacts, 1

though these findings have yet to be generalized. Other studies of charter schools that attempt to go

beyond the oversubscribed set of schools using different methodologies have found essentially no or even

negative differences in average achievement between charter and traditional public schools.2 These

incongruous findings provide support for both advocates and opponents of charter schools. Advocates

point to the high quality of a number of oversubscribed schools. On the other hand, opponents highlight

the mediocre average outcomes and large variability in performance among the broader set of schools.

Drawing appropriate implications for policy from these conflicting results is nonetheless hampered by the

cross-sectional nature of the analyses. For a deeper understanding of this market-oriented reform, it is

necessary to examine the dynamics of the charter sector.


                                                           Little comprehensive research exists on the evolution of charter school quality. Two studies,

however, provide evidence consistent with effective market forces pushing schools to improve. First,

Hanushek et al. (2007) show that higher school value-added has a strong effect on the probability of

student reenrollment in a charter school, suggesting that households respond to quality. Second, CREDO

(2013) finds that average charter school effectiveness has improved relative to traditional public schools

in a number of states. Importantly, the study shows that closure of poorly performing charter schools

appears to be one of the primary mechanisms for improvement.

                                                           This paper brings new evidence to bear on these important issues. Specifically, the paper has two

principal aims. First, it describes how the distribution of charter school quality in Texas, one of the largest

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
  Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011), Angrist et al. (2012), and Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013) report results for
charter schools in and around Boston, and Dobbie and Fryer (2011) and Hoxby, Murarka, and Kang (2009) report
results for New York City.
2
  See, for example, evidence from statewide studies in Bifulco and Ladd (2006), Sass (2006), Booker et al. (2007),
and Hanushek et al. (2007). See also the multiple state comparisons in CREDO (2009, (2013).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     1	  
	  
	  


charter school states, has evolved between 2001 and 2011. Second, it investigates the extent to which

more fundamental factors – changes over time in student turnover, student selection into and out of

charters, and the share of schools that adhere to a “no excuses” philosophy – contribute to the observed

changes in school quality. We focus on the latter two factors because they receive by far the most

attention in the charter school policy debate, and we add the significant fall in student turnover, largely

unnoticed in the debate, because unrelated analyses show the importance of turnover in generating

externalities that affect achievement.

        Our analysis clearly indicates that charter school quality has improved over time in Texas. In

terms of value-added to mathematics and reading achievement, the distribution of charter school quality

initially lies to the left of that for traditional public schools but then converges and subsequently moves

slightly to the right of the public school distribution during the decade under study. Although average

school value-added for charter schools and for traditional public schools is quite similar in 2011, there is

compelling evidence that market forces are generating dynamic improvements in the charter sector. We

thus turn to disentangling the sources of these improvements.

        Each component driving the dynamics underlying the charter school distribution leads to

improvement over time. First, similar to CREDO (2013), we find that schools that close are drawn

disproportionately from the least effective charter schools. Second, schools that open during the period of

study far outperform those that close; the average value-added for new charters is roughly equal to the

average among existing charters. Third, charter schools remaining open throughout the decade from 2001

to 2011 exhibit increases in average school value-added. Together these changes raise the mean and

reduce the variance of charter school value-added relative to traditional public school value-added.


        The policy implications of these improvements hinge in large part on the relative contributions of

changes in student composition versus real improvements in the quality of instruction. We find evidence

that both forces are at work. Specifically, a reduction in student turnover as the sector matures, an




                                                     	                                                        2	  
	  
	  


expansion of the share adhering to a no excuses philosophy, and increasingly positive student selection all

contribute to the improvement of the charter sector.

                                                           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides basic background on

charter schools in Texas and on the growth of this sector. Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4

details the value-added specification used to measure school effectiveness. Section 5 illustrates changes

over time in the distribution of charter school effectiveness and highlights the contributions of school

entry, exit, and improvement to the evolution of charter school quality. Section 6 investigates more

fundamental factors contributing to the sector gains. Finally, Section 7 discusses implications for charter

school policy and further research.




2 The Texas Charter School Program

                                                           Texas – the focus of analysis here – is an active charter school state. Since enacting charter school

legislation in 1995, the Texas charter sector has grown into one of the largest in the nation, ranking

second nationally in both the number of charters operating and the number of students served by charters

in 2010-11.3 We begin this section with a description of the enabling legislation and subsequent

modifications. We then describe the evolution of the charter school sector.


2.1. Institutional Structure

                                                           The Texas Education Code establishes four types of charters: home-rule school district charters,

independent school district charters, university/college campus or program charters, and open enrollment

charters. Open-enrollment charters constitute the majority of charter schools and educate a substantial

fraction of the students enrolled in the sector. Open-enrollment charters are awarded under the auspices

of the Texas State Board of Education, which acts as the primary overseer for these schools. These

schools become independent educational entities, and the state designates a unique county-district

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
 U.S. Department of Education (2014), Table 216.90
[http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_216.90.asp, accessed June 30, 2014].


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     3	  
	  
	  


identifier for schools operating under each open enrollment charter. District charters, by contrast, are

established by and accountable to the school districts in which they reside. University charters make up

the remaining charters in the state and their establishment and operation is similar in character to open-

enrollment charters. No home-rule district charters have been established as of this writing.4

                                                           The defining feature of open-enrollment charter schools is their receipt of public funding without

many of the regulatory restrictions inherent in traditional public schools, chiefly in the realm of personnel

hiring. Outside of the requirements imposed by No Child Left Behind legislation for teachers in core

areas in any open-enrollment charter receiving federal funds, these charter schools have almost no

restrictions on hiring and firing. In practice, they may hire teachers who currently lack certification or

bring skills and experiences that may not be rewarded in conventional public schools. In addition, open-

enrollment charters are able to set salary and benefit schedules freely. By contrast, district charters

maintain the hiring and salary rules of their home districts. This distinction leads to some important

differences in the characteristics of staff: open-enrollment charters tend to employ less experienced

teachers who are less likely to have a post-graduate degree than teachers in traditional public schools.

Open enrollment charters also pay, on average, lower salaries.

                                                           Despite these differences in hiring and staffing, all charters in Texas are similar in their stated

goals to implement new curriculum and disciplinary practices that improve the educational outcomes of

their students. The path to achieving these goals differs, however, as the public mission statements and

foci of charters vary widely. Many combine standard skills enrichment with an emphasis on discipline;

others center their curriculum on more specialized interests such as athletics, the sciences or music and

the arts. Regardless of their curriculum, all charters are subject to the same accountability and testing

requirements as traditional public schools, and measures of school contributions to achievement capture

quality along a dimension central to the enabling legislation and interest in educational reform in Texas.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
 Home rule charter districts offer the possibility of increased flexibility for the entire district, but they also have a
number of procedural requirements including approval by local voters. As of 2014, only the Dallas Independent
School District had met the initial requirements and had a charter commission that was developing a charter for the
voters, but the process is incomplete and no operations had begun.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     4	  
	  
	  


                                                           Institutionally, there is not a one-to-one match between each charter granted and a specific school

(called a campus in Texas). A charter school management organization (CMO) can apply for and hold

more than one charter, and each charter can include multiple campuses in the same manner that a

traditional public school district can include multiple campuses.

                                                           Figure 1 illustrates the institutional structure of the Texas charter sector and the dimensions over

which a CMO can expand operations. America Can!, a 501(c) (3) non-profit organization, successfully

applied for a charter and operated one of the first charter schools in Texas in 1997. This CMO

subsequently expanded along two dimensions. First, it received an additional four open enrollment

charters between 1999 and 2005 for a total of five charter districts; and second, it increased the number of

campuses operated in three of the charter districts. This pattern highlights a key aspect of the regulatory

structure of charter schools in Texas: the approval process of charter districts in good standing to expand

the number of schools is far less involved than the process of applying for a new charter, meaning that the

cost of procuring approval for an additional school is likely to be modest relative to other costs associated

with adding a school.

                                                           From 1997 to 2000, there was no statutory limit on the number of open-enrollment charters

granted to management organizations that committed to operate schools that served at least 75% “at-risk”

students. Two changes were made in 2001. In response to reports of poor performance and

mismanagement at some schools, the legislature relaxed the at-risk student composition constraint.5 At

the same time, a strict limit of 215 was imposed on the number of charters awarded under the open-

enrollment program. This limit implicitly advantaged existing charter holders by limiting the entry of

new charter holders in an environment that permitted existing charter holders to expand through the

opening of new campuses.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  Even though the at-risk requirements were modified, the charter sector has continued to enroll an increasingly
larger share of poverty students compared to the traditional public school sector.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     5	  
	  
	  


2.2. Open Enrollment Charter School Growth

                                                           Figure 2 illustrates the growth of open enrollment charters between 1995 and 2011. By 2011

roughly 3.5% of public school students attended an open enrollment charter. Up to 2001, growth in the

number of charter school operators and districts largely drove the expansion in the charter sector as both

the number of charter holders and districts increased only slightly more slowly than the number of charter

schools. After 2001, however, the numbers of charter holders and districts remained roughly stable

(around 150 holders and 200 districts), while the number of schools roughly doubled.

                                                           Figure 3 shows the numbers of charter districts by active status relative to the state limit and the

annual charter authorizations and discontinuations. Elimination of the separate “at-risk” charter category

and more than doubling of the cap on open enrollment charters in 2001 constituted a major change,

though the annual increase in the number of new charter districts declined steadily between 1999 and

2002, hovering at slightly above zero. Between 2001 and 2011, some charter school operators entered and

some exited the system, some charters were revoked or voluntarily turned in, and some new charters were

authorized by the state. The bulk of the increase in charter schools, however, occurred through expansion

among existing charter districts. Given the low level of entry by the end of the period, it is unsurprising

that the share of inactive charter districts fell below 5 percent by 2011.




3. The UTD Texas Schools Microdata Panel

                                                           The cornerstone of this research is the microdata constructed by the Texas Schools Project at the

University of Texas at Dallas that includes test scores, demographic characteristics, and information on

school attendance and academic programs for a panel of students and schools.6 Our analysis focuses on

over 400 separate charter school campuses and their enrollees for the period 2001 to 2011. School

information includes location, grades offered, enrollment, charter school type, state accountability rating,


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
 A more detailed description of the underlying database can be found in Kain (2001) and other publications on the
website for the Texas Schools Project: http://www.utdallas.edu/research/tsp-erc/.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     6	  
	  
	  


and information on all staff. Student information includes demographics, mathematics and reading test

results, school attended, grade, and academic program information. Students who switch schools,

including those who transition between traditional public and charter schools, can be followed as long as

they remain within the Texas public school system.7

                                                           Mathematics and reading assessments come from two statewide criterion-referenced achievement

tests that were administered during our period of study. From 1993 - 2003, the Texas Assessment of

Academic Skills (TAAS) was administered each spring to eligible students enrolled in grades three

through eight. In 2003, Texas introduced a new exam called the Texas Assessment of Knowledge and

Skills (TAKS).8 TAKS expanded the number of subjects for which students were required to demonstrate

proficiency and elevated the difficulty of the tests. Because the test structure, number of questions, and

average percent right vary across time and grades, we transform all test results into standardized scores

with a mean of zero and variance equal to one for each grade and year. We subsequently examine the

sensitivity of these results to the imposition of a new testing regime. To avoid potential bias introduced by

pooling Spanish language exams with the rest, we standardized these exams separately.

                                                           Any school without students in the TAAS/TAKS data is excluded from the sample; therefore, our

number of charters will differ from public records of the number of authorized charter schools. (Note,

however, that students do not have to have to complete the tests to be included in the TAAS/TAKS file).

Also omitted are those charter schools exclusively serving children with special needs, residents in

treatment programs, or students with diagnosed behavioral problems.

                                                           For the subsequent analysis of the sources of charter sector improvement, we construct a unique

data base that incorporates the operational focus of each charter school. Specifically, on the basis of

information gathered through interviews and records investigations, we classified each CMO on the basis

of whether or not it adheres to a “no excuses” philosophy as defined in Section 6 and Appendix B.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7
  Private schools enrollment in Texas remains relatively small at less than six percent in 2011 (U.S. Department of
Education (2014)).
8
  The TAKS exam was recently repealed by the Texas legislature and schools will now transition to End of Course
Exams.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     7	  
	  
	  


4. Measuring Charter School Quality

                                                           The primary concern in measuring charter school performance is that unobserved differences

between charter school and traditional public school attendees contaminate comparisons of the

achievement in the two sectors. We begin with a short review of analytical approaches used in studies of

charter schools and then describe our school value-added specification.


4.1 Lotteries, Selection on observable characteristics, and Student Fixed Effects

                                                           The most commonly used methods to account for potential confounding factors in the study of

charter schools are lottery-based random assignment, student fixed effects, matching against the

distribution of students in prior traditional public school attended, and regression that controls for prior

achievement along with demographics.9 Lottery studies capitalize on the random offer of admission to

applicants of charter schools when the applicants exceed the number of available openings. The

applicants who are randomly denied admission are used as a control group. In the absence of non-random

attrition, this approach provides clear identification of the impacts of charter schools, but results cannot be

generalized to the larger set of charter schools since the over-subscribed schools are likely to be among

the highest quality charters.

                                                           The absence of lotteries in most schools rules out using these methods in the larger set of charters,

leaving student fixed effects, matching, and value-added regression as alternative observational methods

for accounting for unobserved differences between charter schools and traditional public schools. Student

fixed effects estimators compare outcomes while a student attends a charter school to outcomes for the

same student when attending a traditional public school. This approach fully accounts for fixed

differences in ability, family background, and other achievement determinants between charter and

traditional public school students. However, it does not account for time-varying differences that may be

related to entry into a charter school (e.g., a temporary negative family shock that leads to low


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9
 Early cross-sectional studies that adjusted in one way or another for just student demographics but lacking prior
achievement data have been largely discredited and abandoned as more appropriate data and research methods have
become available.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     8	  
	  
	  


achievement followed by charter school entry). Moreover, as CREDO (2013) points out, only students

who switch between schools in the charter and traditional public school sectors contribute to the

estimates. This restriction excludes the experiences of an increasing share of students that enter charter

schools prior to 4th grade (when the testing structure first permits observing achievement gains). This

reduces the effective sample sizes but more importantly might limit the ability to generalize to all charter

school entrants if the educational return to attending a charter differs by timing of entry.

                                                           CREDO (2013) adopts an approach that matches charter school students to students in traditional

public schools. Essentially each charter school student is matched on prior achievement and other

characteristics with a similar student in one of the traditional public schools that charter school student

previously attended.10 This approach permits the inclusion of all charter school students in the estimation

of charter school effectiveness and covers both over- and under-subscribed charter schools. It must,

however, rely upon the stronger assumption of no differences in the unobserved time invariant and time

varying factors for the charter and traditional public school students with whom they are matched.

                                                           In a comparison of lottery-based estimates with estimates from ordinary regression, matching,

and student fixed effects approaches, Fortson et al. (2012) find that the matching method produces

estimates that are not significantly different from the lottery-based estimates. By contrast, estimates

produced by regression adjustments and by student fixed effect specifications tend to be significantly

different from the lottery-based estimates (despite being fairly close in magnitude). Importantly, the

magnitudes of these differences between lottery-based experimental estimates on the one hand and the

respective observational estimates on the other potentially reflect differences both in the influences of

confounding factors and in the average value-added of the traditional public schools that comprise the

counterfactual. Both the lottery and matching methods construct counterfactuals from traditional public

schools that provide direct education alternatives for those students choosing the charter schools, while

the regression method uses all traditional public schools regardless of proximity to construct the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
10
   Their method creates synthetic matches by combining information on up to seven similar students in the sending
traditional public schools.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     9	  
	  
	  


counterfactual. Thus, these results in Fortson et al. (2012) may be uninformative about the magnitudes of

bias in the respective estimators.

                                                           In describing changes over time in charter school quality, the lottery-based, fixed effect and

matching approaches have potentially serious drawbacks. First, any general equilibrium effects on the

quality of traditional public schools will be amplified as these methods base their comparisons solely on

those public schools from which the charter school students are drawn even though these public schools

likely face the strongest competitive, peer group and financial pressures.11

                                                           Second and more important, the value-added of the counterfactual traditional public school to

which students are compared in each of these three methods is likely to evolve over time in a way that

attenuates estimates of the change in average charter school value-added vis-à-vis the change in average

value-added in traditional public schools. Charter school quality almost certainly affects both the quality

of the applicant pool and the alternative public schools from which lottery winners and losers are drawn

or charter school students are matched. The key element is the change in relevant peer groups for both

traditional and charter schools.12

                                                           The traditional public school counterfactuals used in each of these estimators depend upon the

traditional public school quality distributions for students who transition to a charter. Since the accuracy

and availability of information on charter school quality improves the longer a school is open, the number

of families that select a charter based upon inaccurate information will reduce in the charter’s tenure.

Perceived improvements in charter school quality would tend to raise the alternative public school quality

distribution of the applicant pool of sending schools, meaning that the comparison group used to generate




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
   In fact, as described below, estimates reveal a positive correlation between estimated charter school value-added
and the estimated value-added of traditional public schools previously attended by new entrants to charters.
12
   These issues have entered into the policy discussions through a concern that school choice in general leads to the
highest achieving students and most involved parents leaving the traditional public schools and thereby damage the
traditional public schools by lessening the political pressure and accountability in them. At one level, this is just an
element of the general equilibrium effects of charter schools, which depend on how traditional public schools react
to competition. But, here we are concerned about the analytical implications when considering the dynamics of
market transitions and a changing comparison group.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     10	  
	  
	  


the counterfactual estimate of traditional public school quality likely evolves along with the perceived

quality of charter schools.13

                                                           The findings in Gleason et al. (2010) illustrate the possibility that changes over time in the

distribution of traditional public schools can alter estimates of charter school effects. First, the lottery-

based method generates substantial heterogeneity in estimated charter school effects. Second, the

estimated effect of charter school attendance is much higher for low-income students. This finding is

consistent with the possibility that the gains from charter school attendance are likely higher in areas with

lower-quality traditional public schools (assuming that school quality tends to be lower as poverty

increases). Some of the observed variation almost certainly reflects heterogeneity in charter school

effects, but the pattern is consistent with the existence of heterogeneity in traditional public school quality

as well. In our context, the assumption that this distribution is static is almost certain to be violated in a

manner that biases toward zero estimates of the change over time in average charter school quality.


4.2 School Value-added Models

                                                           This section focuses on direct estimation of charter school value-added. To isolate school value-

added, our estimates exploit the panel structure of our data and condition on lagged test scores to account

for unobserved heterogeneity and influences of prior school quality. 14 Estimates from this approach

compare charter schools to the universe of Texas traditional public schools, thus making the

generalizability of the analysis clear.


                                                           Different strands of prior research produce evidence supporting an evaluation of charter schools

based on relative value-added. Although much of the research on value-added has focused in teachers

rather than schools, some evidence exists on the reliability of various estimates using charter schools.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13
  Note that this is not a simple mechanical “creaming” issue resulting from just higher achieving students changing
schools and thus increasing achievement in the receiving school while decreasing achievement in the sending
school. Each of these evaluation approaches is designed to separate the level of initial achievement of students from
the value-added of the school.
14
 Bifulco and Ladd (2006), Sass (2006), Booker et al. (2007), and Hanushek et al. (2007) also use panel data
methods to identify charter school effects.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     11	  
	  
	  


Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013) present evidence that lottery and observational

identification strategies generate broadly similar estimates. In their study of variation in teacher value-

added estimates, Guarino, Reckase, and Wooldridge (2012) find that typically considered shocks appear

to introduce less bias into value-added estimates produced by the lagged-achievement model than those

produced by other models, including those with student fixed effects. Third, in an examination of school

effects related to racial composition, Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2009) find that student fixed effects

have little effect on estimates produce by models with lagged student achievement. Finally, Chetty,

Friedman, and Rockoff (2014) find for that one year lagged achievement along with common

demographic characteristics effectively eliminates bias in the estimation of teacher fixed effects. And,

even though Rothstein (2011) provides evidence of bias introduced by endogenous sorting into

classrooms, the potential for this type of bias is mitigated here by focusing on schools rather than

teachers, thus aggregating across classroom placements.15

                                                           Equation (1) presents the specification used in our estimation of school quality. Here achievement

A for student i in grade g and school s is modeled as a function of student, family, and peer factors and a

school fixed effect that is our measure of school quality (δ s ) :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aigs = α ig + X ig β + Pgs + δ s + eigs   (1)


where X and P are vectors of contemporaneous family background and peer characteristics during grade

g, α is an individual intercept specific to grade g, and e is a stochastic term capturing other unmeasured

influences. The year subscript is suppressed as is the year-by-grade error component that captures grade-

specific changes over time in the test instrument.


                                                           If school quality was uncorrelated with α and e, standard cross-sectional OLS regression would

yield an unbiased estimate of our measure of school value-added (δ s ) . But as noted above, the choice-

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15
  It may be that classroom placement of students is productive, i.e., average students gains are higher in schools
where student groupings and matches with teachers are optimal. For our analysis this is simply reflected in the
overall school value-added, and we make no attempt to disentangle such sources of any differences in school value-
added.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     	                       12	  
	  
	  


based determinants of school enrollment and evidence on other types of school effects suggest that

typically available variables contained in X will not account adequately for potentially confounding

factors. In particular, as Hanushek et al. (2007) illustrate, both time invariant and time varying

unobserved differences among students could potentially introduce bias, as could student and family

shocks that accompany enrollment into a charter school.

                                                           By moving to panel data on students, we can use lagged achievement to capture the cumulative

effects of prior family, community and school influences. Our approach assumes that conditional on prior

achievement, differences in unobserved effort, ability, or the time path of prior knowledge acquisition do

not introduce bias into the estimates of school value-added.16 The estimation with panel data also makes

possible the inclusion of controls for transition costs associated with changing schools. This is particularly

important in the study of a sector with a large share of schools in their first few years of operation and

with considerable within-sector mobility.

                                                           Within this framework, we can estimate the full distribution of school quality across both

traditional and charter schools. Further, and key to this study, we can trace the evolution of quality across

time and can then consider how market dynamics enter.

                                                           Although uncertainty remains about the “optimal” estimator of charter-school effectiveness, we

conclude that school value-added regressions that account for demographic characteristics and prior

student performance provide the best approach to learning about the evolution of the entire distribution of

quality in the charter sector. Moreover, given the focus on changes over time in charter school quality, we

rely on the assumption that the direction and magnitude of any bias remain stable over time and not the

stronger assumption that the estimator produces unbiased estimates in all periods.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16
              For direct analysis of the reliability of this approach, see Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff (2014).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     13	  
	  
	  


5. Evolution of the Charter School Quality Distribution

                                                           In this section, we first describe changes over time in charter school mathematics and reading

value-added between 2001 and 2011 relative to traditional public schools. Subsequently, we examine the

contributions of school improvement, school closures, and the entry of new schools to these changes.


5.1 Quality Changes

                                                           Figures 4 and 5 illustrate changes over time in the distributions of charter and traditional public

school mathematics and reading value-added, respectively.17 The top panel of Figure 4 shows that the

distribution of charter school mathematics value-added was located to the left of the corresponding

distribution for traditional public schools in 2001 and exhibited much higher variation. In subsequent

years, the difference between sectors in both the location and variance of the distributions shrank steadily.

By 2011, the distributions roughly coincide, though the charter school distribution continues to exhibit

slightly more dispersion.18 The larger variance in the charter school distribution may result in part from

the smaller average school sizes and consequently higher error variance in the sector; the almost 50

percent increase in average charter school enrollment between 2001 and 2011 likely contributed to the

decline in dispersion over this period. Nonetheless, evidence below indicates that the closure of many low

performers also contributed significantly to that decline.

                                                           Importantly, evidence in Hanushek et al. (2007) showing charter school improvement in the early

years of school operation suggests that these figures could understate relative sector quality and may even

understate improvement given the rapid growth of the sector. Figure 2 illustrated the increase in the

number of charter campuses over this period, a circumstance addressed in Figure 4b. This figure

implicitly holds the age distribution of charter schools constant by reporting kernel density distributions

based on residuals from estimates of school value-added on indicators for the first through fourth years of


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17
   Figures 4a and 4b report value-added distributions for the odd-numbered years, but results for all years produce a
similar picture of monotonic changes.
18
   Note that the differential declines between 2001 and 2003, the period in which the state switched from the TAAS
to the TAKS test, and between 2003 and 2011 when the TAKS was used throughout. This consistency indicates that
the observed pattern is not just a testing phenomenon.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     14	  
	  
	  


operation with the indicators set to zero for traditional public schools. The coefficients on the indicators

(not reported) support the previous findings of significant quality improvement during the initial years of

operation. Nonetheless, these controls have little effect on the observed pattern of charter school

improvement, consistent with the fact that the share of schools in the early years of operation has

remained fairly stable.

          Figures 5a and 5b present quality distributions for reading, and the pattern is quite similar to the

pattern reported for mathematics. Again, relative charter school effectiveness rises throughout the period,

and the improvement is similar in distributions that adjust for length of charter school operation.

          Together the results for mathematics and reading paint a consistent picture of gains in charter

school effectiveness. Overall, the average performance of charter schools relative to traditional public

schools improved over this period by 0.11 standard deviations of achievement in mathematics and an

even larger 0.2 standard deviations of achievement in reading. This is a large change in comparison to

typical estimates of the variance in teacher quality or the benefits of a large reduction in class size,

particularly given the absence of an increase in average school spending. Note that all of the average gain

in mathematics and 0.11 over half the gain in reading occurred between 2005 and 2011, consistent with

the notion that improvement in the charter education market unfolds over time.

          The interpretation of these figures with respect to the absolute level of charter school quality

depends in part upon any overall trends in Texas schools. If, for example, the quality of traditional public

schools in Texas is falling over this period due to the expansion of the charter sector or other factors, the

catch-up of charter schools may not indicate much if any quality improvement. Alternatively, if

traditional public schools improve – either in response to competition from the charter sector or for other

reasons – the observed increase in charter school quality would actually understate the improvement in

charter school effectiveness. Imberman (2011) highlights the difficulty of identifying the causal effect of

competition on traditional schools resulting from charter schools. Therefore we simply describe changes

over time in state average achievement to provide a context for the relative improvement of the charter

sector.

                                                      	                                                       15	  
	  
	  


                                                           During the sample period public schools in Texas showed overall improvements. The average

score on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) improved from 2000-2011 for fourth

and eighth grade math and from 1998-2011 for fourth grade reading.19 Public school performance held

constant for eighth grade reading from 1998-2011. Moreover, because the population of Texas has

become more heavily weighted over time toward blacks and Hispanics, who have scored below the white

average, this improvement in the overall average is notable. Looking at subgroups, whites, blacks, and

Hispanics each improved over this period on all of the NAEP tests including eighth grade reading.20

Thus, the relative improvement of charter schools is not driven by a decline in the average quality of

traditional public schools.	  


5.2 Entry, Exit, and Improvement

                                                               The first look at the source of the underlying rightward shifts in the charter school value-added

distributions comes from a description of charter school entry, closures, and improvement (Table 1).21

The average improvements of 0.11 and 0.20 standard deviations in mathematics and reading, respectively,

came from a combination of: (1) improvement in charter schools that persist throughout the period (Panel

A); (2) the disproportionate closure of low value-added schools (Panel B); and (3) an average value-added

of new schools that far exceeds that of the schools that closed (Panel C). Value-added increased by 0.06

standard deviations in math and 0.11 standard deviations in reading for schools open at both the

beginning and end of the period. The difference between the average value-added of schools that closed

during the period and those that entered equals 0.28 standard deviations in math and 0.40 standard




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19
   NAEP is a national test, often called the “Nation’s Report Card,” given to representative samples of students in all
states. It has reported state performance in math and reading at grades 4 and 8 every two to four years since 1992.
Reading tests were not available in 2000 but were available in 1998.
20
   Note that schools across the country also tended to improve on these tests over the period, perhaps indicating the
impact of federal accountability legislation (No Child Left Behind, or NCLB). Nonetheless, Texas students as a
whole and across the racial/ethnic subgroups generally improved more than the national average over this period.
21
   As noted, the tests changed in 2003. Appendix A provides a similar description for just the 2004-2011 period
when the TAKS test was used throughout. For this shorter period, the same patterns of charter school improvement
hold, although the magnitudes of change are smaller.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     16	  
	  
	  


deviations in reading .22 The major contribution of entrants to the overall changes in the distribution of

charter school quality is amplified by the large number of entrants relative to the number of charter

schools continuously open and relative to the number that closed between 2001 and 2011.

                                                           The much higher average value-added of entrants compared to exits suggests systematic

differences in the quality of charter management organizations that expanded relative to those that

contracted. To examine this relationship more closely, we construct a panel that identifies annual changes

in the number of schools operated by each charter management organization. We directly estimate the

relationship between CMO expansion and quality using regressions of the change in the number of

schools operated on the average mathematics and reading value-added of the CMO and year fixed effects.

Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 show a strong, positive relationship between the change in the number of

schools and average value-added of the schools operated in the previous year that is robust to the

inclusion of CMO fixed effects. This pattern is consistent with the notion that quality affects demand for a

CMO’s schools, and CMOs respond in part by expansion or contraction of the number of schools in

operation.

                                                           The remaining columns explore the possibility of asymmetry in CMO expansion and contraction.

Columns 3 and 4 report the value-added coefficients from linear probability regressions of an indicator

equal to one if the CMO increased its number of schools on value-added; and Columns 5 and 6 report the

coefficient from a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the CMO

decreased its number of schools. Again regardless of whether CMO fixed effects are included, the

probability of increasing the number of schools in operation is positively related to average CMO value-

added in the prior year, and the probability of decreasing the number of schools in operation is negatively

related to CMO average value-added. This pattern is consistent with the notion that higher-quality CMOs

increase their market share over time.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
22
  The value added of schools that closed is measured in 2001 while that of entrants is measured in 2011 meaning
that a portion of the gap may result in part from the higher average experience of entrants at the time of
measurement. However, the small differences in the overall school tenure distribution suggest that the impact of
tenure is likely to be minimal relative to fixed differences in school performance.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     17	  
	  
	  


6 Sources of Improvement

                                                           A key issue is the extent to which superior performance of successful charter schools is driven by

more effective school operations as opposed to a more positively selected student body. These alternative

mechanisms for charter school performance have fueled the policy debate about charter schools. The

apparently strong performance among schools that adhere to a “no excuses” philosophy (described below)

has received particular attention. In this section we describe changes over time in both the share of

schools that adhere to such a philosophy and the selectivity of charter school students and then examine

the associations among these variables and estimates of charter school effectiveness. We also add

consideration of student turnover as a third factor based upon existing evidence of its importance and its

dramatic decrease in the Texas charter sector as the sector matures. Note that the absence of compelling

sources of strictly exogenous variation precludes causal claims. The sensitivity of the no excuses

estimates to the inclusion of the other variables in combination with existing external evidence on the

effects of turnover and peers, however, provide evidence that each of these factors is a likely contributor

to the observed improvements in the charter sector.

                                                           The belief that students are inputs into education production in addition to being consumers of its

output guides the model of schooling demand in the seminal work by Epple and Romano (1998). It has

been reinforced by extensive work on peer effects in schools.23 Informal conversations with CMO

executives indicate that many share this belief. These executives, however, tend to emphasize peer

behavior rather than peer achievement. The no excuses philosophy encapsulates this theory, often

featuring a number of rules or policies including strict discipline, contracts that require parental

commitment, and uniforms aimed at creating a positive environment for learning.24 These rules may

contribute to a positive environment both through their direct effects on behavior and through their

influence on enrollment and reenrollment decisions. Recent evidence on the determinants of charter

school quality reported in Furgeson et al. (2012), Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013), and Dobbie and

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
              See the review in Sacerdote (2011).
24
              See Thernstrom and Thernstrom (2003), Mathews (2009).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     18	  
	  
	  


Fryer (2013) highlights the particularly strong performance of charter schools that set high expectations,

adopt a no excuses philosophy, or require uniforms. These studies, however, also raise the possibility that

student selection – intentional or simply a response to school practices – contributes both to the strong

performance of no excuses schools and to the improvement in Texas charters overall.25

                                                           We begin with a description of trends in these key factors previously identified in the literature.

These can be directly related to performance in a standard “growth accounting” way based on existing

causal estimates of their effect. We then estimate the relationship between mathematics and reading

value-added on the one hand and these three factors on the other in a series of specifications designed to

provide information on the sensitivity of the estimates to the inclusion of the other factors. 	  


6.1. Trends over time

                                                           The most straightforward trend we observe is the increased stability of attendance in the charter

sector as it grows and matures. Previous analysis suggests that the disruption generated as a consequence

of large numbers of students changing schools negatively impacts student achievement (Hanushek, Kain,

and Rivkin (2004)). Hence, we begin by comparing the evolution of student mobility in the charter and

traditional public school sectors. Figure 6 traces the proportion of charter and traditional public school

students that are new to their school. For this, we restrict the sample to students attending a grade in

schools where the prior grade was offered; i.e., the sample excludes students in brand new schools or the

first grade offered in a school. Remarkably, the annual share of new students exceeded, on average, 50

percent in charter schools until 2006. The percentage of new students, however, declined by almost thirty

percentage points between 2001 and 2011, although the level remained twice that of the traditional public

schools.

                                                           To see the changes in composition of the students in charter schools, Figure 7 plots the mean

differences in math and reading achievement and the probability of committing a disciplinary infraction

between traditional public school students who transition to a charter school in the subsequent year and
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25
  Nichols-Barrer et al. (2014) consider the conjecture that student attrition from KIPP schools might explain their
success but reject it.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     19	  
	  
	  


their schoolmates who remain in the traditional sector. The high rate of charter school turnover shown

previously, however, also means that the characteristics of new entrants may not fully capture the overall

degree of selection. Therefore, the top panel compares all charter school entrants to schoolmates who

remain in the traditional public sector, and the bottom panel compares only charter entrants who remain in

the charter school into the second year with the same set of schoolmates. Importantly, all comparisons of

achievement and behavior apply to those during the year prior to charter school entry and thus rule out

any influences of the charter school. Moreover, disciplinary infraction comparisons within a traditional

public school at a point in time hold constant infraction policies and procedures and isolate differences in

behavior. Note that we first compute the differences between each charter school entrant and her

schoolmates who remain in the traditional public sector and then average over the sample of entrants.

        Between 2001 and 2004, the entering achievement and behavior characteristics of charter-school

students largely did not improve relative to schoolmates who remained in the traditional public sector, but

this picture changed markedly in subsequent years for both all entrants and those who remained into their

second year at the charter. The average difference in mathematics achievement between students who

entered a charter school and schoolmates who remained in the traditional sector was -0.23 standard

deviations in 2001, fell to -0.30 in 2004, and then rose to -0.05 in 2011; the corresponding differences for

reading were -0.20 standard deviations, -0.21, and 0.03, and the corresponding differences in the

probability of a disciplinary infraction were 0.06, 0.16, and 0.05. In sum, student selection into charter

schools moved from being negative in 2001 to roughly neutral in 2011 based on achievement but changed

little in terms of behavior.

        Entrants who remained in their charter schools into the second year following the transition were

less negatively selected in 2001 and generally more positively selected in 2011 than new entrants as a

whole, indicating adverse selection out of charters. By comparison, differences between the traditional

public school students who initially remained in the traditional sector but switched schools in the

subsequent year and those who remained in their traditional school into the subsequent year were far



                                                    	                                                       20	  
	  
	  


smaller than the differences between all charter entrants and those who remained at their school into the

subsequent year (not shown).

        Finally, Figure 8 shows that, by our measures, the share of students attending schools classified as

adhering to a no excuses philosophy rises from roughly 18 to 38 percent between 2001 and 2011. This

change in school operations thus also has the potential for explaining a portion of the achievement gains

of charter schools. Importantly, the designation of a CMO as adhering to a No Excuses philosophy is not

straightforward, as many that appear to operate with rules and practices that correspond to the No Excuses

philosophy do not designate themselves in this way. Appendix B describes the extensive information and

decision-rules that we use to determine whether a CMO follows a No Excuses philosophy.


6.2. Growth Accounting for Charter School Improvements

        There is evidence from other studies that these trends in enrollment, selection, and no excuses

philosophy likely contributed to the improvement in the charter sector. In this section we employ

estimates from existing studies on student turnover and prior peer achievement to assess their

contributions to the observed trends in performance of Texas charter schools. Specifically, we consider

how much of the improvements in average charter school mathematics and reading value added can be

plausibly attributed to student turnover and changes in peer composition. In the following section we

investigate the possibility that selection and turnover account for a portion of the previously noted high

performance of no excuses schools. Data limitations hinder efforts to identify the causal effects of specific

aspects of school operations including those associated with the no excuses approach, though the findings

in Furgeson et al. (2012), Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013) strongly

suggest that adherence to this model raises achievement.

        The estimates in Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) suggest that the substantial decline in the

new-student share could account for a sizeable portion of the increase in charter school mathematics value

added. The approximately 20 percentage point decline in the relative share of students that are new to the

schools contributes by those estimates to roughly .04 standard deviations to the improvement of relative


                                                    	                                                       21	  
	  
	  


charter school performance between 2001 and 2011.26 In other words, the greater sector stability per se

accounts for over one third of the decrease in the average mathematics value-added gap between charter

and traditional public schools. This estimate of course does not provide the source of the decline in

student mobility, although it is likely that at least a portion of the lower turnover results from an

improvement in school operations. (Note that this is an estimate of the externality of high student

turnover and is not any direct effect of moving on students).

                                                           Obtaining a similar estimate of the impact of changing student peer groups on the growth in

charter school quality is more difficult, because the existing peer effect literature is broad and complex.

As is well recognized, a number of factors impede identification of peer achievement effects, but some of

these complications lessen if the focus is on prior, predetermined peer achievement. By and large, the

weight of the evidence suggests this relationship with peer achievement is positive.27 For our purposes,

even with an estimate of the impact of peer quality, it is difficult to estimate the impact of changes in

peers on the path of charter school improvement from the annual flows summarized in Figure 7. Those

entering a charter school in an early grade may differ substantially from those entering in a later grade.

Consequently, changes over time in the selectivity of students who enter a charter school during tested

grades might not capture average changes across the entire population. Moreover, the increase in the low-

income share of charter-school enrollment likely offsets some of the increase in selectivity given the

lower average achievement of lower-income students. Nonetheless, the estimates from Hanushek et al.

(2003) on Texas can be used to produce an upper bound on the contribution of improvements in peer

achievement to the relative increase in charter school mathematics value added.28 Under the very strong

assumption that the 0.2 standard deviation increase over time in the selectivity of entrants equals the


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
26
   Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin (2004) find that the added disruption of high turnover creates an externality. That
analysis is based on value-added models of achievement in Texas that include student, school-by-year, and school-
by-grade fixed effects to account for confounding factors including perceived school quality and neighborhood
shocks. A ten percentage point higher level of mobility reduces mathematics achievement by approximately 0.2
standard deviations in Texas public schools (independent of any impact on the individuals who move).
27
   An extensive review of the evidence is found in Sacerdote (2011).
28
   Hanushek et al. (2003) do not provide any estimates for reading achievement. For math, a one standard deviation
increase in peer average mathematics achievement is estimated to improve student math scores by 0.15 s.d.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     22	  
	  
	  


increase over time in charter school peer average mathematics achievement, selection on mathematics

achievement accounts for no more and probably much less than 0.03 standard deviations out of the 0.11

standard deviation increase in charter school value added.

                                                           Note that some of the public discussion confuses the effects of selection into charter schools on

school quality with the effects on average achievement. It is certainly the case that the increased

selectivity raised observed achievement levels. However, we measure quality on the basis of achievement

value-added regressions that explicitly condition on prior achievement. Therefore the primary pathway

through which greater selectivity or “creaming” affects school quality is by improving peer group quality,

and the evidence strongly suggests that such improvements have had a significant but small effect on

average charter school value-added.	  


6.3 Student Turnover, Selection, and No Excuses Effects in Texas

                                                           For policy, a pressing question is the extent to which student selection accounts for the higher

performance of charter schools that adhere to a no excuses philosophy or other characteristics associated

with superior outcomes. In order to gain a better understanding of the interrelationships among turnover,

selection, and adherence to a no excuses philosophy, we estimate a series of models that regress

mathematics or reading value added on various combinations of these variables.29

                                                           In the simplest models without school fixed effects found in Columns 1-4 of Table 3, the

coefficient on the no excuses indicator equals 0.169 s.d. in the mathematics value-added specification

without the other variables but falls by roughly 40 percent to 0.096 s.d. following the inclusion of the

selection on achievement and turnover variables. Inclusion of the proportion new students variable alone

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
29
    For this, the selection at the time of entry and reenrollment variables are computed as follows: first, each charter
school entrant is assigned the difference between their prior achievement (or receipt of a disciplinary infraction) and
the average among their traditional public school peers that remain in the traditional public sector. Next, these
differences are averaged over all students that enter each school. The reenrollment selection variables are computed
similarly with the exception that the differences are averaged over only those students who remain in the same
charter into their second year. For students who enter a charter school in year t, the degree of selection upon entry is
related to value-added in year t, while the degree of selection at the time of reenrollment for the second year is
related to value-added in year t+1. Standard errors are clustered at the school level; clustering at the CMO level has
little effect on the standard errors.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     23	  
	  
	  


drops the coefficient to 0.106, and the addition of the selection on achievement variables leads to the

additional 0.01 drop. Nonetheless, the no excuses coefficient remains highly significant, indicating that

average value-added in no excuses charters exceeds that for other charters even controlling for both

turnover and selection. Moreover, the inclusion of the selection on disciplinary infractions variables do

not decrease the no excuses advantage, supporting the notion that this dimension of student composition

does not drive the changing performance of charter schools.

           Despite the absence of a compelling source of exogenous variation in charter school philosophy,

these estimates provide information with which to consider the likely contributions of student

composition to existing estimates of the benefit of adherence to a no excuses philosophy. They suggest

that turnover rather than selection is likely to account for a greater portion of the no excuses effect,

though the exact portions depend upon variation in each of these variables in the sample under

consideration. Moreover, these results also indicate that student peer composition does not account for a

majority of the effect. Importantly, there is substantial variation in the operations and quality of schools

classified as no excuses, and the performance differential almost certainly varies across samples of such

schools.

           The year-to-year variation in the selection and turnover variables permits estimates of these

variable effects in specifications that include school fixed effects (although the no excuses designation is

absorbed by the fixed effects). The pattern of results in the final four columns of Table 3 illustrates the

strength of the relationship between school value-added and selection on prior achievement. In particular,

a highly significant positive relationship emerges between school value-added and the mathematics

achievement differentials. This finding is unaffected by changes in the sample of students used in the

comparison: when computed over all entrants, we find a positive .0075 whereas focusing only on those

who persist to their second year yields a coefficient of .045 that is not significantly different. Moreover,

these estimates decline only slightly following the inclusion of the proportion of new students and the

selection on disciplinary infraction variables (column 8). Note that the selection on disciplinary infraction

variables both have the expected negative signs but are not significant at the 10 percent level. It is

                                                      	                                                       24	  
	  
	  


certainly possible that a variable constructed from more detailed information on classroom behavior

would exhibit a stronger relationship with value added.

                                                           The no excuses coefficients in the full specification (Column 4) can also be used to estimate the

contribution of the growth in the share of schools that adhere to a no excuses philosophy to the increase in

charter school value-added, though these estimates should be considered suggestive given the absence of

clear causal identification. Based on the 20 percentage point increase in the no excuses charter share, the

coefficient of 0.096 indicates that the increase in the no excuses share accounts for slightly less than an

additional 0.02 standard deviations of the 0.11 s.d. increase in mean mathematics value-added for charter

schools relative to traditional public schools.30

                                                           A similar pattern of estimates emerges for reading value-added. We therefore focus only on some

salient differences. First, the estimated impact on performance of no excuses charters is smaller in

specifications without the other variables and falls by an additional amount following their inclusion. In

the full model the no excuses coefficient for reading falls a little below two-thirds of the corresponding

coefficient for math, though it remains highly significant. Second, the estimated relationship between

reading value-added and selection at the time of reenrollment is quite small and insignificant. In

combination with the much larger improvement in charter school average reading value added, the results

suggest that these factors are associated with a much smaller share of charter school increases in reading

than in mathematics value added.


6.4 Other Contributing Factors

                                                           Classification as no excuses is of course not the sole important dimension of school operations,

and there are certainly other aspects of school operations, most notably the quality of leadership and

instruction, that almost certainly vary among schools regardless of their philosophy. In fact, informal


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
30
  Using the estimates in Col. 4 in growth accounting, we would find a somewhat larger contribution of student
turnover (approximately 0.06 versus the previous 0.04) and virtually the same contribution of peer effects of
changing math achievement. However, the estimates from Col. 8 imply larger contributions of changing peer math
achievement but smaller (and statistically insignificant) estimates for student turnover when school fixed effects are
included.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     25	  
	  
	  


conversations with several executives employed by some of the largest CMOs operating in Texas,

including several from no excuses CMOs, reveal a strong emphasis on finding and developing effective

school leaders. Some CMOs devote substantial resources to the training of school leaders including year-

long apprenticeships. These programs differ considerably from the traditional public school job ladder of

teacher to assistant principal to principal. Other CMOs bemoaned the inability to afford such programs.

Importantly, this commitment to leadership did not seem to depend on the degree of authority granted

over personnel or programmatic decisions. Given the difficulty of measuring leadership performance, it is

difficult to evaluate its contribution, but this would seem to be a primary area for further investigation.31




7 Discussion and Conclusion

                                                           Using administrative microdata on schools and students, we trace the evolution of charter school

quality in Texas and establish that charter schools have improved relative to traditional public schools

over the observation period of 2001-2011. The distributions of charter school value added in mathematics

and reading converged to those for traditional public schools despite substantial growth in the number of

charter schools during this period.

                                                           The analysis provides support for the belief that market forces are generating dynamic

improvements in the charter sector. First, consistent with existing evidence, we find that schools that

close are drawn disproportionately from the less effective part of the charter school distribution. Second,

we find that schools that open during the period of study far outperform those that close, with average

value-added for new charters roughly equal to the average for existing charters. Finally, charter schools

remaining open throughout the decade from 2001 to 2011 exhibit increases in average school value-


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
31
  See Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin (2012) on both the potential importance of principals and the difficulty of
measuring differences among principals. Bloom et al. (2014) also point to the importance of management in
schools, relying on surveys of specific management practices. England has introduced Academy Schools which call
for conversion of traditional public schools into institutions very similar to charter schools, and this has led to
positive but heterogeneous impacts on student performance. When surveyed, a majority of the Academy Schools
indicated that change in leadership was the most important element of their conversion; see Eyles and Machin
(2014).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    	     26	  
	  
	  


added. Together these changes raise the mean and reduce the variance of school value-added relative to

traditional public schools.

        In looking deeper into the sources of these improvements, we find support for the beliefs that an

expansion of the share of schools that adhere to a no excuses philosophy, increases in the selectivity of

entering students, and a reduction in student turnover as the sector matures contribute to the charter

sector’s improvement, though much of the improvement remains unexplained by these three factors.

Although the first two of these lie at the center of the debate over the desirability of the charter school

reform, it is the third that makes the largest contribution based on existing evidence on the adverse effects

of turnover on the learning environment.

        Perhaps most important, the results highlight the value of taking a longer-term perspective on the

impact of such a major education reform, particular one that relies on parental decisions and market

forces. The relaxation of constraints on school management opened public education to many with little

prior experience, and the large variation in school quality observed during the early years is consistent

with growing pains associated with new markets. As schools improved, more successful CMOs expanded

and many less effective schools left the market. Also, a much smaller share of charter school students

were exposed to the type of instability and poor quality that likely precipitated many transitions.




                                                     	                                                       27	  
	  
	  



References


Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag A.
      Pathak. 2011. "Accountability and flexibility in public schools: Evidence from Boston's
      charters and pilots." Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, no. 2: 699-748.
Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
       Walters. 2012. "Who Benefits from KIPP?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
       31, no. 4 (Fall): 837-860.
Angrist, Joshua D., Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2013. "Explaining charter
       school effectiveness." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5, no. 4: 1-27.
Bifulco, Robert, and Helen F. Ladd. 2006. "The impacts of charter schools on student
       achievement: Evidence from North Carolina." Education Finance and Policy 1, no. 1
       (Winter): 50-90.
Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, Daniela Scur, and John Van Reenen. 2014.
      "The New Empirical Economics of Management." Centre for Economic Performance
      Occasional Paper 41. London: London School of Economics and Political Science
      (April).
Booker, Kevin, Scott M. Gilpatric, Timothy Gronberg, and Dennis Jansen. 2007. "The impact of
      charter school attendance on student performance." Journal of Public Economics 91, no.
      5-6: 849-876.
Branch, Gregory F., Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2012. "Estimating the Effect of
      Leaders on Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals." NBER Working
      Paper W17803. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (January).
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2014. "Measuring the impacts of teachers I:
       Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates." American Economic Revew 104, no. 9
       (September): 2593–2632.
CREDO. 2009. Multiple choice: Charter school performance in 16 states. Stanford, CA: Center
    for Research on Education Outcomes, Stanford University.
CREDO. 2013. National charter school study 2013. Stanford, CA: Center for Research on
    Education Outcomes, Stanford University.
Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer. 2011. "Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
      Achievement among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children's Zone." American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3, no. 3 (July): 158-87.
Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. 2013. "Getting beneath the Veil of Effective Schools:
      Evidence from New York City." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5, no.
      4 (October): 28-60.
Epple, Dennis, and Richard E. Romano. 1998. "Competition between private and public schools,
       vouchers, and peer-group effects." American Economic Review 88, no. 1 (March): 33-62.



                                            	                                            28	  
	  
	  


Eyles, Andrew, and Stephen Machin. 2014 of Conference. "The Introduction of Academy
       Schools to England’s Education." Paper presented at CESifo Area Conference on
       Economics of Education, September 12-13, at Munich.
Fortson, Kenneth, Natalya Verbitsky-Savitz, Emma Kopa, and Philip Gleason. 2012. Using an
       Experimental Evaluation of Charter Schools to Test Whether Nonexperimental
       Comparison Group Methods Can Replicate Experimental Impact Estimates. Washington,
       DC: Institute for Education Sciences (April).
Furgeson, Joshua, Brian Gill, Joshua Haimson, Alexandra Killewald, Moira McCullough, Ira
       Nichols-Barrer, Bing-ru Teh, Natalya Verbitsky-Savitz, Melissa Bowen, Allison
       Demeritt, Paul Hill, and Robin Lake. 2012. Charter-School Management Organizations:
       Diverse Strategies and Diverse Student Impacts. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy
       Research.
Gleason, Philip, Melissa Clark, Christina Clark Tuttle, and Emily Dwoyer. 2010. The Evaluation
      of Charter School Impacts: Final Report. Washington, DC: National Center for
      Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance (June).
Guarino, Cassandra M., Mark D. Reckase, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2012. "Can Value-Added
      Measures of Teacher Performance be Trusted?" Education Policy Center Working Paper
      #18. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University (May).
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2003. "Does peer
      ability affect student achievement?" Journal of Applied Econometrics 18, no. 5
      (September/October): 527-544.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2004. "Disruption versus Tiebout
      improvement: The costs and benefits of switching schools." Journal of Public Economics
      Vol 88/9-10: 1721-1746.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steve G. Rivkin. 2009. "New evidence about Brown v.
      Board of Education: The complex effects of school racial composition on achievement."
      Journal of Labor Economics 27, no. 3 (July): 349-383.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Steve G. Rivkin, and Gregory F. Branch. 2007. "Charter school
      quality and parental decision making with school choice." Journal of Public Economics
      91, no. 5-6 (June): 823-848.
Hoxby, Caroline M., Sonali Murarka, and Jenny Kang. 2009. How New York City's Charter
      Schools Affect Achivement. Cambridge, MA: New York City Charter Schools Evaluation
      Project (September).
Imberman, Scott A. 2011. "The effect of charter schools on achievement and behavior of public
      school students." Journal of Public Economics 95, no. 7-8 (August): 850-863.
Kain, John F. 2001. "The UTD Texas Schools Microdata Panel ( TSMP ): Its History, Use and
       Ways to Improve State Collection of Public School Data." Paper prepared for The
       Secretary's Forum on Research and Value-Added Assessment Data: U.S. Department of
       Education (December 5).
Mathews, Jay. 2009. Work hard. Be Nice.: How two inspired teachers created the most
      promising schools in America. Chapel Hill, NC: Algonquin Books.

                                             	                                            29	  
	  
	  


Nichols-Barrer, Ira, Brian P. Gill, Philip Gleason, and Christin Clark Tuttle. 2014. "Does student
       attrition explain KIPP's success?" Education Next 14, no. 4 (Fall).
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2011. "Peer effects in education: How might they work, how big are they and
       how much do we know thus far?" In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3,
       edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann. Amsterdam:
       North Holland: 249-277.
Sass, Tim R. 2006. "Charter schools and student achievement in Florida." Education Finance
       and Policy 1, no. 1 (Winter): 91-122.
Thernstrom, Abigail, and Stephan Thernstrom. 2003. No excuses: Closing the racial gap in
       learning. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
U.S. Department of Education. 2014. Digest of Education Statistics, 2013. Advanced Release ed.
       Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.




                                               	                                              30	  
	  
	  


Figure 1: An example of the charter sector organizational structure: the expansion of the America
Can! CMO



                            Charter(            Charter(                    Charter(
                            Holder(             Districts(                 Campuses(
                                                                          Dallas(CAN(Academy(
                                                                                 Charter(
                                                                                                    1997(
                                                                              057804001((


                                                                          Dallas(CAN(Academy(
                                                                           Charter(–(Oak(Cliﬀ(
                                                                              057804002(
                                                                                                    1999(
                                                Dallas(CAN(Academy(
                                                       Charter(
                                                      057804(
                                                                        Texans(CAN(at(Carrollton(
                                                                           –(Farmers(Branch(
                                                                              057804003(            2004(

                                                                         Dallas(CAN(Academy(at(
                                                                             Pleasant(Grove(
                                                                                                    2005(
                                                                              057804004(


                                                                         Houston(CAN(Academy(
                                                                            Charter(School(
                                                                              101812001(
                                                                                                    1999(
                                               Houston(CAN(Academy(
                                                  Charter(School(
                                                      101812(
                                                                         Houston(CAN(Academy(
                                                                                Hobby(
                                                                              101812002(
                                                                                                    2004(
                             America(CAN!(


                                                                        Fort(Worth(CAN(Academy(
                                                                              220804001(            2001(
                                              Fort(Worth(CAN(Academy(
                                                      220804(
                                                                              River(Oaks(
                                                                              220804002(            2002(


                                                San(Antonio(CAN!(HS(      San(Antonio(CAN!(HS(
                                                      015817(                  015817001(           2002(

                                                AusNn(CAN(Academy(        AusNn(CAN(Academy(
                                                  Charter(School(           Charter(School(         2003(
                                                      227818(                 227818001(




Note: The number in each district and campus block refers to the relevant state ID code.




                                                       	                                                   	  
	  
	  


Figure 2: The Growth in the Numbers of Open-enrollment Charter Schools, Districts, and CMOs
and the Share of Students Enrolled in an Open-Enrollment Charter School, 1995-2011

                                Charter Expansion
                    Active CMOs, Districts, Campuses, and Students
       500




                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                Pct of state enrolled in OE charter
       400




                                                                                                           3
       300




                                                                                                 2
       200




                                                                                        1
       100
       0




                                                                                0
             1995            2000                2005                   2010

                     CMOs                 Districts
                     Campuses             Pct of state enrolled in OE charter




                                                     	                                                                 	  
	  
	  


Figure 3. Stock of State Charters by Type, 1995-2011

                          Charter School Stock and Flows
       200
       150
       100
       50
       0




             1995              2000                   2005                  2010
                                              year

                    Unlimited >75% at-risk charters          State-wide Charter Cap
                    # Charters                               # Active Charters
                    Discontinued Charters                    New Charters




                                                      	                              	  
	  
	  


Figure 4: Distributions of School Quality as Measured by Mathematics VA, by Year
Panel A: No controls for years of operation. 	  


                                  2001                       2003                            2005
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0
       Density




                                  2007                       2009                            2011
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0




                     -2    -1      0     1   2   -2     -1      0          1   2   -2   -1    0     1   2
                                             Campus value-added in math
                                                      Charter                  TPS
                 Graphs by year
                                                                                                            	  

Panel B: Conditional on years of operation (1, 2, 3, 4, 5+ yrs.).

                                  2001                       2003                            2005
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0
       Density




                                  2007                       2009                            2011
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0




                     -2    -1      0     1   2   -2     -1      0          1   2   -2   -1    0     1   2
                                             Campus value-added in math
                                                      Charter                  TPS
                 Graphs by year
                                                                                                            	  

                                                                    	                                             	  
	  
	  


Figure 5: Distributions of School Quality as Measured by Reading VA, by Year
Panel A: No controls for years of operation.

                                  2001                        2003                            2005
                 4
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0
       Density




                                  2007                        2009                            2011
                 4
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0




                     -2    -1      0     1    2   -2     -1      0          1   2   -2   -1    0     1   2
                                             Campus value-added in reading
                                                       Charter                  TPS
                 Graphs by year



Panel B: Conditional on years of operation (1, 2, 3, 4, 5+). 	  


                                  2001                        2003                            2005
                 4
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0
       Density




                                  2007                        2009                            2011
                 4
                 3
                 2
                 1
                 0




                     -2    -1      0     1    2   -2     -1      0          1   2   -2   -1    0     1   2
                                             Campus value-added in reading
                                                       Charter                  TPS
                 Graphs by year
                                                                                                             	  

                                                                     	                                             	  
	  
	  




Figure 6: Proportion of Students that are New to the School in the Charter and Traditional Public
School Sectors: 2001 to 2011
       .6
       .5
       .4
       .3
       .2
       .1




                  2000            2002             2004            2006            2008               2010

                                                    Charter                    TPS
            Excludes schools in first year of operation and the lowest grade offered at each school




                                                          	                                                 	  
	  
	  


Figure 7: Trends Over Time in Selection into the Charter Sector by Prior Mathematics and
Reading Achievement and the Probability of Receiving a Disciplinary Infraction, by Subsequent
Transitions of Charter School Entrants: 2001-2011	  



Panel A: All Charter School Entrants
       .2
       .1
       0
       -.1
       -.2
       -.3




             2001   2003   2005            2007             2009          2011
                                    year

                           Math                   Reading
                           Discipline
                                                                                 	  

Panel B: Charter Entrants Who Remain into Their Second Year
       .2
       .1
       0
       -.1
       -.2
       -.3




             2001   2003   2005            2007             2009          2011
                                    year

                           Math                   Reading
                           Discipline
                                                                                 	  

Notes: The series compare students who transition to a charter school to their former schoolmates who
remain at a traditional public school using information from the year prior to the transition. Math refers
to average math achievement, reading refers to average reading achievement, and discipline refers to the
probability of having committed any disciplinary infraction.




                                                                   	                                    	  
	  
	  


Figure 8: Trends over time in the share of schools that adhere to a no excuses philosophy

             40
             35
       % No Excuses
       25    20
             15 30




                      2001   2003         2005             2007             2009             2011


Note: No excuses status is defined at the CMO level, and the percentage is expressed in terms of the
number of students enrolled at a ‘no excuses’ campus relative to all charter school students.




                                                   	                                                  	  
	  
	  




Table 1. Average Charter School Mathematics and Reading Value-added and Enrollment shares
for 2001 and 2011, by status of school operations.


                                                                                                      Mathematics	                                                   Reading	  

       	  	                                                                                        2001	                   2011	          	              2001	                 2011	  

       A.	  Schools	  in	  operation	  in	  2001	  and	  in	  2011	                     	  	                  	  	             	  	  	   	  	                 	  	  

       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Average	  Value	  Added	                           -­‐0.06	                 0.00	                         -­‐0.12	            -­‐0.01	  
                                                                                                                                              	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Share	  of	  Charter	  Enrollment	                  0.79	                  0.24	                           0.79	                0.23	  
                                                                                                                                              	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Number	  of	  Schools	                                            105	                                                   98	  
                                                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                             	                      	       	                     	                    	  
       	   Schools	  in	  operation	  in	  2001	  but	  not	  in	  2011	  
       B.	  

       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Average	  Value	  Added	                       	  -­‐0.27	           	   .	           	   	  -­‐0.36	   	  
                                                                                                                                              	                                           	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Share	  of	  Charter	  Enrollment	                  0.21	                       .	                0.21	  
                                                                                                                                              	                                           	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Number	  of	  Schools	                                             59	                                       55	  
                                                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                             	                      	       	                     	                    	  
       	   Schools	  in	  operation	  in	  2011	  but	  not	  in	  2001	  
       C.	  

       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Average	  Value	  Added	                       	   .	                	   0.01	        	   	                             	   0.04	  
                                                                                                                                              	                     	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Share	  of	  Charter	  Enrollment	                       .	                0.76	                                             0.77	  
                                                                                                                                              	                     	  
       	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Number	  of	  Schools	                                            318	                   	  	                  318	   	  	  


Notes: Average value added for charter schools weighted by enrollment; traditional public school average
value added in each year deducted from the corresponding charter average. Empty cells in panels B and
C correspond to years when these school categories are no longer in operation or have yet to begin
operation.




                                                                                          	                                                                                                      	  
	  
	  


Table 2: Estimated Effects of CMO Performance on the Number of Schools Operated
	  

                                                             Net	  Change	                                  Net	  Expansion	                               Net	  Contraction	  

       	                 	  	              	  	        (1)	                 (2)	      	  	            (3)	                 (4)	     	  	            (5)	                 (6)	  

       CMO	  Average	  Math	  VA	                     0.186	            0.191	                         0.084	            0.075	                       -­‐0.041	         -­‐0.044	  

                                              	         (0.049)	          (0.052)	   	                  (0.019)	          (0.020)	   	                 (0.013)	          (0.014)	  

       	                                     	                                             	                                                	  
                                                             	                 	                              	                 	                              	                 	  
       	  
       CMO	   Average	  Reading	  VA	     	          0.223	            0.203	         	              0.083	            0.070	        	             -­‐0.056	         -­‐0.051	  

                                              	         (0.053)	          (0.056)	   	                  (0.020)	          (0.021)	   	                 (0.014)	          (0.015)	  

       	  
       CMO	   FE	                           	            No	                  Yes	      	                No	                  Yes	     	                No	                  Yes	  

       Mean	                                 	                      0.139	                   	                       0.120	                  	                       0.055	  

       N	                                    	  	                  1847	                 	  	  	                  1847	                	  	  	                  1847	  

Note: Data for regressions include all CMOs operating in each year. Each estimate comes from a separate
regression. All regressions include year dummies. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the
net change in the number of campuses in operation for a CMO, while columns (3)-(6) the dependent
variable is an indicator equal to one if the net change is positive (expansion) or negative (contraction).
Standard errors are clustered at the CMO level. All coefficients are significant at the 1 percent level.




                                                                                      	                                                                                                         	  
	  
	  


Table 3: Estimated effects of No Excuses, Selection at Entry and Reenrollment, and Share of
Students New to the School on Charter School Mathematics Value-added
	  

                                  (1)      (2)           (3)             (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)     (8)
   No-Excuses-Indicator         0.169*** 0.106*** 0.095***            0.096***
                                 (0.025)  (0.022)  (0.022)             (0.022)

   Proportion-New                       +0.350*** +0.269*** +0.297***             +0.129                         +0.096
                                          (0.041)   (0.057)   (0.058)            (0.082)                        (0.088)

   Math-score-difference                            0.065**           0.075***             0.075**              0.064*
   00000Entrants                                    (0.026)            (0.028)             (0.033)              (0.033)
                                                     0.008              0.014              0.045**              0.039*
   00000Persisters                                  (0.014)            (0.015)             (0.022)              (0.023)

   Infraction-Rate-difference
   00000Entrants                                                        0.065                        +0.154** +0.112
                                                                       (0.050)                        (0.078) (0.075)
   00000Persisters                                                      0.02                           +0.066 +0.052
                                                                       (0.045)                        (0.044) (0.044)

   School-Fixed-Effects           No       No            No              No       Yes        Yes          Yes    Yes

   N                                             1,410                                             1668                   	  

Note: School-by-year-level regressions with estimated mathematics value-added as the dependent
variable. Regressions include demographic characteristics, year dummies. Standard errors, clustered at
the campus level, are in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** denotes
significance at the 5 percent level, * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.




                                                               	                                                                	  
	  
	  


Table 4: Estimated effects of ‘No Excuses’, Selection at Entry and Reenrollment, and Share of
Students New to the School on Charter Reading Value-added
	  

                                   (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)                (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
   No-Excuses-Indicator         0.133*** 0.077*** 0.063*** 0.064***
                                 (0.020)  (0.017)  (0.017)  (0.016)

   Proportion-New                       ,0.311*** ,0.218*** ,0.262***         ,0.205***                        ,0.175*
                                          (0.036)   (0.044)   (0.048)           (0.065)                        (0.066)

   Reading-score-difference
   /////Entrants                                   0.082*** 0.095***                      0.089***             0.077**
                                                    (0.022)  (0.023)                       (0.032)             (0.032)
   /////Persisters                                   0.020   0.024*                         0.012               0.009
                                                    (0.014)  (0.014)                       (0.020)             (0.020)
   Infraction-Rate-difference
   /////Entrants                                                    0.111**                           ,0.060    ,0.021
                                                                    (0.050)                          (0.066)   (0.065)
   /////Persisters                                                   ,0.001                          ,0.077*    ,0.064
                                                                    (0.039)                          (0.045)   (0.044)

   School-Fixed-Effects           No       No           No            No        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes

   N                                            1,396                                         1651                       	  

Note: School-by-year-level regressions with estimated reading value-added as the dependent variable.
Regressions include demographic characteristics, year dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the campus
level, are in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** denotes significance at the 5
percent level, * denotes significance at the 10 percent level.




                                                             	                                                                 	  
	  
	  


Appendix A

Table A1: Average Charter School Mathematics and Reading Value-added and Enrollment shares
for 2004 and 2011, by status of school operations.	  

                                                            Mathematics        Reading
                                                            2004 2011        2004 2011
       A.'Schools'in'operation'in'2004'and'in'2011
       ''''''''''Average'Value'Added                        :0.10 :0.03      :0.05 0.00
       ''''''''''Share'of'Charter'Enrollment                 0.81 0.38        0.82 0.38
       ''''''''''Number'of'Schools                               185              185

       B.'Schools'in'operation'in'2004'but'not'in'2011
       ''''''''''Average'Value'Added                        :0.19        .   :0.20
       ''''''''''Share'of'Charter'Enrollment                 0.19        .    0.18
       ''''''''''Number'of'Schools                                  66             67

       C.'Schools'in'operation'in'2011'but'not'in'2004
       ''''''''''Average'Value'Added                          .      0.00           0.05
       ''''''''''Share'of'Charter'Enrollment                  .      0.62           0.62
       ''''''''''Number'of'Schools                                249            249     	  

Notes: Average value-added weighted by enrollment. Empty cells in panels B and C correspond to years
when these school categories are no longer in operation or have yet to begin operation.




                                                     	                                            	  
	  
	  


Appendix B: Classification of Schools as Adhering to the No Excuses Philosophy
        We used a number of sources of information to determine whether a CMO adhered to the No
Excuses philosophy. First, our research assistant called each school, described our project, and asked the
representative if they could answer some questions about the school’s approach to education. This often
proved difficult, as many offered vague or curt responses. The research assistant then explored the
website (if available), focusing on the mission or vision statements, superintendent’s message, history,
and other relevant information to gain a general feel for the school. Perhaps the most important source of
information was the school handbook and code of conduct, and the research assistant carefully sifted
through these documents. Finally, if none of these sources proved adequate, the research assistant
searched for school reviews and articles that provided information on school policies and practices.

        We focused on six areas to determine whether to classify a school as adhering to the No Excuses
Philosophy. These areas are the following:

• Discipline: Most schools follow a progressive disciplinary system and provide clear expectations for
  behavior. Some schools, however, stand out as being particularly strict. We classify schools as strict in
  the discipline dimension if they use corporal punishment, impose strict zero tolerance policies for
  misbehavior, curfews, fine dining requirements (no talking or sharing), or sizable monetary fines for
  having cell phones or electronics, or undertake legal prosecution if a teacher is offended by students
  language or other actions.
• Expectations: We use the following questions to determine whether a school sets very high
  expectations: Does the school hold all students to the same high expectations regardless of extraneous
  circumstances or family background? Does the school follow state standards or hold their students to
  higher expectations (i.e. are students required to meet state required 90% compulsory attendance or do
  they require all students to maintain 95-100% attendance to stay enrolled?)? Does the school require
  that all students are accepted at a university? Are students expected to graduate from college?
• Uniforms: Does the school require students to wear uniforms? Adhere to a strict dress code? Are there
  serious consequences for failing to comply? Are students sent home? Fined? Given detention? How
  many infractions until there is a serious consequence?
• Parental Involvement: Are parents encouraged to actively participate in the school? Are parents
  required to sign a commitment form?
• Incentives: Does the school offer rewards to students who surpass expectations? Most schools
  recognize students through things such as honor roll, by allowing them to go on field trips, or by letting
  them have a free dress day. Some offer additional incentives such as monetary prizes or privileges for
  good grades, attendance, and have a strong belief in reinforcing good behavior.
• Extra: Is there an extended school day? Week? Year? Is Saturday school offered or required?
  Tutoring?

              For some CMOs that were consistent across categories the classification decision was
       straightforward. For other CMOs the decision was more difficult, because they appeared to be strict in
       some dimensions but not others. In classifying these schools we placed particular emphasis on the
       strictness of the disciplinary practices.




                                                       	                                                   	  
	  
