NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF SHORT TERM EXPOSURE TO AMBIENT AIR POLLUTION
ON COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE AND HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION
Victor Lavy
Avraham Ebenstein
Sefi Roth
Working Paper 20648
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20648
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

Excellent research assistance was provided by Eyal Frank, Michael Freedman, Michal Hodor and Susan
Schwartz. We thank seminar participants at Hebrew University, University of London Royal Holloway,
University of Warwick, and NBER Summer Institute for useful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Victor Lavy, Avraham Ebenstein, and Sefi Roth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Short Term Exposure to Ambient Air Pollution on Cognitive Performance and
Human Capital Formation
Victor Lavy, Avraham Ebenstein, and Sefi Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 20648
October 2014
JEL No. I21,J24
ABSTRACT
Cognitive performance is critical to productivity in many occupations and potentially linked to pollution
exposure. We evaluate this potentially important relationship by estimating the effect of pollution
exposure on standardized test scores among Israeli high school high-stakes tests (2000-2002). Since
students take multiple exams on multiple days in the same location after each grade, we can adopt
a fixed effects strategy estimating models with city, school, and student fixed effects. We focus on
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and carbon monoxide (CO), which are considered to be two of the most
dangerous forms of air pollution. We find that while PM2.5 and CO levels are only weakly correlated
with each other, both exhibit a robust negative relationship with test scores. We also find that PM2.5,
which is thought to be particularly damaging for asthmatics, has a larger negative impact on groups
with higher rates of asthma. For CO, which affects neurological functioning, the effect is more homogenous
across demographic groups. Furthermore, we find that exposure to either pollutant is associated with
a significant decline in the probability of not receiving a Bagrut certificate, which is required for college
entrance in Israel. The results suggest that the gain from improving air quality may be underestimated
by a narrow focus on health impacts. Insofar as air pollution may lead to reduced cognitive performance,
the consequences of pollution may be relevant for a variety of everyday activities that require mental
acuity. Moreover, by temporarily lowering the productivity of human capital, high pollution levels
lead to allocative inefficiency as students with lower human capital are assigned a higher rank than
their more qualified peers. This may lead to inefficient allocation of workers across occupations, and
possibly a less productive workforce.
Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk
Avraham Ebenstein
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus Campus, #4208
Jerusalem, Israel 91905
ebenstein@mscc.huji.ac.il

Sefi Roth
Department of Economics
Royal Holloway
University of London
Egham TW20 0EX
United Kingdom
s.j.roth@rhul.ac.uk

I.

Introduction
Ambient air pollution has significant consequences for human health and life expectancy (Pope et

al. 2009, Chay and Greenstone 2003). Researchers have documented that short-term acute exposure to
particulate matter decreases circulatory performance and leads to increased illness and hospitalization rates
(Pope et al. 1995). Exposure to fine particulate matter is particularly dangerous since these small particles
penetrate deep in to the lungs and may also affect other aspects of human life, such as cognitive
performance, due to their impact on blood flow and circulation (Pope and Dockery 2006). Recent work has
also demonstrated a link between carbon monoxide and higher incidents of respiratory and heart related
emergency room visits (Schlenker and Walker 2011). Medical research has also identified symptoms that
point to a diagnosis of carbon monoxide poisoning, including headaches, dizziness, and confusion
(Piantadosi 2002). A potential link between cognition and harmful forms of ambient air pollution would
suggest that the benefit of pollution reduction could be underestimated by focusing only on health outcomes
(Chay and Greenstone 2005). However, evidence documenting a link between cognition and ambient air
pollution is extremely limited. A potential link between cognitive performance and pollution exposure
would imply high costs of pollution in terms of lost labor productivity, as mental acuity is critical to
productivity for many occupations.
There are several challenges posed in trying to estimate the relationship between cognitive
performance and air pollution. First, ambient pollution is often correlated with other factors correlated with
wellbeing, such as wealth, generating a potential source of omitted variables bias that is similar to the
challenges faced in measuring the health impact of air pollution. However, measuring air pollution’s impact
on cognition poses unique challenges as well. First, unlike with health problems, poor cognitive outcomes
are generally not measured precisely. Whereas short-term dysfunction can result in a hospital admission,
short-term cognitive decline is unlikely to be recorded. Even if short-term cognitive dysfunction results in
injury, such as from a car accident, it is unlikely that this will be recorded in a systematic manner. In our
study, since we observe students engaged in a difficult mental task with precise measurement of
performance, it is more likely we can observe an effect (if there is one). A second issue is that cognitive
tests (e.g. IQ) are only administered to self-selected groups, such as military recruits, making samples less
representative than in samples of individuals exposed to air pollution with observed health outcomes. As
we will describe, since the Israeli examination we analyze in our study is taken by nearly all high school
students, and our dataset includes the entire universe of test takers, our results presumably have more
external validity than results generated from a self-selected group.
In this paper, we examine a unique data set of merged high school high-stakes exit exams (Bagrut
tests) and pollution data for the universe of Israeli test takers during 2000-2002 where we observe pollution
and outcomes for over 400,000 subject examinations. Since we observe the same student at multiple test

2

administrations following each year of high school, we can control for both time invariant features of both
a school and of a particular student. The rigorous nature of the Bagrut tests and the precise scoring of the
exams provide a context to analyze a potential link between cognition and air pollution, even if there are
only modest declines in cognitive performance due to pollution. Furthermore, Israel’s small size and welldeveloped monitoring system implies that most of its testing locations are near a station where we observe
precise levels of pollution concentration. Lastly, Israel’s ethnic heterogeneity provides a context to examine
the responsiveness of different groups to pollution, and potentially distinguish between different
mechanisms by which pollution may affect cognitive performance.
In this study, we examine the impact of fine particulate matter and carbon monoxide exposure on
exam outcomes. These two pollutants are particularly harmful to human health, and are available in the data
provided by the Israeli monitoring system. We find that a 10 unit increase in the ambient concentration of
fine particulate matter (PM2.5) as measured by the Air Quality Index (AQI) reduces Bagrut test scores by
.46 points, or roughly 1.9% of a standard deviation of the Bagrut (sd=23.7). Alternatively, relative to a day
with average air quality, a 1 standard deviation increase in the PM2.5 AQI value (sd=22.81) is associated
with a .65 point decrease in score, or 2.8% of a standard deviation. We also find that a 10 unit increase in
the ambient concentration of carbon monoxide (CO), as measured by the Air Quality Index (AQI), reduces
Bagrut test scores by .85 points, or roughly 3.5% of a standard deviation. This implies that relative to a day
with average air quality, a 1 standard deviation increase in the CO AQI value is associated with a .54 point
decrease in score, or 2.4% of a standard deviation. We also examine whether pollution has a non-linear
impact on test takers using specifications where we include dummy variables for clean, moderately
polluted, or very polluted days. We find that our results are largely driven by poor performance of test
takers on very polluted days, with an AQI reading above 101 for PM2.5 associated with a decline in test
score of 1.95 points, or 8.2% of a standard deviation. For CO, test administrations in the top 5% of most
polluted days are 10.16 points lower, a decline of 42.8% of a standard deviation. These results suggest that
modest pollution levels have only a marginal impact, but very polluted days can have much larger impacts,
suggesting a non-linearity in pollution’s relationship with cognitive performance. In several placebo
exercises, we find that the correlation between Bagrut test scores and pollution readings other than the test
pollution level is insignificant in most specifications, further supporting our claim of a causal interpretation
to our results. Our results also indicate that test outcomes for afternoon examinations are more affected by
carbon monoxide than morning examinations. This is consistent with a prior that carbon monoxide, which
is generated primarily by automobile emissions, will worsen over the course of the day. Our results for fine
particulate matter, which are primarily the byproduct of sandstorms and coal-burning power plants, are
more similar for morning and afternoon examinations.

3

We examine mechanisms for our findings by estimating treatment effects for different groups in
Israel, in combination with a prior on how each pollutant should affect test takers. In particular, we find
that demographic groups with higher rates of asthma have larger treatment effects of PM2.5, suggesting that
exacerbation of respiratory health problems could be a mechanism for pollution to affect test outcomes.
Our results for PM2.5 seem to be consistent with the patterns of relative risk for asthma found by Laor et al.
(1993) from military records in Israel, which reflect much higher incidence among boys and Ashkenazi
Jews, and among lower socio-economic groups in other countries (Basagana et al. 2004, Eriksson et al.
2006). Carbon monoxide exposure, which is thought to decrease neurological functioning, has a more
homogenous impact on Israel’s demographic groups. This may be due to a more similar responsiveness to
carbon monoxide poisoning, which may affect all individuals, even those without prior respiratory
conditions.
We also find that exposure to PM2.5 or CO on examination days has a significant impact on a
particular student’s long-term academic outcome, and potentially has implications for the welfare
consequences of using the Bagrut for ranking students. We find that a one standard deviation increase in
the fraction of exam days that are heavily polluted is associated with a 2.19 and 2.70 percentage point
decline in the probability of receiving a Bagrut matriculation certificate for PM2.5 and CO respectively. Note
that this certificate is a prerequisite for college entrance, preventing some students from accessing higher
education. In addition, since access to college majors is also determined by Bagrut performance, air
pollution may have long-term consequences for students who pass the Bagrut but are forced to choose a
less desirable college major. An implication of this finding is that by temporarily lowering the productivity
of human capital, high pollution levels lead to allocative inefficiency as students with lower human capital
are assigned a higher rank than their more qualified peers. This may lead to inefficient allocation of workers
across occupations, and possibly a less productive workforce. The results highlight the danger in assigning
too much weight to a student’s performance on a high-stakes exam, rather than their overall academic
record.
Our results provide novel and compelling evidence that cognition is affected by air pollution
exposure. Epidemiologists have examined the relationship between air pollution and cognition, but the
evidence is generally cross-sectional in nature, with little attention paid to a potential correlation between
omitted variables and pollution. For example, Suglia et al. (2008) found that in a sample of 202 children,
those living near higher levels of black carbon (which is a solid fraction of PM2.5) performed worse on
cognitive function assessments. Wang et al. (2009) found that children in higher-traffic areas (with higher
levels of carbon monoxide) performed worse on neurobehavioral examinations. Both of these studies,
however, were cross-sectional in nature and did not account for a potential correlation between
unobservable determinants of test outcomes and the measures pollutants. Our examination of Israeli Bagrut

4

exams is, to our knowledge, the first attempt to measure fine particulate matter and carbon monoxide’s
impact on cognitive performance using rich data and a panel approach.1 Our results underscore the need for
tighter pollution regulations relative to policy made taking only human health effects into account. The
results may also highlight a mechanism by which individuals in highly polluted areas, such as those living
in cheaper industrial areas of cities, could have economic disadvantage exacerbated by pollution (Brown
1995).
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In the second section, we present background on the
Israeli context, and summarize in greater detail the relevant existing work on acute air pollution and human
welfare. Section III presents our data and Section IV presents our empirical strategy. In Section V, we
present our empirical results and in Section VI we conclude.

II.

Background and Data

a.

Air pollution and Cognitive Performance
We consider two air pollution measures. Our first air pollution measure is particulate matter

(PM2.5), which is a complex mixture of solid and liquid microscopic droplets found in the air that consists
of various components including acids, metals, dust particles, organic chemicals and allergens. In Israel,
the main sources of particulate matter are sand storms, coal-burning power plants, and certain industrial
processes. Our second air pollution measure is carbon monoxide, which is generated by automobile
emissions, fossil-fuel furnaces, and fires (Piantadosi 2002). Human intake of particulate matter or carbon
monoxide inhibits proper blood flow, leading to elevated risk of heart disease, stroke, and lung cancer
(Dockery and Pope 1996; Schlenker and Walker 2011). It is less clear whether either of these air pollutants
affect cognition. Since the brain consumes a large fraction of the oxygen needs of the body, any
deterioration in oxygen quality can in theory affect cognition (Clark and Sokoloff, 1999). Long-term
exposure to ambient pollution can lead to the growth of white-matter lesions, potentially inhibiting
cognition (Calderón-Garcidueñasetal et al. 2008). Air pollution can also impact the nervous system, leading
to symptoms such as memory disturbance, fatigue and blurred vision (Kampa and Castanas, 2007), and
may also impact labor productivity (Graff Zivin and Neidell 2011). Fine particle matter can also travel

1

These results contribute to a limited but growing literature in economics documenting that a narrow focus on
hospitalization rates or excess mortality rates may understate the impact of air pollution on human wellbeing, though
these studies focus primarily on consequences of illness rather than a direct impact on cognition. Currie et al. (2009)
find that carbon monoxide exposure increases absenteeism among elementary and middle school children students.
Oliva and Hanna (2011) present evidence that labor supply is reduced in Mexico City on days with high pollution
levels. Ham et al. (2011) examine the relationship between pollution and test scores using data from California
elementary schools. They find significant but modest effects for ozone, fine particulate matter, and coarse particulate
matter. However, they are unable to observe the same student over multiple examinations, and are therefore forced to
rely on grade-school fixed effects.

5

through small passageways, suggesting that high levels of pollution may affect test takers even indoors
(Branis et al. 2005). These papers provide compelling evidence that cognition may be affected by pollution.
They also suggest that while particulate matter may affect the respiratory system, carbon monoxide will
primarily affect the release of oxygen to human tissues, including the brain. This implies that particulate
matter may have a larger impact on sensitive or unhealthy groups – such as asthmatic groups – while carbon
monoxide will affect healthy and unhealthy groups more similarly. However, as stated by Suglia et al.
(2008), “the possible neurodegenerative effect of air pollution remains largely unexplored.” The Israeli
Bagrut examination provides a unique context to assess the relationship empirically, which is discussed in
the next section.

b.

The Israeli High-School Matriculation Exam System
Israeli post-primary education consists of middle school (grades 7–9) and high school (grades 10–

12). High-school students are enrolled either in an academic track leading to a matriculation certificate
(Bagrut in Hebrew2) or in a vocational track leading to a high-school diploma. The matriculation certificate
is a prerequisite for university admission and is one of the most economically important education
milestones. Students complete the matriculation process by passing a series of national exams in core and
elective subjects following tenth grade and eleventh grade, and then a larger set following twelfth grade.
Students choose to be tested at various levels of proficiency, with each test awarding the student between
one and five credit units per subject, varying by the difficulty of the exam. The exam focuses on seven
mandatory subjects and one elective subject, allowing us to observe students completing exams with
separate grades for each subject.3 The most basic level of study is three credits and a minimum of twenty
credits is required to qualify for a matriculation certificate. About 52 percent of high-school graduates in
2002 and 46 percent of the overall cohort received matriculation certificates.4
The examinations are given bi-annually during the two exam “seasons”, a winter examination given
in January and a summer examination in May/June, and are graded by two independent and anonymous
examiners. The Bagrut final score in each subject is a simple average of the Bagrut exam score and a school
score, or Magen score, on this subject. The Magen score is based on a school exam (the Matchonet

2

Many countries and some American states have similar high-school matriculation exams, e.g., the French
Baccalaureate, the German Certificate of Maturity (Reifezeugnis), the Italian Diploma di Maturità, the New York State
Regents examinations, and the recently instituted Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System.
3
The seven core subjects are Math, English, Hebrew, History, Literature, Religious Studies and Civics. It is possible
to be awarded a Bagrut certificate despite a failing mark on one of the exams if one of following conditions is satisfied:
(1) the mark is not below 45 (2) the mark is below 45 but the candidate has two more exams with 3 credit units or
more that their scores combined sums to at least 150 (3) the failing mark is not in the Hebrew subject exam.
4
See the Israel Ministry of Education web site (www.education.gov.il) and Lavy (2002).

6

examination)5 that precedes the Bagrut exam by week to three weeks and has the same format as the
nationally-administered Bagrut exam, except that it is graded by the student’s secondary school subject
teacher and on the student’s overall performance in this subject during the academic year. We only observe
the overall Magen score and not its two components. The weights of these two factors can vary and the
overall Magen score is therefore a natural measure for ranking the students in terms of quality which we
use in our analysis to stratify the sample.
Students are admitted to post-secondary programs on the basis of their average matriculation scores
and based on an SAT-style examination from a psychometric examination administered by the National
Testing Center. Each higher education institution ranks applicants according to the same formula, thus
producing an index based on a weighted average of the student’s average score on all her matriculation
exams and the SAT-style examination. Therefore, pollution levels can affect students’ post-secondary
schooling by affecting their probability of passing Bagrut exams, and also by affecting the average score
in these exams. The first channel will affect the eligibility for post-secondary admission while the second
will affect which programs (or majors) will be available to the student.

III.

Data
Our data set is generated by combining Israeli test score data with air pollution and meteorological

data for 2000-2002. The Bagrut exam information and demographic information for each test taker were
provided by the Israeli Ministry of Education. These files also contain each student’s Israeli identification
number, allowing us to observe rich demographic information on the student and the student’s family, such
as parental education level, country of origin, and ethnicity. For each exam, we also know the exact date of
the test and the precise location of the testing site, allowing us to assign pollution measures to each test
administration. Our pollution data are taken from files published by the Israeli Ministry of Environmental
Protection, which reports daily mean readings of particular matter less than 2.5 microns in width, or PM2.5
(µg/m3) and carbon monoxide (CO) at 139 monitoring stations throughout Israel for the sample period (see
Figure 1).6 Readings are taken at 5 minute intervals and averaged over the course of the day.
Each school is assigned the average pollution reading for all monitoring stations within the city
limits in which it is located, or within 2.5 kilometers of the city limits. Since Israeli cities are not very large,
we generally are taking readings from stations very close to the schools. While we ideally would have a
5

This exam is called matkonet, derived from the word matkon, recipe, meaning that the school exam follows the
“recipe” of the state exam. The school exam follows the exact format of the Bagrut exam and it also draws its questions
from the same bank of questions used for the Bagrut exam.
6
The Israeli monitoring system also records readings for a set of other pollutants. In this paper we focus on PM2.5 and
CO since these are considered among the most harmful, and are monitored most extensively by the monitoring system.
We also examined the relationship between PM10 and SO2 and test score data, finding zero effects for PM10 and modest
effects of very high levels of SO2. The results are available from the authors upon request.

7

measure of pollution inside the classroom, the air quality inside a school is presumed to be highly correlated
with the ambient reading outdoors (Branis et al. 2005). Schools that had no monitoring station within the
city limits or 2.5 kilometers of the city limits were dropped from the sample.7 These stations also record
temperature and relative humidity, which are used as control variables. We assign pollution and weather to
each test by averaging all non-missing values among stations within 2.5 kilometres of the test site. Our
analysis is executed using the Air Quality Index (AQI) measurement associated with our PM2.5 and CO
readings. The AQI measure converts the pollutant measures in micrograms (µg/m3) into an index score that
ranges from 0-500 using a formula specified by the US EPA. 8 The US defines values above 101 as
“unhealthy for sensitive groups” and values above 150 as “unhealthy”. In our empirical analysis, we classify
air quality on a particular day as being beyond the threshold if the PM2.5 (AQI) reading is greater or equal
to 101 (AQI). Since Israel’s CO measures are relatively lower, and have few days where the AQI score
exceeds 101, we chose a lower threshold where we generate a dummy for a test occurring on a day in the
top 5 percent of the most polluted days.
It is also worth noting that the correlation between our two measures of pollution is very close to
zero (R=.0028).9 The two pollutants are associated with different causes: particulate matter is generated by
sand and dust storms and coal-powered electric plants, whereas carbon monoxide is associated with high
traffic density or other combustion processes. As such, this provides an opportunity to exploit two different
and largely independent measures of pollution to assess the link between air pollution and cognitive
performance.
The summary statistics for our sample are presented in Table 1. Our sample includes 489,419
examinations taken by 71,383 students at 712 schools throughout Israel. Our key variables are the measures
of PM2.5 (µg/m3 or AQI), CO, and our standardized test outcomes in Bagrut exams. We also use the Magen
score as a proxy for student quality that can be used to stratify the sample. This score is determined primarily
by a test which is a similar to the Bagrut test a few weeks prior to the Bagrut, and by the student's course
grade. In columns (2)-(4), we stratify the sample by sex and Magen score. The table indicates that girls
perform somewhat better than boys on the exam. Also, as anticipated, the students who have higher Magen
7 Since Israel’s population is densely concentrated in several metropolitan areas, this led to the dropping of less than
5% of schools.
8
We used the EPA’s breakpoints table (see Table A1) and the following formula to generate the PM2.5 (AQI)
measurement: PM2.5 (AQI)={(IHI-ILO) / (BPHI-BPLO)} (CP-BPLO) + ILO. Where CP is the rounded concentration of the
pollutant, BPHI is the breakpoint that is greater than or equal to CP, BPLO is the breakpoint that is less than or equal to
CP, IHI is the AQI value corresponding to BPHI and ILO is the AQI value corresponding to BPLO. A similar formula is
used for CO.
9
In a robustness check, we estimate whether there is a conditional correlation between the two pollutant measures by
estimating models with the two pollutants simultaneously, shown in Table A2. Our results indicate that the results are
largely unchanged by including both measures in the same model for our dichotomous measure of pollution, but the
result for our continuous measure of PM2.5 is significantly reduced for models with student fixed effects. This is
discussed in the empirical results section.

8

scores, and are placed in our top quality group, have on average higher Bagrut scores and come from more
educated families. The parents of the higher Magen group have, on average, some postsecondary schooling,
whereas parents of the lower Magen group have, on average, less than a high school diploma. The lower
Magen group also come from larger families (more siblings) and are more likely to be of African/Asian
ethnic origin (Sephardi). These means are not shown in the table but are available from the authors, and
provide additional indication that the students in the low Magen group are from more disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds. This characterisation of the low Magen group will feature in our later discussion
of potential mechanisms for our results, since the incidence of asthma is much higher among disadvantaged
populations. Also note that Table 1 indicates that air pollution, temperature, and humidity do not vary by
gender or Magen score. For example, the mean PM2.5 AQI index for boys and girls is similar: 59.5 and 59.9,
less than a tenth of a standard deviation. Similarly, the average PM2.5 AQI index value for high and low
Magen students are 60.1 and 59.5 respectively, and the mean temperature of the days of exams for both
groups is 23.8. The balancing of our data on observables when stratified by these groupings by gender and
by our measure of student quality is important in light of our findings that the effect of pollution is very
different for these sub-populations. We discuss this further in the empirical section, but the similarity on
observables is suggestive evidence that selection on unobservables is unlikely to be driving our results.

IV.

Empirical Strategy
Our estimation strategy is relatively straightforward. We estimate OLS models where we examine

the partial correlation between our air pollution measures and test scores outcomes. For identification, we
crucially rely on the panel structure of the data and the repeated nature of the Bagrut exam. Since we observe
the exact location of the test, we can include city or school fixed effects. Since we observe the students
taking exams following each grade, we can include student fixed effects. Formally, the models we estimate
are of the following form:

(1) Rist  0 X it  1POLst  2Tempst  3RHst  Mt  Ll  Ii  ist
where Rist is the test score of student i at school s at time t; X it is a vector of individual characteristics
possibly related to test outcomes, such as parental education10; POLst is our measure of air pollution (PM2.5
or CO) at school s at time t; Tempst is the mean temperature11 at school s at time t; RH st is the relative
humidity measure at school s at time t; M t and Ll are month and exam proficiency level fixed effects

10

Our results with individual fixed effects exclude individual controls.
In the empirical analysis, we include linear and quadratic terms in both temperature and humidity, and linear and
quadratic interaction terms of the two variables.
11

9

respectively; I i is our fixed effect for the individual; and

ist

is an idiosyncratic error term. Note that in

different specifications we will use city or school fixed effects in place of our individual fixed effects.
The key identifying assumption for inferring a causal relationship between pollution and test scores
estimated by equation (1) is that unobserved determinants of student’s test scores are uncorrelated with
ambient pollution. Without any fixed effects to absorb unobserved variation in schools or individuals, this
assumption is likely violated since it is likely that pollution is correlated with time invariant features of a
testing location or a particular student. For example, if poorer schools are located in more polluted parts of
cities, OLS will likely overstate the causal link between pollution and test scores. Conversely, if schools in
denser (and wealthier) cities have more pollution exposure, OLS might understate the true cost of pollution,
as it is mitigated by other compensating factors (e.g. tutoring). More generally, endogenous sorting across
schools, heterogeneity in avoidance behavior, or measurement error in assigning pollution exposure to
individuals will all bias results that do not properly account for unobserved factors correlated with both our
outcome of interest and ambient pollution (Moretti and Neidell 2011). In our setup, since we account for
time invariant features of schools and students with fixed effects, the challenge relevant to our estimation
is to account for omitted variables that are varying over time but are potentially correlated with pollution
and Bagrut outcomes. For example, if weather or traffic the day of the exam is correlated with pollution,
our fixed effects models will fail to identify the true effect. In our empirical analysis, we include controls
for time-varying factors that could be contemporaneous with pollution, such as daily temperature and
relative humidity, but of course it is untestable whether there are factors that are unobserved that are both
correlated with pollution and Bagrut exam scores. As such, we conduct a rich set of robustness checks and
placebo tests. These are discussed further in the next section.

V.

Empirical Results

a.

Main Results
In Table 2, we report our baseline results of the relationship between the Air Quality Indicator

values for PM2.5, CO, and Bagrut test scores. In columns (1) and (2) of Panel A, we report the correlation
between Bagrut scores and a continuous measure of PM2.5 (AQI) using OLS without city, school or student
fixed effects. In column (1), we estimate that a 1 unit increase of PM2.5 is associated with a 0.055 points
decrease in a student’s test score, significant at the 1% level. The results also indicate that a relatively small
part of the variation in test scores (R-squared = 0.003) is explained by air pollution. This result indicates,
as one would expect, that variables other than air pollution are responsible for the vast majority of the
variation in test scores. In column (2) we report the results with the addition of controls for parental
education, sex, temperature, relative humidity and dummies for the month of the exam and difficulty of the

10

exam. The results are similar and slightly larger in magnitude, with our coefficient estimate indicating that
a 1 unit increase in pollution is associated with a 0.065 decrease in a student’s score. Note that the sample
with controls is roughly 20% smaller, as we have incomplete demographic information for these
individuals. The similarity of the results with and without controls, and with the smaller sample size, is
suggestive that there is no strong correlation between observables and pollution. We also used the smaller
sample to estimate the OLS regression without any controls and obtained estimates almost identical to those
reported in column 1, which suggest the sample of students with some missing characteristics is not on
average selectively different from the rest of the sample.
In columns (3)-(5) of Table 2, we take advantage of the panel structure of our data and include city,
school, and student fixed effects, respectively. These account for variation in time-invariant unobserved
heterogeneity that could be correlated with ambient pollution. The estimates from a regression with city or
school fixed effects in columns (3) and (4), are somewhat larger, with estimated coefficients of -0.082 and
-0.069 respectively. Adding student fixed effects weakens the results slightly, with our preferred estimate
indicating that a 1 unit increase in PM2.5 is associated with a 0.046 (sd=0.007) decline in the Bagrut score.
This estimate implies that a test score in an exam on a day with average pollution (AQI=59.74) will be
lowered relative to an exam taken on a day with the minimum pollution level (AQI=10.1) by 0.10
(.046*(59.7-10.1)/22.8) standard deviations. Our results for CO in columns (6-10) largely mirror our results
in columns (1-5). Our results in column 10 indicate that a 1 unit increase in CO is associated with a 0.085
(sd=0.017) decline in the Bagrut score, significant at the 1 % level. Note however that since the Israeli
monitoring system failed to collect CO readings at all stations during our sample period, our PM2.5 analysis
is based on a much larger sample.12
In Panel B, we perform a similar analysis but replace our continuous measure of pollution with a
dichotomous indicator for whether the test occurred in a day classified as having “poor” air quality. The
results are qualitatively similar to the results using the continuous measure for PM2.5 but much larger for
CO. Specifically, in our specification in column 5 where we include student fixed effects, the data indicate
that having “poor” PM2.5 air quality the day of the exam is associated with a 1.95 point decline in the
student’s Bagrut score, equivalent to 8.2% of a standard deviation. Our specification in column 10 indicates
that having “poor” CO air quality the day of the exam is associated with a 10.16 point decline in the
student’s Bagrut score, equivalent to 42.8% of a standard deviation. 13

12

We investigated whether there was something systematic about which stations did not collect CO measures. We
found no noticeable pattern in our data, though coverage for CO was much poorer in northern Israel and in the areas
surrounding Haifa.
13
It is also worth noting that the CO results for our threshold measure of pollution may be affected by several
extremely polluted exam administrations. In the highest CO reading, students were subjected to AQI=270, roughly
twenty times the average reading.

11

The effect of PM2.5 on Bagrut scores for the 99th percentile of exposure in our sample (AQI=137)
is very large and implies a decline of roughly a sixth (.149) of a standard deviation relative to an average
day. This effect is similar to the estimated effect of reducing class size from 31 to 25 students (Angrist and
Lavy, 1999) and larger than the test scores gains associated with paying teachers large financial bonuses
based on their students’ test scores (Lavy, 2009). Unfortunately, days with elevated levels of particulate
matter are not unusual in Israel and in neighboring countries in the Middle East, as they are often the result
of sandstorms that originate in the Sahara desert and are relatively common in the spring and summer
months, with serious health effects (Bell et al. 2008). For CO, our results similarly suggest a large response
of students to very poor days. The 99th percentile of CO, AQI=56, would imply a similar decline of .158
standard deviations relative to a day with average levels of CO. Since Israel’s CO level is actually quite
similar to the levels found in other large cities, such as Los Angeles, CA,14 and may indicate that these
results may affect student performance in polluted areas of these cities as well.
In light of the fact that PM2.5 and CO are only weakly correlated, these results suggest a robust
relationship between different air pollution measures and test scores, as two largely independent pollution
measures are associated with appreciable declines in test scores. To explore the role of each pollutant
further, in Table A2 we estimate models where both pollutants are included simultaneously. The results
indicate that our dichotomous measure of each pollutant’s impact is extremely robust to simultaneous
estimation, and the continuous measure for CO is almost unchanged by the inclusion of PM2.5. However,
our continuous measure of PM2.5 is weakened by inclusion of CO in models with student fixed effects. This
may be because our sample for PM2.5 is more than twice as large as our sample for CO, and partly due to a
weak residual correlation with CO.
In Table 3, we report results where we examine whether pollution has a non-linear impact on test
takers using specifications where we include dummy variables for clean, moderately polluted, or very
polluted days.15 For PM2.5, we define moderately polluted days as days where the AQI score ranges from
51-100 (which the EPA defines as moderate pollution) and AQI scores above 101 (which the EPA defines
as unhealthy for sensitive groups) as poor or very polluted days (see Table A1). Since our CO scores are
consistently lower than our PM2.5 scores (a mean score of 13 versus a mean score of 59 for PM2.5), we
define moderately polluted days as days above the median pollution level and below the top 5% of the most
polluted days, and very polluted days as the top 5% of the sample’s CO readings. Column 5 indicates that
having poor air quality from PM2.5 exposure the day of the exam is associated with a 2.89 point decline in
the student’s Bagrut score, which is more than double the size of the coefficient for moderately polluted

14

http://www.usa.com/los-angeles-ca-air-quality.htm
It is worth noting that students cannot reschedule their examination, and so avoidance behavior in response to high
pollution on the day of the Bagrut is unlikely to be common.
15

12

days. Similarly, Column 10 indicates that having “poor” CO air quality the day of the exam is associated
with a 10.89 point decline in the student’s Bagrut score, which is more than ten times the size of the
coefficient for moderately polluted days. These results indicate that our results are largely driven by poor
performance of test takers on very polluted days, suggesting that pollution’s impact on cognitive
performance is mostly relevant on days with very poor air quality.

b. Placebo Tests
In this section, we perform a set of placebo tests where we examine the relationship between air
pollution on days other than the actual exam and exam scores. In Table 4, we examine whether there is a
correlation between pollution from the day of the previous Bagrut and the score on the exam. Note that
since students take the Bagrut exams over a short period of time, this will generally be a pollution reading
taken from several days prior. As shown in Panel A of Table 4, the correlation between Bagrut outcomes
is weak relative to the correlation with the actual exam. While some of the specifications are statistically
significant, our preferred specification with student fixed effects are either statistically insignificant, or with
the wrong sign. For example, in our estimates using our threshold measure with student fixed effects, the
impact of PM2.5 during the previous exam is a .78 point increase in the student’s score, and the result is not
statistically significant. This can be compared to our main result using the PM2.5 reading from the day of
the Bagrut, where poor air quality reduces scores by 1.9 points (significant at the 1% level). For our
dichotomous measure of CO, the results are also reassuring: after including school or student fixed effects,
no significant relationship between the placebo pollution reading and the exam score is observed.
In Panel B, we perform a similar exercise but using the air pollution on the date exactly one year
before the exam. For the continuous measure of pollution, column 5 indicates a negative and statistically
insignificant relationship between PM2.5 and test scores, while column 10 indicates a positive and
statistically significant relationship between CO and test scores. For our dichotomous measure of pollution,
we observe a correlation between exams and PM2.5 in the previous year when we include no fixed effects:
having a day classified as polluted in the previous year is associated with a 2.8 point decline in scores in
models with controls, even though there should be no relationship. This underscores the importance of
including fixed effects to absorb a time-invariant correlation between pollution and student quality, and
suggests that more polluted areas have lower exam scores in general. Once we include student fixed effects
in our models, the correlation between PM2.5 from the previous year and the Bagrut score declines to 1.15
points, and it is only marginally significant. For the dichotomous measure of CO, the results for the previous
year’s reading are counter-intuitive: we find a positive correlation between pollution levels from the
previous year and exam scores. While this result is surprising, it suggests that our CO results may be less

13

stable than our PM2.5 results due to a smaller sample size and more extreme values for pollution. The results
for CO, therefore, should be interpreted with greater caution.
In Figure 2, we examine the impact of PM2.5 and CO from three days prior to the exam, the day of
the exam, and three days following the exam on test scores. As shown in the figure, the main effects of
PM2.5 are concentrated on the day of the exam, and no significant relationship between pollution readings
and the exam score is observed for days before and after the exam. The figure indicates that the coefficient
on pollution the day of the exam is much larger and more negative than the other days: an additional 100
units of AQI is associated with a 0.2 point decrease in student scores, and the coefficient estimates are small
and positive on the days before and after the exam. In contrast, the results for CO are less conclusive, with
somewhat larger negative coefficients for the day of the exam relative to the days before and after. As such,
our results for CO should be interpreted with greater caution.
In Table A3, we exploit the fact that we know the exact time of day that the examination was
administered, and consider whether our pollutants have different effects at different times of day.16 While
the majority of our sample is given a 9AM examination time, roughly 40% of examinations are given after
12PM. We posit that fine particulate matter, which is generated from sandstorms and coal-burning plants,
will affect students throughout the day in a similar manner at all hours of the day (or night). Carbon
monoxide is produced primarily by automobile emissions, and is likely to be more relevant for exams later
in the day. As shown in the table, our coefficient estimates for PM2.5 are relatively similar for both afternoon
and morning examinations. In our preferred student fixed effect specification, we find that having poor air
quality from our PM2.5 exposure measure for an afternoon exam is associated with a .045 point and .054
point decline per unit of AQI respectively. Likewise, our results using the dichotomous measure are similar;
we observe a 3.16 point decline in the student’s Bagrut score for days with very high AQI in afternoon
exams, which is about 20% larger than the coefficient for morning exams. For CO, our estimates are much
larger for afternoon exams using both the continuous and dichotomous measures.17 For example, using the
dichotomous measure, having poor CO air quality for afternoon exams is associated with a 10.45 point
decline in the student’s Bagrut score, which is almost ten times the size of the coefficient for morning
exams. The results are consistent with a prior that carbon monoxide exposure should be more problematic
later in the day, and the results for particulate matter will be similar at different times.

16

As an additional robustness check, we also estimate our main models with fixed effects for the day of the week on
which the exam is given. The results are largely unchanged, and available upon request.
17
Note that since we have fewer observed tests for each student, our results using student fixed effects will be less
stable.

14

c. Heterogeneity and Implied Mechanisms
In this section, we examine heterogeneity in the treatment effects reported in Table 2. Our interest
is twofold. First, we wish to identify whether there are sub-populations that may be particularly responsive
to poor air quality. Second, this may help to identify mechanisms for the observed reduced form relationship
between air pollution and cognition. In particular, our prior is that PM2.5 which affects the respiratory system
will have a larger impact on weaker groups who are more sensitive to poor air quality. In contrast, we expect
that CO, which affects the tissues and neurological system, to have a more similar impact across different
groups.
We build on a set of stylized facts regarding who would be most sensitive to poor air quality from
the medical literature. First, Israeli boys are more likely to be asthmatic than Israeli girls. As shown by Laor
et al. (1993) the rate of asthma incidence in Israel is 25 percent higher among boys. Second, children of
lower economic status are known to have higher rates of asthma and respiratory illnesses (Eriksson et al.
2006, Basagana et al. 2004). Third, Laor et al. (1993) also found that Ashkenazic Jews (ethnic origin from
America and Europe) have 63% higher incidence of these illnesses than Sephardim (ethnic origin from
Africa and Asia). This gives a rich set of potential comparisons for gauging whether asthma is a mechanism
for the observed reduced form relationship between pollution and exam outcomes.
In Table 5, we examine our results separately by gender. The results highlight that men are
significantly more likely to have their test outcomes affected by PM2.5 than women. Our results indicate
that treatment effects among men are between 2 and 4 times larger than among women. For example, in
models with student fixed effects, we estimate that an additional 10 units of PM2.5 (AQI) is associated with
a .078 point decline among men and a .021 decline among women. We posit that the difference could be
generated by the different asthma rates in these cohorts. Another possibility is that male students are more
likely to be affected by small cognitive decline and distraction, consistent with higher rates of Attention
Deficit Disorder in males (Biederman et al. 2002). In contrast, the results for CO are largely similar for
men and women, with the results for men being moderately larger. For instance, in our model with student
fixed effects, we estimate that an additional 10 units of CO (AQI) is associated with a .099 point decline
among men and a .075 decline among women.
In Table 6, we break down our sample of test takers by our ex-ante expectation of their
performance. This is proxied by their Magen score, which is a reasonable measure of student quality as it
reflects their achievement in the full-year class and on a test similar to the Bagrut, and is correlated with
family income and other measures of wellbeing because it is highly correlated with parental schooling,
family size and ethnic origin. It may be that poorer families are more affected by air pollution as well, due
to lower ability to engage in compensating behavior (Neidell 2004). Poorer children also have higher
incidence of asthma (Basagana et al. 2004, Eriksson et al. 2006). When we stratify the students by whether

15

their Magen score is above or below the median, our estimated treatment effects for PM2.5 are more than
two times larger among those classified as low quality. For a low quality student, we estimate that a 10 unit
increase in PM2.5 (AQI) is associated with a .061 point decline versus only a .028 point impact among higher
quality students. However, we see no large difference between the responsiveness of higher and lower
quality students to CO when using the continuous measure for AQI. This is consistent with our earlier
results that CO’s effect may be less heterogeneous. However, when using our dichotomous measure of
pollution, both PM2.5 and CO have larger effects on weaker students.
The results by student quality are investigated further in Table A4, which reveals that when the
sample is stratified into quartiles, there is a monotonic relationship between treatment effects and our
student quality measure for PM2.5. Specifically, using our continuous measure of PM2.5, we find that poor
air quality lowers scores by 0.08 and 0.04 points in the lowest and the second-lowest quartile respectively.
For the two quartiles above the median, the treatment effect is -0.03 and -0.02 respectively, neither of which
is statistically significant. This suggests that student vulnerability is rising sharply with respect to student
quality and may reflect the correlation between the incidence of asthma and socio-economic status. In
contrast, the relationship between CO and test scores among the stratified sample is more mixed and the
monotonic relationship is not evident for the continuous measure. Again, for the dichotomous measure of
CO, the result is monotonic, leaving the results mixed regarding distinguishing between PM2.5 and CO on
this dimension. The results do, however, consistently point to large effects of both pollutants on student
outcomes.
In Table A5, we exploit the unique ethnic heterogeneity of Israel to estimate models for subpopulations. Israel’s population is composed primarily of Jews and Arabs, and the Jewish population is
composed of immigrants from ethnically distinct source countries. The primary distinction is between
Sephardic Jews of Middle Eastern and North African origin, and Ashkenazic Jews who are from Eastern
Europe and Russia. The former group has lower rates of asthma and respiratory conditions (Laor et al.
1993). We find that the impact of air pollution is larger among Ashkenazic Jews relative to Sephardic Jews
using both our measures of PM2.5 and CO. For example, Ashkenazic Jews are a third more responsive to
PM2.5 (.046/.035) and almost twice as responsive using our dichotomous measure of PM2.5 (1.73/1.01). For
CO, however, the results are similar across groups, with Ashkenazic Jews being slightly less responsive
than Sephardic Jews for both our continuous (.056/.61) and our dichotomous measure (8.28/10.56).

d. Impact of Particulate Matter on Academic Outcomes with Long-run Implications
While our analysis focuses on the impact of short-term exposure to particulate matter on cognition,
in our context this can have a large effect on academic success in the long-run. Success on the Bagrut exam
facilitates entry in to university, and higher scores allow a student to choose more lucrative college majors,

16

such as medicine or computer science. To assess directly the potential harmful long-term effect of pollution
on human capital formation in our context, we examine in Tables 7, 8, and 9 the relationship between
exposure to air pollution and academic outcomes related to Bagrut exams.
In Table 7 Panel A, we examine the relationship between air pollution exposure and the probability
of failing a particular Bagrut exam. In Panels B and C, we carry out the analysis at the student level. For
these results, our new measure of pollution is the average pollution reading across all exams the students
has taken. Our continuous measure of pollution is the average over all the exam days, and our threshold
measure is the average over all days of whether the exam was administered on a day with pollution in the
top 5% of most polluted days. As such, the coefficients will represent the impact of raising pollution on all
days for the continuous measure, or increasing the fraction of exams taken during very polluted days from
0% to 100% for the threshold measure. As we will show, the results indicate that having poor PM2.5 or CO
on the days of the Bagrut exams is associated with a lower Bagrut composite score and lower probability
of receiving the matriculation certificate. These outcomes can have a permanent impact on an individual’s
probability of attending college, and the majors that are available upon matriculation.
As shown in Panel A, in our preferred specification with student fixed effects, having elevated
levels of PM2.5 or CO using the continuous measure have a statistically insignificant effect. However, for
the threshold measure, both indicate a large decline in a student’s probability of passing the exam on very
polluted days: a student is 2.4 and 12.3 percentage points less likely to pass an exam on very polluted days
relative to a normal day. In Panel B, the estimated effect of PM2.5 is negative and significant, and in our
preferred specification, which includes school fixed effects, we estimate that an additional 10 units of AQI
on average for each test would lead to a decline in the student’s average score of 1.66 points, roughly 9.8%
of a standard deviation. Similarly, increasing the fraction of days with high PM2.5 readings by 10% reduces
the average score by .96 points. A student’s probability of passing the Bagrut is also sensitive to these
measures. A 10 point increase in PM2.5 AQI reduces a student’s probability of receiving the Bagrut
certificate by 3.3 percentage points, and increasing the fraction of days with very pollution readings by 10%
reduces certificate achievement by 1.5 percentage points. Our estimates for CO are somewhat more modest:
a 10 unit increase in the AQI average reading during the student’s tests reduces scores by .86 points, and a
10% increase in the share of days with high pollution readings reduces scores by .75 points. Similarly, a 10
point increase in CO AQI reduces a student’s probability of receiving the Bagrut certificate by 0.5
percentage points, and the result is not statistically significant. Finally, increasing the fraction of days with
very pollution readings by 10% reduces certificate achievement by 1.4 percentage points. This suggests that
CO only affects long-run outcomes among students who are exposed to extremely elevated levels of CO,
and that more modest levels may have an extremely small impact.

17

In Table 8, we examine these results broken down by two sub-populations that may be more
sensitive to air pollution: boys and students of lower quality. The results indicate that boys are more
sensitive to PM2.5 than girls, and lower quality students are more likely to be detrimentally affected than
stronger students. In particular, raising the fraction of days with very polluted air by 10 percentage points
is associated with a .57 percentage point increase for boys in the chance of failing a particular Bagrut in
models with student fixed effects. Girls appear largely unaffected, with the increased chance of not passing
being statistically indistinguishable from zero. The gap is even more striking for student with low Magen
scores: a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of days with very polluted air is associated with a .59
percentage point increase in failure probability. The second outcome we examine is the student’s probability
of failing the composite Bagrut. Boys are nearly a third more sensitive to air pollution by this measure,
where a 10 percentage point increase in polluted days is associated with a 1.74 percentage point increased
chance of not receiving their matriculation certificate, whereas girls only experience a 1.19 percentage point
increase. The results are even more striking for low scoring Magen students, who are 1.07 percentage points
more likely to not receive a Bagrut certificate for a 10 percentage point increase in the share of days with
poor air quality.
In Table 9, we present results parallel to those shown in Table 8 but for CO rather than PM2.5. While
the results for our continuous measure are statistically insignificant, the results for our threshold measure
are negative and statistically significant. Interestingly, we find very similar results for boys and girls in their
probability of failing the Bagrut exam or not receiving a matriculation certificate. For instance, a 10
percentage point increase in days above the CO threshold is associated with a 1.42 percentage point
increased chance of not receiving their matriculation certificate for boys, and girls experience a similar 1.44
percentage point increase. The results are also similar for low scoring Magen students, who are 1.02
percentage points more likely to not receive a matriculation certificate for a 10 percentage point increase in
the share of days with poor air quality, versus a 1.24 increase for high scoring Magen students. This suggests
that the long-run effects of CO are similar across different groups.

VI.

Conclusion
This paper has examined the relationship between cognitive performance and ambient pollution

exposure. Using a large sample of Israeli high-school Bagrut examinations (2000-2002), we have presented
evidence that there is a robust negative relationship between outcomes and ambient pollution
concentrations. We also find that among Israeli sub-populations with higher rates of asthma and respiratory
illnesses, our estimated treatment effects for PM2.5 are larger, suggesting that physiological impairment is a
potential mechanism for our findings. In contrast, our results for CO are largely consistent among Israeli
sub-populations, suggesting that neurological impairment may be a mechanism for our findings. The

18

measured impact of our pollutants may have a permanent effect on a student’s human capital formation,
because it affects whether the student earns the Bagrut in a timely fashion and can matriculate in college
following the army, or must complete additional coursework prior to starting college, delaying
matriculation. In the overall economy, the mis-ranking of students due to variability in pollution exposure
may result in bad assignment of workers to different occupations, resulting in reduced labor productivity.
While our results are robust to a variety of specification checks, it is worth noting several important
caveats. First, our result is in a completely reduced form and we cannot trace out the pathways. While we
posit that asthmatics and other sensitive groups are driving our results for PM2.5, this is difficult to determine
definitively in the absence of health measures for the test takers. Second, we cannot fully examine whether
the effect is due to pollution only on the day of the exam, versus through a build-up effect from the days
prior to the exam. We report the relationship between the exam outcome and ambient pollution, but we are
unable with our data to fully disentangle the exact timing of the effect. Third, it may be that increased
pollution is contemporaneous with other factors affecting test outcomes. For example, it is possible that
traffic on the way to the exam is correlated with pollution and with reduced test performance. In spite of
these limitations, our results present new evidence of a connection between reduced cognitive performance
and fine particulate matter or carbon monoxide exposure.
The results presented here suggest that the gain from improving air quality may be underestimated
by a narrow focus on health impacts. Insofar as air pollution may lead to reduced cognitive performance,
the consequences of pollution may be relevant for a variety of everyday activities that require mental acuity.
Traffic accidents, injuries in the workplace, and reduced worker productivity may all be the byproduct of
reduced cognitive performance. As such, the results presented here highlight a channel by which the
consequences of pollution are vastly understated by a narrow focus on the immediate and acute health
consequences, and suggest that improvements in air quality may yield tremendous benefits in welfare.

19

References
Angrist, J. and Lavy, V. 1999. “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on Scholastic
Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 533–575.
Basagaña, Xavier, Sunyer, Jordi, Kogevinas, Manolis, Zock, Jan-Paul, Duran-Tauleria, Enric, Jarvis,
Deborah, Burney, Peter and Josep Maria Anto. 2004. “Socioeconomic status and asthma prevalence in
young adults: the European Community Respiratory Health Survey.” American Journal of
Epidemiology, 160: 178–188.
Bell, Michelle, JK, Lin Z. 2008. “The effect of sandstorms and air pollution on cause-specific hospital
admissions in Taipei, Taiwan.” Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 65: 104-111.
Biederman, Joseph, Mick, Eric, Faraone, Stephen, Braaten, Ellen, Doyle, Alysa, Spencer, Thomas, Wilens,
Timothy, Frazier, Elizabeth, and Mary Ann Johnson. 2002. "Influence of Gender on Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder in Children Referred to a Psychiatric Clinic." The American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159: 36–42.
Braniš, Martin, Řezáčová, Pavla, and Markéta Domasová. 2005. "The effect of outdoor air and indoor
human activity on mass concentrations of PM10, PM2.5, and PM1 in a classroom." Environmental
Research, 99(2): 143–149.
Brown P. 1995. “Race, class, and environmental health: a review and systematization of the literature.”
Environmental Research, 69: 15–30.
Calderón-Garcidueñas, L., Mora-Tiscareño, A., Ontiveros, E., Gómez-Garza, G., Barragán-Mejía, G.,
Broadway, J., Chapman, S., Valencia-Salazar, G., Jewells, V., Maronpot, RR., Henríquez-Roldán, C.,
Pérez-Guillé, B., Torres-Jardón, R., Herrit, L., Brooks, D., Osnaya-Brizuela, N., Monroy, M., GonzálezMaciel, A., Reynoso-Robles, R., Villarreal-Calderon, R., Solt. A., and R. Engle. 2008. "Air pollution,
cognitive deficits and brain abnormalities: a pilot study with children and dogs." Brain and Cognition,
68(2): 117-127.
Chay, Kenneth Y, Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence
from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(3): 1121-1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y, Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing
Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2):376-424.
Clark, D. and L. Sokoloff. 1999. "Circulation and energy metabolism of the brain," in G. Siegel, B.
Agranoff, R. Albers, S. Fisher and M. Uhler, eds., Basic Neurochemistry. Molecular, Cellular and
Medical Aspects, Lippincott-Raven, pp. 637–670.
Currie, J., Neidell M., and J. Schmieder. 2009. "Air pollution and infant health: Lessons from New Jersey."
Journal of Health Economics, 28: 688-703.

20

Dockery, W., and C. Pope. 1996. “Epidemiology of Acute Health Effects: Summary of Time Series
Studies.” in R. Wilson and J. Spengler, eds., Particles in Our Air, Harvard University Press, 123-148.
Eriksson K., Hedlund U., and E. Ronmark. 2006. "Socio-economic status is related to incidence of asthma
and respiratory symptoms in adults." European Respiratory Journal, 28(2): 303-310.
Graff Zivin, Joshua S. and Matthew J. Neidell. 2011. "The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity."
NBER Working Paper #17004.
Ham, John C., Zweig, Jacqueline S. and Edward Avol. 2011. “Pollution, Test Scores and the Distribution
of Academic Achievement: Evidence from California Schools 2002-2008.” IZA Working Paper.
Kampa, M., and E. Castanas. 2007. "Human health effects of air pollution." Environmental Pollution, 151:
362-367.
Laor, A., Cohen, L., and Y Danon. 1993. "Effects of time, sex, ethnic origin, and area of residence on
prevalence of asthma in Israeli adolescents." British Medical Journal, 307(6908): 841-844.
Lavy, Victor. 2002. “Evaluating the Effect of Group Teachers’ Performance Incentives on Pupils’
Achievements.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6): 1286-1317.
Lavy, Victor. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading Ethics”, American
Economic Review, 99(5): 1979-2011.
Moretti, Enrico and Matthew Neidell. 2011. "Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior Evidence from
the Ports of Los Angeles." The Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154-175.
Neidell, Matthew. 2004. "Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of outdoor air quality
on childhood asthma." Journal of Health Economics, 23: 1209–1236.
Oliva, P., and R. Hanna. 2011. "The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment in Mexico City." NBER Working Paper #17302.
Piantadosi, C. A. 2002. "Carbon Monoxide Poisoning." The New England Journal of Medicine, 347(14):
1054-1055.
Pope, C. III, Bates, D., and M. Raizenne. 1995. "Health Effects of Particulate Air Pollution: Time for
Reassessment?" Environmental Health Perspectives, 103: 472-480.
Pope, C. III, and D. Dockery. 2006. "Critical Review–Health effects of fine particulate air pollution: Lines
that connect." Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 56: 709-742.
Pope, C. III, Ezzati, M., and D. Dockery. 2009. "Fine-particulate air pollution and life expectancy in the
United States." New England Journal of Medicine, 360: 376-386.
Suglia, S., Gryparis, A., Wright, R., Schwartz, J., and R. Wright. 2008. "Association of black carbon with
cognition among children in a prospective birth cohort study." American Journal of Epidemiology,
167(3): 280-286.
Schlenker, Wolfram and W. Reed Walker. 2011. "Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous Health."

21

NBER Working Paper #17684.
Wang, S., Zhang, J., Zeng, X., Zeng. Y., Wang, S., and S. Chen. 2009. "Association of Traffic-Related Air
Pollution with Children’s Neurobehavioral Functions in Quanzhou, China." Environmental Health
Perspectives, 117(10): 1612-1618.

22

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
By Magen Score
1
(Course Grade )

By Sex
All
(1)

Boys
(2)

Girls
(3)

Low Scores
(4)

High Scores
(5)

21.05
(10.86)

20.89
(10.57)

21.18
(11.10)

21.15
(10.88)

20.96
(10.87)

59.74
(22.81)

59.47
(22.50)

59.98
(23.08)

60.01
(22.89)

59.51
(22.75)

PM2.5
(AQI ≥101)

0.05
(0.21)

0.05
(0.21)

0.05
(0.22)

0.05
(0.22)

0.05
(0.21)

CO
3
(µg/m )

1.21
(1.05)

1.22
(1.08)

1.21
(1.02)

1.25
(1.15)

1.17
(0.92)

CO
(AQI Index)

13.77
(11.58)

13.81
(11.93)

13.73
(11.27)

14.19
(12.80)

13.29
(10.18)

CO
(>95th percentile)

0.04
(0.20)

0.04
(0.20)

0.04
(0.20)

0.04
(0.21)

0.03
(0.18)

Bagrut Exam Score
(1-100 points)

70.76
(23.74)

68.91
(24.86)

72.33
(22.64)

53.22
(30.69)

77.10
(22.18)

Magen Score
(1-100 points)

75.45
(21.37)

73.27
(22.50)

77.30
(20.19)

64.09
(23.25)

86.93
(10.47)

Bagrut Composite
Score

83.03
(16.84)

81.37
(17.48)

84.49
(16.11)

73.18
(14.59)

95.05
(10.33)

Matriculation
Certificate (1=yes)

0.68
(0.47)

0.64
(0.48)

0.71
(0.45)

0.48
(0.50)

0.91
(0.28)

Failed a Bagrut Exam
(1=yes)

0.19
(0.39)

0.21
(0.41)

0.17
(0.37)

0.33
(0.47)

0.04
(0.19)

Mother’s Education
(years)

11.44
(5.04)

11.60
(5.09)

11.30
(5.00)

10.79
(4.87)

12.08
(5.13)

Father’s Education
(years)

11.62
(5.03)

11.83
(5.02)

11.44
(5.03)

10.85
(4.84)

12.39
(5.10)

Temperature
(celsius)

23.81
(2.61)

23.81
(2.61)

23.82
(2.62)

23.84
(2.66)

23.83
(2.50)

Relative Humidity
(percent saturation)

50.90
(14.71)

50.86
(14.52)

50.94
(14.87)

50.98
(15.08)

50.95
(14.35)

Observations

415,219

190,410

224,809

206,571

204,527

Variable
PM2.5
(µg/m3)
PM2.5
(AQI Index)

Notes : Standard deviations are in parentheses. The measures of pollution are particulate matter smaller than 2.5
microns, or PM2.5, and carbon monoxide, CO. We also report the AQI value for each reading, which is calculated
from a formula that converts micrograms (µg/m3) into a 1-500 index value. We also report dummies for days with
PM2.5 (AQI) >100 or CO readings in the top 5% of days in our sample. Relative humidity is the amount of moisture
in the air as a share of what the air can hold at that temperature. Receiving a Matriculation Certificate is determined
by a combination of the average Bagrut score across exams, and the Magen score, which is composed of the student's
1
course grade and an exam similar in content to the Bagrut. The low and high subsamples were based on being above
or below the median of the Magen score.

Table 2
Pooled OLS and Fixed Effect Models of Air Pollution's Impact on Bagrut Test Scores
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

-0.065
(0.011)

-0.082
(0.008)

-0.069
(0.007)

-0.046
(0.007)

Female (1=yes)

3.22
(0.34)

3.30
(0.34)

Mother’s Education

0.165
(0.063)

Father’s Education

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

-0.054
(0.020)

-0.133
(0.018)

-0.083
(0.017)

-0.085
(0.017)

2.72
(0.22)

3.82
(0.50)

3.88
(0.50)

3.15
(0.38)

0.141
(0.062)

0.112
(0.034)

0.182
(0.097)

0.191
(0.093)

0.113
(0.057)

0.410
(0.061)

0.396
(0.058)

0.241
(0.033)

0.451
(0.095)

0.463
(0.090)

0.251
(0.050)

0.003

0.042

0.046

0.145

0.493

0.001

0.054

0.060

0.174

0.531

415,219

380,435

380,435

380,435

380,435

158,647

153,528

153,528

153,528

153,528

-2.63
(1.03)

-2.75
(0.84)

-2.68
(0.70)

-1.95
(0.74)

-6.04
(1.15)

-6.68
(1.31)

-9.16
(1.28)

-9.56
(0.96)

-10.16
(1.02)

Female (1=yes)

3.19
(0.340)

3.25
(0.337)

2.68
(0.219)

3.84
(0.498)

3.91
(0.496)

3.19
(0.377)

Mother’s Education

0.158
(0.064)

0.143
(0.063)

0.111
(0.035)

0.185
(0.096)

0.192
(0.092)

0.117
(0.055)

Father’s Education

0.409
(0.061)

0.396
(0.058)

0.241
(0.033)

0.452
(0.094)

0.465
(0.090)

0.252
(0.048)

Panel A: Air Quality Index (continuous measure)
Pollutant

R-squared
Observations

-0.055
(0.015)

-0.047
(0.017)

Panel B: Air Quality Index above Threshold Value
Dummy for AQI>1001

-3.00
(1.54)

0.001
0.040
0.043
0.143
0.492
0.002
0.056
0.062
0.177
0.534
R-squared
Observations
415,219
380,435
380,435
380,435
380,435
158,647
153,528
153,528
153,528
153,528
Notes : Standard errors are clustered by school. All regressions include suppressed controls for temperature and humidity on the exam date, which are
1
included as linear and quadratic terms in each, and linear and quadratic interaction terms of the two variables. For carbon monoxide, we generate a dummy
for a test occurring on a day in the top 5% of most polluted days.

Table 3
Air Pollution's Impact on Bagrut Test Scores on Polluted and Extremely Polluted Days
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Dummy for AQI >50 &
1
< 101

-2.32
(0.50)

-2.29
(0.42)

-3.02
(0.31)

-2.41
(0.29)

-1.43
(0.33)

0.56
(0.71)

-1.92
(0.75)

-1.26
(0.67)

-1.36
(0.60)

-0.72
(0.66)

Dummy for AQI
≥ 101

-4.42
(1.61)

-4.07
(1.10)

-4.92
(0.87)

-4.34
(0.73)

-2.89
(0.78)

-5.76
(1.27)

-8.56
(1.55)

-10.39
(1.42)

-10.88
(1.14)

-10.87
(1.19)

Female (1=yes)

3.20
(0.339)

3.27
(0.335)

2.70
(0.217)

3.86
(0.498)

3.92
(0.497)

3.20
(0.378)

Mother’s Education

0.166
(0.064)

0.142
(0.063)

0.112
(0.035)

0.180
(0.096)

0.190
(0.092)

0.114
(0.055)

Father’s Education

0.411
(0.061)

0.395
(0.058)

0.241
(0.034)

0.455
(0.095)

0.466
(0.090)

0.252
(0.049)

0.003

0.041

0.046

0.145

0.493

0.003

0.056

0.063

0.178

0.534

415,219

380,435

380,435

380,435

380,435

158,647

153,528

153,528

153,528

153,528

R-squared
Observations
1

Notes : See Table 2. For carbon monoxide we generate a dummy for a test occurring on a day above the median pollution level and below the top 5% of
the most polluted days as the intermediate pollution category.

Table 4
Placebo Tests Measuring the Relationship between the Bagrut and Pollutants on Irrelevant Days
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects
City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Panel A: Pollutant Level from Previous Exam
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.024
(0.013)

-0.035
(0.010)

-0.049
(0.007)

-0.034
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.128
(0.065)

-0.130
(0.074)

-0.307
(0.164)

-0.080
(0.079)

0.097
(0.055)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-1.10
(1.37)

-0.48
(0.87)

-0.66
(0.78)

-0.29
(0.68)

0.78
(0.71)

-3.61
(2.29)

-1.48
(2.85)

-5.68
(3.09)

1.48
(2.82)

-2.53
(3.06)

358,584

328,974

328,974

328,974

328,974

131,579

127,341

127,341

127,341

127,341

Observations

Panel B: Pollutant Level from Previous Year
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.008
(0.008)

-0.033
(0.008)

-0.027
(0.008)

-0.014
(0.009)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.032
(0.017)

-0.060
(0.038)

0.061
(0.029)

0.063
(0.023)

0.147
(0.048)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-2.78
(0.81)

-2.89
(0.68)

-1.03
(0.76)

-0.75
(0.73)

-1.15
(0.69)

0.98
(1.06)

2.38
(0.76)

3.87
(0.74)

4.90
(0.70)

5.55
(0.81)

261,091

248,759

248,759

248,759

248,759

291,555

193,764

193,764

193,764

193,764

Observations
Notes : See Table 2.

Table 5
Air Pollution's Impact on Bagrut Test Scores, Separately for Boys and Girls
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects
City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Panel A: Boys Only
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.087
(0.018)

-0.100
(0.013)

-0.118
(0.009)

-0.104
(0.009)

-0.078
(0.009)

-0.035
(0.021)

-0.055
(0.026)

-0.142
(0.024)

-0.080
(0.020)

-0.099
(0.019)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-4.83
(1.95)

-5.62
(1.26)

-5.59
(0.96)

-5.33
(0.82)

-4.10
(0.87)

-6.12
(1.41)

-7.49
(1.65)

-10.73
(1.53)

-10.28
(1.22)

-11.28
(1.23)

190,410

174,250

174,250

174,250

174,250

73,054

70,311

70,311

70,311

70,311

Pollutant (AQI)

-0.031
(0.014)

-0.036
(0.012)

-0.054
(0.009)

-0.041
(0.007)

-0.021
(0.008)

-0.058
(0.017)

-0.052
(0.017)

-0.125
(0.021)

-0.091
(0.018)

-0.075
(0.023)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-1.67
(1.35)

-0.30
(1.03)

-0.55
(0.90)

-0.66
(0.80)

-0.38
(0.83)

-6.07
(1.13)

-5.79
(1.26)

-7.62
(1.34)

-8.79
(1.10)

-9.29
(1.16)

224,809

206,185

206,185

206,185

206,185

85,593

83,217

83,217

83,217

83,217

Observations
Panel B: Girls Only

Observations
Notes : See Table 2.

Table 6
Air Pollution's Impact on Test Scores, Separately for Students with Low and High Magen Scores
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Panel A: Low Magen Scores
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.074
(0.015)

-0.078
(0.013)

-0.081
(0.011)

-0.075
(0.010)

-0.061
(0.011)

-0.073
(0.032)

-0.097
(0.031)

-0.064
(0.021)

-0.065
(0.020)

-0.048
(0.029)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-4.64
(1.58)

-4.79
(1.24)

-3.77
(1.12)

-3.86
(1.04)

-3.49
(1.10)

-6.22
(1.31)

-9.66
(1.49)

-11.79
(1.64)

-11.56
(1.28)

-12.14
(1.45)

206,571

185,030

185,030

185,030

185,030

134,126

128,078

128,078

128,078

128,078

Observations

Panel B: High Magen Scores
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.027
(0.006)

-0.024
(0.006)

-0.037
(0.006)

-0.030
(0.006)

-0.028
(0.006)

-0.023
(0.015)

-0.027
(0.015)

-0.068
(0.016)

-0.052
(0.016)

-0.055
(0.015)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-0.94
(0.42)

-0.93
(0.71)

-1.30
(0.66)

-0.93
(0.57)

-0.76
(0.68)

-2.97
(0.59)

-4.09
(0.69)

-4.61
(0.78)

-4.88
(0.81)

-4.57
(0.85)

204,527

191,790

191,790

191,790

191,790

128,758

126,284

126,284

126,284

126,284

Observations

Notes : See Table 2. The sample is stratified by whether the student did below (Panel A) or above (Panel B) the median on the Magen score. The Magen
score is based on the student's class performance and on an exam similar to the Bagrut.

Table 7
Air Pollution's Impact on Long-term Academic Outcomes Related to the Bagrut Examination
RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
Controls
(1)

Fixed Effects
City
(2)

RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide
Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects

School
(3)

Student
(4)

Controls
(5)

City
(6)

School
(7)

Student
(8)

Panel A: Failing a Particular Bagrut Exam (1=yes)
Pollutant (AQI, 100
units)

0.025
(0.015)

0.035
(0.010)

0.018
(0.009)

-0.017
(0.010)

0.048
(0.024)

0.071
(0.034)

0.026
(0.036)

0.019
(0.049)

Pollutant (Threshold)

0.036
(0.016)

0.039
(0.012)

0.036
(0.010)

0.024
(0.010)

0.082
(0.018)

0.103
(0.021)

0.111
(0.017)

0.123
(0.019)

Observations

380,435

380,435

380,435

380,435

153,528

153,528

153,528

153,528

Panel B: Bagrut Exam Composite Score
Pollutant (AQI, 100
units)

-6.77
(4.29)

-26.79
(3.40)

-16.60
(1.87)

-2.88
(3.68)

-22.72
(4.53)

-8.56
(3.23)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-3.77
(4.96)

-10.93
(3.66)

-9.55
(2.70)

-10.98
(2.24)

-8.43
(1.55)

-7.54
(1.15)

Observations

50,899

50,899

50,899

25,730

25,730

25,730

Panel C: Received a Bagrut Matriculation Certificate (1=yes)
Pollutant (AQI, 100
units)

-0.236
(0.099)

-0.537
(0.082)

-0.328
(0.048)

-0.063
(0.075)

-0.301
(0.102)

-0.054
(0.100)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-0.184
(0.125)

-0.255
(0.093)

-0.146
(0.050)

-0.214
(0.051)

-0.188
(0.035)

-0.142
(0.027)

Observations

50,899

50,899

50,899

25,730

25,730

25,730

Notes : See Table 2. In Panel A, each observation is an examination. In Panel B and Panel C, each observation is a student. For the models estimated
in Panel B and Panel C, pollution is averaged over all of the Bagrut tests taken following grades 10-12 for each student.

Table 8
Particulate Matter's Impact on Failing a Bagrut Exam and
Receiving a Matriculation Certificate by Sex and Magen Score
LHS: Failed Bagrut Exam
(1=yes)

LHS: Received Matriculation
Certificate (1=yes)

Pooled OLS
Controls
(1)

City
(2)

PM2.5 (AQI, 100 units)

0.070
(0.020)

0.082
(0.014)

0.064
(0.013)

0.021
(0.014)

-0.243
(0.109)

-0.621
(0.089)

-0.345
(0.057)

PM2.5 (Threshold)

0.085
(0.022)

0.086
(0.017)

0.077
(0.015)

0.057
(0.015)

-0.283
(0.133)

-0.403
(0.094)

-0.174
(0.065)

Observations

174,250

174,250

174,250

174,250

23,830

23,830

23,830

PM2.5 (AQI, 100 units)

-0.012
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.011)

-0.017
(0.010)

-0.046
(0.011)

-0.231
(0.107)

-0.468
(0.097)

-0.328
(0.056)

PM2.5 (Threshold)

0.000
(0.014)

0.003
(0.012)

0.004
(0.010)

-0.001
(0.010)

-0.061
(0.142)

-0.073
(0.116)

-0.119
(0.062)

Observations

206,185

206,185

206,185

206,185

27,069

27,069

27,069

Fixed Effects
School
Student
(3)
(4)

Pooled OLS
Controls
(5)

Fixed Effects
City
School
(6)
(7)

Panel A: Boys Only

Panel B: Girls Only

Panel C: Low Magen Scores
PM2.5 (AQI, 100 units)

0.038
(0.020)

0.038
(0.017)

0.026
(0.015)

0.001
(0.017)

-0.086
(0.096)

-0.299
(0.079)

-0.204
(0.049)

PM2.5 (Threshold)

0.077
(0.020)

0.071
(0.017)

0.066
(0.016)

0.059
(0.016)

-0.124
(0.103)

-0.178
(0.082)

-0.107
(0.049)

Observations

185,030

185,030

185,030

185,030

24,892

24,892

24,892

Panel D: High Magen Scores
PM2.5 (AQI, 100 units)

-0.026
(0.006)

-0.031
(0.006)

-0.035
(0.005)

-0.041
(0.007)

-0.219
(0.074)

-0.197
(0.077)

-0.118
(0.050)

PM2.5 (Threshold)

0.004
(0.007)

0.006
(0.006)

0.000
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.007)

-0.284
(0.146)

-0.252
(0.131)

-0.042
(0.044)

Observations

191,790

191,790

191,790

191,790

26,007

26,007

26,007

Notes : See Table 2. Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. Each observation in columns (1)-(4) is an
examination, and in columns (5)-(7) each observation is a student.

Table 9
Carbon Monoxide's Impact on Failing a Bagrut Exam and
Receiving a Matriculation Certificate by Sex and Magen Score
LHS: Failed Bagrut Exam
(1=yes)

LHS: Received Matriculation
Certificate (1=yes)

Pooled OLS
Controls
(1)

Fixed Effects
School
Student
(3)
(4)

Pooled OLS
Controls
(5)

Fixed Effects
City
School
(6)
(7)

City
(2)

CO (AQI, 100 units)

0.049
(0.033)

0.089
(0.030)

0.027
(0.029)

0.037
(0.036)

-0.022
(0.079)

-0.240
(0.164)

0.009
(0.128)

CO (Threshold)

0.090
(0.023)

0.123
(0.025)

0.118
(0.020)

0.132
(0.023)

-0.236
(0.061)

-0.196
(0.049)

-0.142
(0.040)

Observations

70,311

70,311

70,311

70,311

11,990

11,990

11,990

CO (AQI, 100 units)

0.045
(0.024)

0.057
(0.048)

0.031
(0.050)

0.007
(0.067)

-0.101
(0.083)

-0.389
(0.111)

-0.243
(0.125)

CO (Threshold)

0.071
(0.018)

0.084
(0.022)

0.103
(0.018)

0.115
(0.020)

-0.191
(0.049)

-0.176
(0.036)

-0.144
(0.028)

Observations

83,217

83,217

83,217

83,217

13,740

13,740

13,740

Panel A: Boys Only

Panel B: Girls Only

Panel C: Low Magen Scores
CO (AQI, 100 units)

0.031
(0.034)

0.073
(0.060)

0.029
(0.061)

0.053
(0.073)

-0.107
(0.076)

-0.180
(0.138)

0.033
(0.108)

CO (Threshold)

0.136
(0.025)

0.197
(0.027)

0.192
(0.023)

0.220
(0.029)

-0.183
(0.053)

-0.163
(0.045)

-0.102
(0.035)

Observations

71,192

71,192

71,192

71,192

11,962

11,962

11,962

Panel D: High Magen Scores
CO (AQI, 100 units)

0.028
(0.010)

-0.01
(0.016)

-0.014
(0.017)

-0.015
(0.025)

-0.053
(0.043)

-0.143
(0.093)

-0.052
(0.087)

CO (Threshold)

0.026
(0.009)

0.019
(0.010)

0.023
(0.010)

0.026
(0.012)

-0.097
(0.035)

-0.11
(0.035)

-0.124
(0.024)

Observations

80,728

80,728

80,728

80,728

13,768

13,768

13,768

Notes : See Table 2. Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. Each observation in columns (1)-(4) is an
examination, and in columns (5)-(7) each observation is a student.

Figure 1
Locations of Air Quality Monitoring Stations in Israel

Figure 2
Impact of PM2.5 and CO on Test Scores in the Days
Pre and Post Examination
Particulate Matter2.5

Carbon Monoxide

.1

.2

Coefficient Estimate

0
-.1

Coefficient Estimate

.1

0

-.2

-.1

-.2

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

-3

-2

-1

Coefficient Estimates

0

1

2

3

Day

Day
+/- 2 standard errors

Coefficient Estimates

+/- 2 standard errors

Notes : The figure plots the coefficients from a regression of Bagrut test scores on PM2.5 and CO AQI readings in the days prior to, the day of (Day=0), and the days
following the examination. Standard errors are clustered by school.

NOT FOR PUBLICATION - ONLINE APPENDIX
MATERIALS

Table A1
Breakpoints for PM2.5 (μg/m3) and AQI Index Categories
PM2.5 (μg/m3)

AQI Index Value

Category

0.0 - 15.4

0 - 50

Good

15.5 -40.4

51 - 100

Moderate

40.5 - 65.4

101 - 150

Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups

65.5 - 150.4

151 - 200

Unhealthy

150.5 - 250.4

201 - 300

Very unhealthy

250.5 - 350.4

301 - 400

Hazardous

350.5 - 500.4

401 - 500

Hazardous

Source : United States Environmental Protection Agency

Table A2
Pooled OLS and Fixed Effect Models of Pollutant Matter on Test Scores with Both Measures Included Simultaneously
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Pollutant (AQI)

-0.049
(0.018)

-0.030
(0.018)

-0.043
(0.016)

-0.033
(0.014)

-0.009
(0.019)

-0.046
(0.017)

-0.052
(0.020)

-0.126
(0.018)

-0.078
(0.017)

-0.083
(0.017)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-3.77
(1.03)

-1.93
(1.01)

-2.09
(0.94)

-2.60
(0.74)

-1.73
(0.82)

-6.19
(1.15)

-6.89
(1.30)

-9.33
(1.28)

-9.77
(0.96)

-10.26
(1.01)

158,647

153,528

153,528

153,528

153,528

158,647

153,528

153,528

153,528

153,528

Observations

Notes : The table reports the coefficients from estimating the models with both measures of pollution as independent variables. The results in the first row
and columns (1) and (6) are from the same regression, and the results from (2) and (7) are from the same regression, and so on. The results in the second
row and columns (1) and (6) are from the same regression, and the results from (2) and (7) are from the same regression, and so on.

Table A3
Pooled OLS and Fixed Effect Models of Pollutant Matter on Afternoon and Morning Test Scores
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Panel A: Afternoon Examinations
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.019
(0.017)

-0.079
(0.015)

-0.116
(0.013)

-0.082
(0.010)

-0.045
(0.013)

-0.099
(0.024)

-0.079
(0.014)

-0.183
(0.022)

-0.152
(0.015)

-0.135
(0.020)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-2.94
(2.11)

-3.11
(2.01)

-3.04
(1.95)

-2.56
(1.35)

-3.16
(1.42)

-8.82
(1.23)

-7.77
(1.22)

-9.24
(1.29)

-9.89
(1.10)

-10.45
(1.31)

162,912

148,026

148,026

148,026

148,026

68,161

65,984

65,984

65,984

65,984

Observations

Panel B: Morning Examinations
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.074
(0.016)

-0.067
(0.013)

-0.074
(0.009)

-0.066
(0.008)

-0.054
(0.010)

0.017
(0.026)

0.007
(0.046)

0.086
(0.069)

0.130
(0.034)

0.239
(0.083)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-2.93
(1.38)

-3.13
(1.11)

-2.97
(0.87)

-3.13
(0.73)

-2.46
(0.97)

-1.50
(2.79)

-2.45
(3.35)

-7.50
(8.30)

-0.08
(3.24)

-1.12
(4.38)

252,307

232,409

232,409

232,409

232,409

90,486

87,544

87,544

87,544

87,544

Observations

Notes : See Table 2. The examinations that are given at 12PM and later are classified as afternoon exams.

Table A4
Air Pollution's Impact on Test Scores, Separately by Magen Score Quartile
RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Low Magen Score
Percentile
(0-0.25) (0.25-0.50)

High Magen Score
Percentile
(0.50-0.75) (0.75-1.00)

RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide
Low Magen Score
Percentile
(0-0.25)

(0.25-0.50)

High Magen Score
Percentile
(0.50-0.75) (0.75-1.00)

Pollutant (AQI)

-0.080
(0.017)

-0.044
(0.010)

-0.033
(0.008)

-0.022
(0.006)

-0.134
(0.042)

-0.064
(0.020)

-0.082
(0.015)

-0.088
(0.028)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-4.99
(1.38)

-2.29
(1.19)

-1.24
(0.86)

-0.35
(0.63)

-18.22
(1.86)

-10.93
(1.16)

-7.52
(0.87)

-3.56
(1.18)

Observations

90,354

94,676

94,288

97,502

36,901

38,446

38,022

38,551

Notes : See Table 2. All models include student fixed effects. The columns include the students within the listed percentile range
on the Magen score, which is based on the student's class performance and on an exam similar to the Bagrut .

Table A5
Pooled OLS and Fixed Effect Models of Pollutant Matter on Test Scores, Separately for Ashkenazi and Sephardi Students
RHS Pollutant Measure: Carbon Monoxide

RHS Pollutant Measure: Particulate Matter 2.5
Pooled OLS
No Controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects
City
(3)

School
(4)

Student
(5)

No Controls Controls
(6)
(7)

Fixed Effects
City
(8)

School
(9)

Student
(10)

Panel A: Ashkenazi (Europe, America & Australia)
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.048
(0.018)

-0.056
(0.014)

-0.081
(0.011)

-0.062
(0.009)

-0.046
(0.012)

-0.038
(0.024)

-0.035
(0.028)

-0.122
(0.035)

-0.077
(0.033)

-0.056
(0.025)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-2.91
(1.94)

-2.85
(1.35)

-3.03
(1.08)

-2.19
(1.07)

-1.73
(1.13)

-5.87
(1.30)

-5.98
(1.30)

-7.41
(1.29)

-9.10
(1.19)

-8.28
(1.19)

Observations

88,635

80,156

80,156

80,156

80,156

31,437

30,156

30,156

30,156

30,156

Panel B: Sephardi (Asia, Middle East & Africa)
Pollutant (AQI)

-0.077
(0.018)

-0.058
(0.014)

-0.068
(0.011)

-0.058
(0.010)

-0.035
(0.009)

-0.037
(0.020)

-0.059
(0.020)

-0.109
(0.019)

-0.073
(0.018)

-0.061
(0.020)

Pollutant (Threshold)

-4.11
(1.67)

-1.17
(1.33)

-1.15
(1.20)

-1.32
(0.98)

-1.01
(1.00)

-4.96
(1.29)

-6.85
(1.49)

-9.06
(1.61)

-9.72
(1.50)

-10.56
(1.56)

Observations

61,889

54,822

54,822

54,822

54,822

22,702

22,116

22,116

22,116

22,116

Notes : See Table 2.

