NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL FISCAL LIMITS
Stephen Coate
Working Paper 20643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20643

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

This paper was stimulated by the Becker Friedman Institute Conference on Constitutional Design and
the Scope of Authority at the University of Chicago. I thank the organizers for inviting me. I also thank
Yanlei Ma for outstanding research assistance and Marco Battaglini for very helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Optimal Fiscal Limits
Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 20643
October 2014
JEL No. H72
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the optimal design of fiscal limits in the context of a simple political economy model.
The model features a single politician and a representative voter. The politician is responsible for choosing
the level of public spending for the voter but may be biased in favor of spending. The voter sets a spending
limit and requires that the politician have voter approval to exceed it. This limit must be set before
the voter's preferences for public spending are fully known. The paper first solves for the optimal limit
and explains how it depends upon the degree of politician bias and the nature of the uncertainty concerning
the voter's preferred spending level. A dynamic version of the model is then analyzed and policies
which limit the rate of growth of spending are shown to dominate those that cap spending to be below
some fixed fraction of community income.

Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-7601
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Tax and spending limits are a common feature of the state and local government fiscal landscape
in the US. At the state level, Rose (2010) and Waisanen (2010) report that thirty states operate
under a tax or spending limitation.1 In some states these limits are constitutional and in others
they are statutory. They have been implemented both by state legislative bodies and directly by
citizens through the initiative process. At the local level, Mullins (2010) reports that all but three
states impose some form of constitutional or statutory statewide limitation on the fiscal behavior
of their local governments.2

Moreover, self-imposed limits are quite prevalent at the local level

as recently documented by Brooks, Halberstam, and Phillips (2013).3
Limits come in many forms and apply to a variety of diﬀerent fiscal variables. With respect to
taxes, there are limits on tax rates. In particular, limits on property tax rates are very common
at the local level. There are also limits on the total amount of tax that can be raised, so called
tax levy limits. These can apply to revenue raised from a specific tax or to total tax revenue.
With respect to spending, there are limits on the total amount of spending that the government
can do. All limits have override provisions which specify when limits may be violated. Typically,
violation requires either a super-majority vote of the governing legislative body or direct approval
of a majority or super-majority of citizens in a referendum.
Limits typically govern fiscal policy for a period of time, rather than being reoptimized at
the beginning of each fiscal year. Moreover, they diﬀer in how they are structured over time.
One common form of spending limit, for example, simply caps spending each year to be below
some fixed fraction of the community’s aggregate income.4 Another common form requires that
spending may not increase annually by more than some percentage. This percentage typically
depends on the growth of community aggregate income, population, and/or inflation.5

These

1 This is a conservative estimate, since Mullins (2010) reports that thirty five states have limitations. Eighteen
states have revenue limits, twenty seven have spending limits, and nine have provisions limiting both revenue and
spending.
2 The three exceptions are Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Vermont. The most common type of state-imposed
limit on local governments is a property tax rate limitation (thirty three states). Tax levy limits are also common
(thirty states). Nine states limit spending growth in their local governments and two limit revenue increases. States
also regulate what their local governments can tax. See Mullin (2010) for more details.
3 These researchers find that one in eight of the municipalities in their large-scale survey have self-imposed limits
(as distinct from state-imposed limits).
4

According to Waisanen (2010), such a spending limit exists in Arizona, Idaho, Missouri, and North Carolina.

5

According to Waisanen (2010), such a spending limit exists in Connecticut, Hawaii, Maine, New Jersey,

1

two forms of spending limit are equivalent only when spending is always equal to the limit. This
will not be the case when, for example, an override is approved. Similarly, tax rate limits diﬀer
in what happens when the limit is overriden and a higher rate is approved. In some cases, the
new higher rate becomes the new limit. In others, the limit reverts back to its original level the
next period. In still others, politicians are required to propose for how many periods they want
the higher rate.6
The purpose of this paper is to consider the optimal design of fiscal limits. Thus, the paper
seeks to develop principles that might guide citizens in the setting of such limits. Questions of
interest include how stringent should limits be and what does the optimal stringency depend on?
What is the role of the override provision? How should limits be structured over time?
The paper begins by developing a simple model in which to consider the problem. The agents
in the model are a politician who is in charge of selecting the level of spending on public goods and
services for a community and a representative voter who benefits from the public spending but has
to pay taxes to finance it. The voter’s preferred spending level is some fraction of the community’s
income, but this fraction is ex ante uncertain. The politician may be biased in favor of spending
in the sense that he prefers to see a higher fraction of community income spent on public goods
and services than the voter. The voter sets a spending limit before his preferred spending level is
known. Following common practice, the limit is in the form of a maximal fraction of community
income that can be devoted to public spending. Moreover, the limit has an override provision that
allows the politician to violate it with the voter’s approval.
The paper solves for the optimal limit and explains how it depends upon the extent of politician bias and the nature of the uncertainty concerning the voter’s preferred spending level. When
the politician’s bias exceeds a threshold, the optimal limit equals the expected fraction of community income the voter would like devoted to public spending. Below this threshold, the limit
exceeds this level. For some distributions of the voter’s preferred spending level, the optimal
limit is more permissive the lower is the politician’s bias and, as this bias goes to zero, converges
to the maximum fraction of income the voter could possibly want devoted to public spending.
Surprisingly, however, for other distributions, the limit becomes more stringent as the politician’s
bias decreases. Examples suggest that greater uncertainty in the voter’s preferred spending level
Oklahoma, South Carolina, Utah, and Washington.
6 For examples of all three of these systems in practice see Chapter 2 of Hamilton and Cohen (1974) which
inventories the rich variety of school finance systems across the states.

2

results in a more permissive limit.
The paper then extends the model to a dynamic setting to analyze how limits should be
structured over time. The extension assumes that the fraction of the community’s income the
voter would like to see devoted to public spending evolves according to a stochastic process.
Shocks are persistent in the sense that a positive demand shock in the current period implies
an increase in demand for public spending in the future. This creates a dynamic linkage across
periods. A diﬀerent politician is in oﬃce each period, so that politicians behave myopically. The
analysis first assumes that a sequence of limits must be chosen at the beginning of the first period.
The optimal sequence involves capping spending in each period to be below a constant fraction of
community income. Under our assumptions on the magnitude of bias, this fraction is the expected
fraction of community income the voter would like to see devoted to public spending conditional
on the information available at the beginning of the first period. However, this optimal sequence
is shown to be dominated by a system of spending-contingent limits that, after capping spending
in the first period, limit the growth of future spending to be less than the growth of community
income. Thus, the analysis suggests that systems that limit the growth of spending dominate
those that simply cap spending.
The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses related
literature. Section 3 outlines the basic model and analyzes the optimal limit in the static case.
Section 4 extends the model to incorporate dynamics and studies the optimal way to structure
spending limits over time. Section 5 concludes with a brief summary of the findings and suggestions
for further research.

2

Related literature

There is a large literature on fiscal limits.7 This literature focuses on three main tasks. The first
is documenting the types of limits faced by state and local governments and describing when and
how they were introduced (see, for example, Mullins 2010 and Waisanen 2010). This is diﬃcult
and time consuming because there is a great deal of variation across states and localities and a
considerable amount of change over time. The second task is understanding how limits impact
7

Selective reviews are provided by Krol (2007), Mullins and Wallin (2004), and Rose (2010).

3

the fiscal variables they seek to regulate and other related public policies.8

This is challenging

because of the problem of identifying the eﬀect of limits. The third task is understanding what
citizens think about existing limits and why they were introduced (see, for example, Citrin 1979,
Courant, Gramlich and Rubinfeld 1985, Cutler, Elmendorf, and Zeckhauser 1999, and Ladd and
Wilson 1982).
The normative question of whether limits enhance citizens’ welfare and, if so, what should be
limited and how should limits be designed has attracted less attention in the literature. Brennan
and Buchanan (1979) provide an early and wide ranging normative discussion of tax limits. They
study the issue in the context of a model in which a Leviathan government wastes a fixed fraction of
any revenues raised for public good provision. This Leviathan government would like to maximize
revenues raised. Brennan and Buchanan discuss a number of diﬀerent limits: tax rate limits,
tax levy limits, and tax base limits.9

They consider tax levy limits that require revenue to be

less than some fraction of community income and argue that assessing the appropriate fraction
will be too complicated for average citizens. Our analysis seeks to provide guidance on exactly
this question as it applies in the spending context. They also question whether such limits can
be eﬀective in restraining government, arguing that the footprint of government in the economy
does not equate to the tax revenue it raises. In particular, they point out that government can
intervene with non-tax methods such as mandates and regulations. This concern is abstracted
from in this paper.
Besley and Smart (2007) study the operation of a tax revenue limit in the context of a two
period political agency model. The politician holding oﬃce in each period chooses taxes and
provides a public good, the cost of which is uncertain. Politicians can be good or bad. Good
politicians maximize voters’ welfare in an unstrategic way. Bad politicians are strategic and get
utility from holding oﬃce and diverting tax revenues to their own consumption. The important
point that Besley and Smart make is that a revenue limit in the first period not only limits the
choices of the incumbent politician but also impacts how much voters learn about the incumbent.
8 Papers in this branch of the literature include Bradbury, Mayer, and Case (2001), Brooks, Halberstam, and
Phillips (2013), Dye and McGuire (1997), Figlio and Rueben (2001), Knight (2000), Poterba (1994), and Poterba
and Rueben (1995, 2001). After surveying the literature, Rose (2010) concludes “tax and expenditure limits
appear to be modestly eﬀective in slowing the growth of government, particularly at the municipal level, although
the evidence is somewhat mixed”.
9 Base limits correspond to restrictions on what the government may tax. For example, local governments in
many states are not allowed to tax income.

4

In particular, a revenue limit might induce a pooling equilibrium between good and bad politicians
in the first period, which leads to worse selection in the second period. This impact must be taken
into account in a full welfare analysis of limits. This point is abstracted from in our dynamic
analysis which assumes that politicians hold oﬃce for one period only.
As a prelude to their empirical work, Brooks, Halberstam, and Phillips (2013) provide a
theoretical analysis that is closer to this paper. They develop a framework for understanding
limits building on a model of local government elections presented in Coate and Knight (2011).
There are two groups of citizens with low and high preferences for public goods. The level of
public good is chosen by an elected politician. Politicians are citizens and choose their preferred
public good level if elected. However, citizens cannot observe candidates’ preferences. A limit is
implemented when the majority have low preferences and is intended to constrain high spending
politicians. The cost of the public good is uncertain which makes the choice of limit non-trivial.
The optimal limit is shown to be more permissive the higher the probability the elected politician
is a low type. However, the analysis assumes there is no override. While it does not explicitly
incorporate elections, our model is consistent with that of Brooks, Halberstam, and Phillips.
Nonetheless, our analysis of optimal limits diﬀers from theirs because we incorporate the reality
that limits can be overriden. This changes the calculus of the optimal limit.
The model presented here is also related to the well-known agenda setter model of RomerRosenthal (Romer and Rosenthal 1978 and 1979). The agenda setter model considers the interaction between a politician and a representative voter. The voter’s utility depends on the level
of public spending and the politician is responsible for choosing the level of this spending. The
politician is not only biased in favor of spending in the sense that he always prefers a higher level
than the voter, he is in fact a budget maximizer. The politician’s proposed spending level must
be approved by the voter and, if it is not, then an exogenous reversion level is implemented. In
equilibrium, the politician proposes a spending level which leaves the voter indiﬀerent between the
proposal and the reversion level. The proposed spending level exceeds the reversion level whenever
the latter falls below the voter’s preferred spending level. In this paper, the choice of the limit
can be thought of as endogenizing the reversion level. Moreover, the fact that the limit must be
chosen before the voter’s preferences are fully known makes the choice of limit interesting even in
the case in which the politician is a budget maximizer and thus heavily biased.
More generally, the paper contributes to a broader literature on fiscal constitutions. A fiscal
5

constitution is a set of rules and procedures that govern the determination of fiscal policies (see,
for example, Brennan and Buchanan 1980). It is distinct from a political constitution which
sets up the architecture of government and the rules by which policy-makers are selected. The
fiscal constitution literature seeks to understand the eﬀectiveness of various rules and procedures
in generating good fiscal policies for citizens. In addition to tax and spending limits, it studies
balanced budget rules, budgetary procedures, debt limits, and rainy day funds. Rose (2010)
provides a useful review of this literature.
Finally, the paper is related to the contract theory literature on the delegation problem (see, for
example, Alonso and Matouschek 2008, Amador and Bagwell 2013, Holmstrom 1977, 1984, and
Melumad and Shibano 1991). In this problem, a principal interacts with an informed but biased
agent and contingent transfers between the principal and agent are ruled out. The nature of the
interaction is that the principal chooses a set of permissible actions for the agent and, given his
private information, the agent chooses his preferred action from this set. The question of interest
is what is the optimal set of permissible actions from the principal’s perspective? This general
theoretical problem has many interesting applications, including several in the field of political
economy.10
At first glance, the delegation problem seems to map cleanly into our setting: the principal is
the representative voter, the agent is the politician, and the permissible actions are the spending
levels lower than the limit. Moreover, information is asymmetric in the sense that at the time the
voter has to choose the limit he does not have perfect information but knows that the politician
will be fully informed when choosing the spending level. The choice of the limit determines the
set of permissible actions and hence the question of the optimal limit is relevant to the problem of
determining the optimal set of permissible actions.11 Nonetheless, there are important diﬀerences
between the problem considered here and the delegation problem. In our problem, there is an
override provision so that the politician can choose a policy outside the set of permissible actions
with the voter’s approval.12

Moreover, if the politician does decide to take advantage of the

10 One application is the delegation of policy-making from elected politicians to bureaucrats (see, for example,
Epstein and O’Halloran 1994 and Huber and Shipan 2006). Another is to the delegation of policy-making from
legislatures to standing committees (see, for example, Gilligan and Krehbiel 1987, 1989 and Krishna and Morgan
2001).
11

Of course, simply imposing a limit may not be the optimal way of constructing the set of permissible actions.

12 In the delegation problem setting, Mylovanov (2008) shows that the principal can implement an optimal
outcome through veto-based delegation with an appropriately chosen default policy. In this implementation, the

6

override provision, the voter is fully informed when deciding whether to approve the politician’s
proposal. Thus, there is no information asymmetry between the voter and politician at this stage
of the interaction.13
Indeed, the fiscal limit we study better resembles an incomplete contract between the representative voter and the politician.14

It is incomplete because the limit is not conditional on

the voter’s preferred spending level even though both parties can observe this variable when it
is realized. The real world justification for this is that voters’ preferred spending levels depend
on too many factors to be coded into a limit formula. Like an incomplete contract, the fiscal
limit also specifies a renegotiation procedure through the override process. The politician has the
property right to choose the spending proposal and voters have the right to veto it if it exceeds
the limit. In contrast to the incomplete contracting literature, however, our analysis does not seek
to explain why the incomplete contract defined by the fiscal limit is optimal. It simply focuses on
the narrow, but practically relevant, question of what determines the optimal limit. Thus, we are
optimizing within this particular class of incomplete contracts.

3
3.1

Static analysis
The static model

A politician is in charge of selecting a level of spending on public goods and services for a community. A representative voter benefits from public spending but has to pay taxes to finance it. The
voter desires that a certain fraction of the community’s income be devoted to public spending, but
this preferred fraction is ex ante uncertain. The politician may share the voter’s preferences over
spending or may prefer a higher level. The voter is aware of the politician’s potential spending
agent proposes a policy and then the principal approves it or not. If he does not approve it, the default policy is
implemented. However, this diﬀers from the institution considered in this paper which requires that the politician
obtain the voter’s approval only if he exceeds the limit. Moreover, in Mylovanov’s scheme the voter is not fully
informed when he is voting on the agent’s proposal. Rather he makes inferences about what must be true from the
politician’s proposal.
13 This may appear similar to the set-up of Epstein and O’Halloran (1994). In their well-known model, a
politician must decide how much discretion to provide to a bureaucrat. The bureaucrat makes a policy proposal
within an interval of permissible proposals set by the politician. After the bureaucrat has made his proposal, the
politician may veto it. If he does so, some default policy is implemented. As in our model, at the time of the
veto decision, the politician is fully informed. However, this model diﬀers from ours in that i) the bureaucrat’s
proposal is always subject to the politician’s veto, and ii) the bureaucrat cannot choose from outside the interval
of permissible policies. In our model, the voter (who corresponds to the politician in their model) only votes if the
politician (who corrsponds to the bureaucrat) proposes something outside the permissible set.
14 For textbook treatments of incomplete contracts see, for example, Bolton and Dewatripont (2004) and Salanie
(1997).

7

bias and, before he knows his preferred spending level, imposes a spending limit on the politician.
This limit is in the form of a maximal fraction of community income that can be devoted to public
spending. The limit comes with an override provision that allows the politician to violate it with
the voter’s approval.
The level of spending is denoted  and the community’s income by . The voter’s preferred
spending level is . The voter has distance policy preferences − | − | so that his utility declines
linearly and symmetrically as the spending level diverges in either direction from his ideal.15 The
voter’s preferred fraction of community income to devote to public spending  (hereafter preferred
fraction) is the realization of a random variable with range [ ] and cumulative distribution
function (). The associated density function, (), is assumed to be symmetric around the
mean  = ( + ) 2.16

In addition, the density is continuous and non-decreasing on [  ].

These assumptions imply that the cumulative distribution function is convex on the interval [  ]
and concave on the interval [  ].
With probability  the politician is biased in favor of higher spending and with probability 1−
he shares the voter’s preferences. When biased, the politician has preferences − | − (1 + )| so
that his preferred spending level is (1 + ). The parameter  therefore measures the magnitude
of the biased politician’s spending bias.
The spending limit is denoted . The limit is in the form of a maximal fraction of the community’s income that can be devoted to public spending, so it prevents the politician from implementing a spending level in excess of  without the voter’s approval. Without loss of generality,
the limit  is assumed to belong to the interval [ ].
The timing of the interaction between the voter and the politician is as follows. First, knowing
, , , and , the voter selects a limit  from the interval [ ]. Second, nature selects the voter’s
preferred fraction  which is observed by both players. Third, the politician proposes a spending
level . If the proposal does not exceed the maximal permitted spending level  it is implemented.
Fourth, if the proposed spending level violates the limit, an election is held and the voter votes
in favor or against the proposal. If he votes in favor, the proposal is implemented. Fifth, if the
15 While not without their drawbacks (see, for example, Milyo 2000), distance preferences are very widely used
in the political economy literature. They are both analytically tractable and simple to understand. The particular
form used here assumes a linear loss of utility for the voter as spending diverges from his ideal. This is distinct
from a quadratic loss which is also commonly assumed.
16

This means that for any  below the mean  , () is equal to (2 − ).

8

voter votes against the proposal, the politician chooses another spending level 0 which respects
the limit and this is implemented.

3.2

Discussion of the model

The model raises a number of obvious questions which it is useful to briefly discuss. One question
is why might the politician be biased? In particular, why cannot voters always elect a candidate
who shares their spending preferences? Of course, to the extent that elections select in the right
candidates, then limits would seem unnecessary. Thus, the prevalence of limits at the state and
local government level suggests that candidate elections cannot be working perfectly in these
environments.17 To explain this imperfect functioning, it is common to point out that elections
at this level of government are small scale aﬀairs and that, as a consequence, voters are not
well informed about candidates’ policy preferences. Moreover, the rewards to holding oﬃce are
not large enough to provide incentives for elected candidates to diverge from their preferences to
increase their chances of re-election. But all this only means that, when elected, candidates will
likely follow their policy preferences and that these preferences may not be congruent with those
of the median voter. It does not explain a particular direction of bias. For this, there are (at least)
two possible explanations. First, it may be that interest groups operate to put pressure on elected
leaders to increase spending above the level preferred by voters. Many stakeholders stand to
benefit from public spending. These include public employees, public contractors, and recipients
of government grants. By the usual logic of concentrated benefits versus diﬀuse costs, these
stakeholders may form groups to influence politicians. In such environments, politicians may act
as if they prefer higher spending even if, as citizens, they share the general voter’s preferences (see,
for example, Grossman and Helpman 1994 and Besley and Coate 2001). The second explanation
is selection. For certain local government oﬃces, it is reasonable to believe that the people most
likely to run are those who care intensely about the policies the oﬃce controls and thereby have
higher preferences for spending on these policies. Good examples might be school board or town
and city council.
A related question is how does the voter know the politician’s exact bias (assuming he is
biased)? Would it not be more realistic to just assume the voter was uncertain of the degree of
17 This said, it is possible to generate an explanation for the limits states impose on their local governments
while assuming that the median voter theorem applies at both the state and local level. See Calabrese and Epple
(2011) and Vigdor (2004).

9

the politician’s bias, allowing in eﬀect a continuous distribution of bias rather than a two point
distribution? The answer to this question is obviously yes. A known level of bias is assumed
purely for reasons of tractability.18 The optimal limit design problem is quite complicated with a
known level of politician bias and it makes sense to understand this problem prior to introducing
a more general type of uncertainty.
Another question is why is the voter uncertain about the fraction of community income he
would like to see devoted to public spending? If there were no such uncertainty, the voter should
just impose a limit equal to his preferred fraction and that would be the end of the analysis. In
particular, there would be no role for overrides. The ubiquity of override provisions suggests that in
the real world there must be uncertainty. Moreover, such uncertainty seems intuitively plausible.
The type of uncertainty will depend on the nature of the policy the politician is controlling. If the
policy is road maintenance (snow plowing, pothole repair, etc), then uncertainty would be created
by weather, the prices of inputs like road salt, tarmac, etc. If the policy is police protection then
uncertainty would be created by the underlying forces generating crime. If the policy is school
spending then uncertainty would be created by the prices of school supplies, mandates from higher
levels of government, and state and federal financial support.
A further question is why does the model assume that the voter knows the level of community
income? If voters are uncertain about the fraction of community income they would like to see
devoted to public spending, it also seems likely they will be uncertain of the level of community
income. This is certainly a reasonable point. Fortunately, as we will show below, given the
assumed form of preferences and the fact that the limit is expressed in the form of a maximal
fraction of community income, uncertainty in the community income level can be introduced
without changing the results. Thus, the assumption that the voter knows the level of community
income is without loss of generality.
A final question is why the voter cannot simply implement his preferred spending level once
uncertainty is resolved? This reflects the assumption that the politician has the property right
to choose the spending proposal and citizens only have the right to veto it if it exceeds the limit.
The model makes this assumption because it seems an accurate description of reality but does
not explain why this arrangement exists. One could certainly imagine alternative arrangements
18 In the literature on the delegation problem, it is typical to assume a single level of bias (i.e., a one point
distribution).

10

whereby voters could propose alternatives to the politician’s proposal. Intuitively, the underlying
reasons why we do not observe such arrangements would seem to include i) that only the politician
is likely to have the knowledge and expertise to implement a spending plan and ii) that, if citizens
could also propose alternatives, it is not clear how to choose between all the alternatives that
might be proposed.

3.3

The static limit design problem

We are now ready to consider the problem of choosing a spending limit to maximize the voter’s
expected welfare. To pose the limit design problem formally, we must understand the policy
implications of any given limit . Let the voter’s preferred fraction be . There are two possibilities:
either the politician is biased or he is unbiased.
Suppose that the politician is biased. Working backwards, consider what policy the politician
would choose if he had to satisfy the limit. He will choose a spending level equal to the maximal
permitted level  if this is smaller than his optimal level (1 + ). Otherwise, he will choose
his optimal level. Thus his policy choice will be min{ (1 + )}. The voter will recognize
that if he votes down any alternative policy proposed by the biased politician, the spending level
implemented will be min{ (1 + )}. If the voter’s preferred fraction  is less than  he will
prefer this policy to any higher spending level and there is no point in the politician proposing to
violate the limit. In this case, therefore, the implemented spending level will be min{ (1+)}.
If  exceeds , the voter will support spending in excess of the limit. The optimal policy proposal
for the biased politician solves the problem
max − | − (1 + )|

(1)

 − | − | ≥ − | − | 
The constraint guarantees that the voter supports the proposal since the politician will choose
spending level  if his proposal is rejected. From the constraint, the maximum spending level the
voter will support is (2 − ) . The politician will propose this if it is smaller than his preferred
level (1 + ). Otherwise, he will choose his preferred level. In summary, therefore, with a biased
politician, the policy implemented under limit  will be min{ (1 + )} if the voter’s preferred
fraction  is less than  and min{(2 − )  (1 + )} otherwise.
If the politician is unbiased, he will choose the spending level  if the voter’s preferred fraction

11

 is less than . Otherwise, he will propose the spending level  and the voter will approve his
proposal.
Putting all this together, it follows that with limit , the voter’s expected welfare will be given
by
−

ÃZ





[min{ (1 + )} − ] () +

Z



!



[min{2 −  (1 + )} − ] () 

(2)

The limit design problem is to choose a spending limit from the interval [ ] to maximize this
function. Since the constraint set is compact and the objective function continuous, the problem
has a solution.
There are several observations to make about this problem. First, by inspection, the optimal
limit is independent of the probability that the politician is biased .19

This reflects the fact

that an unbiased politician always chooses the voter’s preferred spending level. If the limit is
below the voter’s preferred fraction, the politician just gets the voter’s support to override it.
Nonetheless, as we will explain below, the possibility of the politician being unbiased plays a key
role in rationalizing the override provision.
Second, the optimal limit is independent of the level of community income . This means that
ex ante uncertainty concerning community income can be incorporated into the model with no
change in the analysis. This independence reflects two considerations. One is that the limit is
expressed as a maximum fraction of community income. This means that the implied maximum
spending level automatically adjusts with the community’s income level.20 The other is that the
voter’s preferred fraction is assumed to be independent of the community’s income level. This
means that the voter does not wish to change the proportion of community income spent on public
goods and services when this income changes.
Third, removing the multiplicative term  and rearranging, the limit design problem can be
restated as choosing a limit to maximize:

 () =

Z




}
max{ 1+

[(1 + ) − ] ()+

Z


min+ { 1−
}



[ − (1 − )] ()−

Z



() (3)



19 It is worth contrasting this result with that of Brooks, Halberstam, and Phillips (2013). As noted in the
introduction, they show that the optimal limit is more permissive the higher the probability the elected politician
is a low spending type. A low type politician, in our terms, would be unbiased. Their result diﬀers from ours
because they assume the limit cannot be overriden.
20

Indeed, this feature may explain the popularity of such limits in practice.

12

where min+ { (1 − )} denotes the smallest positive number of the two.21

The third term in

this expression measures the voter’s loss of welfare if there was no limit and the biased politician
were to just choose his preferred fraction (1 + ). The first two terms represent the surplus the
voter can claw back through the limit. The limit design problem is then to find the limit  that
maximizes these first two terms.

3.4

The optimal limit with large politician bias

When the biased politician’s bias is large, the limit design problem is straightforward to solve. In
particular, suppose that it were the case that  exceeded ( − ) . Then  (1 + ) would be less
than  for any limit  in the range [ ]. Moreover, if it were positive, (1 − ) would exceed 
for any limit  in the range [ ]. Accordingly, from (3), the objective function  () would be
 () =

Z





[(1 + ) − ] () +

Z




[ − (1 − )] () −

Z



()

(4)



Diﬀerentiating this expression, we obtain
 0 () = 1 − 2()

(5)

Recall that  is assumed to have a density that is symmetric around the mean and hence ( )
is equal to 12. Thus, the voter’s welfare is increasing in the limit as long as it is less than 
and decreasing thereafter. The optimal limit is therefore equal to  - the expected fraction of
community income the voter would like to see devoted to public spending.
The intution here is equally transparent. When the biased politician’s bias exceeds ( − ) ,
then, whatever the limit, he will always choose a spending level equal to the maximum allowable
level under the limit () when the voter’s preferred fraction is less than the limit (  ). Moreover,
when the voter’s preferred fraction exceeds the limit (  ), the biased politician will choose a
spending level that provides the voter with exactly the same payoﬀ as he would get from the
maximum allowable level under the limit (). As a result, the voter’s payoﬀ is exactly that which
would arise if the policy were just set equal to the maximum level permitted by the limit ().
The optimal limit is therefore the fraction which, if committed to ex ante, would yield the voter
the highest expected payoﬀ. This is the expected preferred fraction  .
21 If  exceeds 1, (1 − ) will be negative and hence min{ (1 − )} equals (1 − ) while min { (1 − )}
+
equals .

13

In fact, we can weaken the requirement on bias and still keep the conclusion that the limit
should equal the expected preferred fraction. As the following proposition shows, it is suﬃcient
that the degree of bias  exceeds ( −  ) .
Proposition 1 In the static model, if the biased politician’s bias  exceeds ( −  ) , the optimal
limit is  
With a level of bias between ( −  )  and ( − ) , it remains the case that the voter’s
payoﬀ from limit  with a biased politician is exactly that which would arise if the spending
level were just set equal to   ex ante. However, for a limit  in excess of  , it could be the
case that the politician would choose his preferred policy (1 + ) rather than  for suﬃciently
small .22

If so, the payoﬀ from such a limit would strictly exceed that associated with just

choosing spending level  ex ante. Similarly, for a limit  less than  , it could be the case that
the politician would choose (1 + ) rather than (2 − )  for suﬃciently large . It therefore
becomes less obvious that the optimal limit is  because the payoﬀ from alternative limits may
have improved. However, the proof of the Proposition shows that, under the conditions on the
density function ,  remains optimal.
A graphical interpretation of the result is provided in Figure 1. In each panel, the range of
values for the voter’s preferred fraction  is measured on the horizontal axis. The three upward
sloping lines are (1 + ), , and (1 − ) respectively. The parameters are chosen so that  is
exactly equal to ( −  ) . In Panel , the shaded area represents the surplus that the voter
would lose if the biased politician were to choose his preferred fraction (1 + ). This area is the
third term in (3). In Panel , the shaded area represents the surplus generated for the voter by the
limit  , which corresponds to the first two terms of (3). Panel  illustrates the surplus generated
for the voter by a limit  larger than  . Notice that with this limit, the biased politician chooses
his preferred fraction (1+) when  is suﬃciently low. The diﬀerence in surplus from limit  as
opposed to limit  is illustrated in Panel . In the proof of Proposition 1, this diﬀerence is shown
R
to equal the diﬀerence between twice the striped area (  [ − ] ()) less the shaded area
R 
( 1+ [ − (1 + )] ()). The assumptions on the distribution function  and bias parameter
 imply that this diﬀerence is positive.
22

This requires that (1 + ) is less than .

14

Figure 1: Graphical Interpretation of Proposition 1

3.5

The optimal limit with small politician bias

We now turn to the more challenging case in which  is smaller than ( −  ) . We first prove
that, under our assumptions on the distribution function , the optimal limit is never smaller
than  .
Lemma 1 In the static model, the optimal limit is always at least as big as  .
We now characterize the solution when the biased politician’s bias is smaller than ( −  ) 
but larger than ( −  ) . In this range of bias levels, with a limit equal to  , the politician
will choose his preferred spending level (1 + ) when  is suﬃciently low but will always choose
the spending level (2 −  )  when  exceeds  .

15

Proposition 2 In the static model, if the biased politician’s bias  lies between ( −  )  and
( −  ) , the optimal limit solves the equation
1+

µ

¶


1+

= 2()

(6)

It is straightforward to show that there must exist a solution to equation (6) on the interval
(  ].23 While there is no guarantee that this solution is unique, it is diﬃcult to come up with
examples satisfying our assumptions in which there are multiple solutions. Figure 2 illustrates
a situation in which there exists a unique solution. The Figure depicts the curves 2() and
1 +  ((1 + )) on the interval [  ]. The curve 2() must be concave since, under our
assumptions,  is concave on [  ]. The curve 1 +  ((1 + )) is convex on the interval
[  (1 + ) ] and concave thereafter. This follows from the fact that  is convex on [  ].
As illustrated, the end points and shapes of the two curves guarantee they intersect, with 2()
intersecting 1 +  ((1 + )) from below.24
In the case covered by Proposition 2, the optimal limit becomes more stringent as the biased
politician’s bias increases. An increase in  shifts down the curve 1 +  ((1 + )). If there is a
single intersection point, it must shift to the left, implying a lower optimal limit.25
Finally, we tackle the case in which the biased politician’s bias is smaller than ( −  ) . In
this range of bias levels, with a limit equal to  , the politician will not only choose his preferred
spending level (1 + ) when  is suﬃciently low but will also do so when  is suﬃciently high.
Proposition 3 In the static model, if the biased politician’s bias  is smaller than ( −  ) ,
the optimal limit is either bigger than (1 − ) and solves equation (6) or is smaller than (1 − )
and solves the equation


µ


1−

¶

+

µ


1+

¶

= 2()

(7)

As noted above, there must exist a solution to equation (6) on the interval (  ]. We show
in the proof of Proposition 3, that if this solution is smaller than (1 − ), then there must be
23

This is shown in the proof of Proposition 2.

24

If there is more than one solution to equation (6), the end points and shapes of the two curves imply that there
must be three. The optimal limit is either the smallest or the largest intersection point, where 2() intersects
1 +  ((1 + )) from below.
25 If there are multiple intersection points, both the smallest and largest shift down. The only way that an
increase in  could increase the optimal limit, therefore, is if it caused a shift from the smallest intersection point
to the largest. But it is easy to see that an increase in  makes a move from the smallest intersection point to the
largest less attractive.

16

Figure 2: Illustration of Proposition 2
a solution to equation (7) which is also smaller than (1 − ). Again, there is no guarantee
that there exists a unique solution, but multiple solutions do not arise in examples. Figure 3
graphs the three curves 2(), 1 +  ((1 + )) and ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )). The curve
((1 − )) +  ((1 + )) coincides with 1 +  ((1 + )) at limits higher than (1 − ) and lies
below it for lower limits. Over this range, it has a steeper slope. The Figure illustrates a situation
in which the solution to equation (6) is smaller than (1 − ). The optimal limit is therefore found
where the curves 2() and ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )) intersect.
It is important to note that in the case in which the optimal limit is found where the curves
2() and ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )) intersect, it is not necessarily the case that increasing the
biased politician’s bias will make the optimal limit more stringent. This is because an increase in
 has ambiguous eﬀects on the curve ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )). While an increase in  reduces
 ((1 + )) for all , it increases ((1 − )). The net eﬀect is ambiguous.26
26


The derivative of the function implicitly defined by the equation ( 1−
)+

17




1+



The next sub-

= 2() is given by

section provides examples which illustrate that the stringency of the optimal limit can be both
decreasing and increasing in bias.

Figure 3: Illustration of Proposition 3

3.6

Examples

We now provide three examples of specific distributions  satisfying our assumptions and use
these to explore how the optimal limit depends on the biased politician’s bias and the extent of
uncertainty in the voter’s preferred spending level.
Uniform distribution Suppose that the distribution of the voter’s preferred fraction of community income to devote to public spending is uniform; i.e., () equals ( − )  ( − ). Then,






( 1−
) (1−)
2 −

1+ (1+)2


=


 )

 1+
( 1−
2() − 1−
− 1+
Assuming that 2() intersects ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )) from below, the denominator in this expression will be
positive. However, the sign of the numerator is ambiguous.

18

when the politician’s bias  is less than ( − ) , the optimal limit is
¶
µ
1+

() = 
1 + 2

(8)

To see this, note first that equation (7) has no solution in the uniform case. It therefore follows
from Proposition 2 and 3 that the optimal limit must satisfy equation (6). Solving this equation
yields (8).
Equation (8) implies that as  approaches 0, the limit converges to  and so the politician is
completely unconstrained. At first glance, this seems natural, because the politician is becoming a
perfect agent for the voter and there is little gain from constraining him. However, the possibility
of overrides mean that the limit is irrelevant when the politician is a perfect agent of the voter
and therefore it is not clear to what point the limit will converge. Note also from (8) that the
limit gets progressively tighter as we increase , until the point at which  equals ( − )  and
the limit equals the expected preferred fraction  . Further increases in bias have no impact on
the limit beyond this point. Figure 4 illustrates the optimal limit as a function of  for the case
in which ( ) equals (01 03). The solution is the curve that takes on the value of 03 when  is
equal to 0 and equals 02 for  greater than 01.
To understand the impact of changing the distribution of preferred spending levels, it is instructive to consider a parameterization in which ( ) equals ( −   + ). As we increase ,
we hold constant the voter’s expected preferred fraction but increase the dispersion. We therefore
implement a mean preserving spread. Proposition 1 and (8) tell us that the optimal limit is
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨ (+)(1+) if  ∈ [0 2 ]
1+2
2(−)
() =

(9)
⎪
⎪
2
⎩
 if   2(−)

These limits are illustrated in Figure 4 for  equal to 02 and various values of . The main point
to take away is that with a mean preserving spread, the limit becomes more permissive when the
bias of the politician is not too large.
Tent distribution Suppose that the distribution of the voter’s preferred fraction is a tent
distribution; i.e.,
() =

⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩

(−)2
2( −)2
1
2

+

if  ∈ [  ]

(− )[2−(+ )]
2( −)2

19

if  ∈ [  ]



(10)

Figure 4: Optimal Limits for the Uniform Distribution
The density associated with this distribution rises linearly from 0 to 1 ( − ) over the interval
[  ] and comes back down the other side. Despite its simplicity, this case turns out to be very
complicated. Thus, to simplify and permit comparison with the uniform case, we set ( ) equal
to (01 03).
In this case, for levels of bias less than 003 the optimal limit occurs where the curves
 ((1 − )) +  ((1 + )) and 2() intersect. For higher levels of bias, the optimal limit
occurs where the curves 1 +  ((1 + )) and 2() intersect. Solving the appropriate quadratic
equations reveals that the optimal limit is

⎧


2
6
2
6
1
1
⎪
12+ 1+
− 1−
− (12+ 1+
− 1−
)2 −32 2+ (1+)
2 − (1−)2
⎪
⎪


⎨
if  ∈ (0 003)
1
1
2 2+ (1+)
2 − (1−)2
() =

2
48
64
⎪
8+ 1+
− (1+)
⎪
2
1+ +12−
⎪
⎩
if  ∈ (003 01)

(11)

2
4+ (1+)
2

This optimal limit is graphed in Figure 5. It is the higher of the two curves that take on the
value 02 when  is equal to 0. It is instructive to compare this with the optimal limit in the
20

uniform case when ( ) equals (01 03) (i.e., the curve in Figure 4 that takes on the value of 03
when  is equal to 0). What is striking is that the optimal limit is much more stringent with the
tent distribution. Moreover, the optimal limit does not become more permissive as the politician
becomes less biased. Indeed, to the contrary, it becomes more stringent over some part of the
range! Analytically, this reflects the fact that the equation determining the optimal limit switches
from (6) to (7) as the politician becomes less biased.
What happens when we do a mean preserving spread in the voter’s preferred fraction? Figure
5 illustrates the optimal limits for the cases in which ( ) equals (02 −  02 + ) for various
values of . Note first that the lesson from the uniform case remains: a mean preserving spread
results in the optimal limit becoming more permissive when the bias of the politician is not too
large. Second, note that as we spread out the distribution, the non-monotonicity exhibited in the
case ( ) equals (01 03) disappears. This makes sense intuitively because as we flatten out the
tent distribution, it approaches a uniform distribution.

Figure 5: Optimal Limits for the Tent Distribution

21

Symmetric Beta distribution Suppose that [ ] equals [0 02] and that the distribution of
the preferred fraction is a symmetric Beta distribution
R  −1
 (02 − )−1 
0
(; ) = R 02

−1 (02 − )−1 
0

(12)

for  greater than or equal to 1. Recall that when  equals 1 this distribution is just the uniform
distribution and when  equals 2 it is the parabolic distribution. As we continue to increase ,
probability mass becomes more and more concentrated around the mean 01.
Figure 6 graphs the optimal limit as a function of  for various values of .27

There are two

points to note. First, for given , the optimal limit is decreasing and approaches the expected
preferred spending level  which equals 01. It does not quite reach the mean because  equals
0 and so Proposition 1 never applies. Thus, we do not get the non-monotonicity displayed in the
case of the tent distribution. Second, for given , as  becomes higher, the optimal limit becomes
smaller. Thus, less discretion is provided to the politician as uncertainty is reduced. This is
consistent with the findings from the two previous examples, because a move from a symmetric
Beta distribution with a higher to a lower  amounts to implementing a mean preserving spread.
Discussion There are two main points to take away from these examples. First, as we increase
the uncertainty in the voter’s preferred fraction, the optimal limit becomes more permissive at
least for bias levels that are not too large. Related comparative static findings have been shown in
a number of papers in the literature on the delegation problem. Indeed, Huber and Shipan (2006)
refer to the idea that the optimal permissible set of actions for the agent is increased when the
principal faces more uncertainty as the Uncertainty Principle. It is interesting that this principle
continues to hold even though the agent can opt out of the permissible set of actions with the
principal’s approval. Second, as we reduce the biased politician’s bias it is not necessarily the case
that the optimal limit becomes more permissive. This contrasts with findings in the literature
on the delegation problem which show that the optimal permissible set of actions for the agent
is increased when bias is reduced (the so-called Ally Principle). The key to understanding this
diﬀerence is that in our model, because of the override, the limit is irrelevant when the politician
is unbiased. Thus, it is not obvious to what point the optimal limit will converge when the biased
politician’s bias becomes small.
27

A closed form solution is not available for this case, so the optimal limit is obtained numerically.

22

Figure 6: Optimal Limits for the Beta Distribution

3.7

The role of the override provision

From the outset, we have assumed that the limit can be overriden with voter approval. This is
because such override provisions are standard in practice. However, it is worth briefly discussing
how the voter actually benefits from the override provision.
When the politician is biased, the potential for benefit arises in the situation where the voter’s
preferred fraction  exceeds the optimal limit  and the maximum spending level the voter will
support, (2 − ) , exceeds the politician’s preferred spending level (1 + ). If 2 −  is smaller
than (1 + ), then the politician will propose spending level (2 − )  which, by construction,
provides the voter with exactly the same utility level as if the spending level were set equal to
the maximum allowed under the limit . Notice that in order for it to be possible for 2 −  to
be larger than (1 + ), it is necessary that 2 −  is larger than (1 + ) which requires that
the optimal limit  is less than (1 − ). From Propositions 1-3, this requires that  be less than
( −  )  and that the optimal limit satisfies (7). Thus, for a broad range of bias parameters,
23

the voter obtains no benefit from the override provision when the politician is biased. All the
surplus it creates goes to the politician. Moreover, in examples such as the uniform distribution
analyzed above, the override provision provides no benefit to voters for all bias parameters when
the politician is biased.
By contrast, when the politician is unbiased, the override provision is always beneficial for the
voter. With an override, the unbiased politician always chooses the voter’s preferred spending level
. Without an override, the unbiased politician would have no option but to choose spending
level  when the voter’s preferred fraction  exceeds . The main point to take away, therefore, is
that it is the presence of unbiased politicians that, in this model, guarantee that there is a benefit
to the voter from having an override provision.28

4

Dynamic analysis

We now extend the analysis to a dynamic setting. The dynamic problem is harder to analyze and
a complete characterization of optimal limits in this setting is beyond the scope of this paper.
Rather our goal is to make a specific point about the desirability of schemes that limit the rate of
growth of spending as opposed to those which cap spending below a fixed fraction of community
income. To make this point as simply as possible, we consider a two period extension of our model.

4.1

The dynamic model

There are 2 periods indexed by  ∈ {1 2}. The level of spending and community income in period
 are denoted  and  . The voter’s preferred spending level in period  is   . In each period ,
the voter has distance preferences − | −   |. The voter discounts future payoﬀs at rate .
The voter’s preferred fraction of community income to devote to public spending in period 
 is assumed to evolve according to the stochastic process
 = −1 +  

(13)

where  is a shock uniformly distributed on the interval [− ]. At the beginning of period 1,
the prior period’s preferred fraction 0 is known, and, to guarantee that  is always between 0
and 1, is assumed to belong to the interval (2 1 − 2). Specification (13) implies that shocks are
28

More generally, in a model with a continuous distribution of politician biases, the benefit from the override
provision to the voter seems likely to come primarily from those politician types with lower bias.

24

persistent in the sense that a positive shock in period 1 (i.e., 1  0) not only increases the voter’s
preferred fraction in period 1 but also increases it in period 2. This persistence creates a dynamic
linkage across periods.
A diﬀerent politician chooses policy in each period. With probability  the period  politician
is biased and has policy preferences − | − (1 + )   | and with probability 1 −  he is unbiased
and shares the voter’s preferences. In either case, the period  politician cares only about the
period  policy choice and so behaves in a myopic manner. To focus the analysis on the main
point we want to make, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 1 The bias parameter  exceeds 2 (0 − 2).
To relate this assumption to our analysis of the static model, note that it guarantees that, in each
period ,  exceeds (  −   )   . This is because specification (13) implies that   −   is equal
to 2 and that  2 is equal to 0 − 2.
At the beginning of period 1, knowing 0 , the voter selects limits for the two periods. The
limit in period ,  , specifies the maximal fraction of the community’s income that can be devoted
to public spending in period . Within periods, the timing of events is as in the static model.
Each period  begins with the current limit  and the previous period’s preferred fraction −1 .
Nature determines the period  preferred fraction  by choosing the preference shock  according
to equation (13). Then, the politician proposes a spending level  . If this proposed policy does
not violate the limit, it is implemented. If it exceeds the limit, an election is held. If the voter
votes for the proposal, it is implemented. If he votes against, the politician chooses another policy
0 which respects the limit and this policy is implemented.

4.2

The dynamic limit design problem

Consider the problem of choosing a pair of limits {1  2 } to maximize the voter’s welfare. To pose
the problem formally, the initial step is to understand what happens for any given limit sequence
{1  2 }.
Consider first what happens in period 2. From our analysis of the static model, if the period
2 politician is biased, the spending level implemented will be min{2 2  (1 + )2 2 } if the voter’s
preferred fraction 2 is less than the limit 2 and min{(22 − 2 ) 2  (1 + )2 2 } otherwise. If the
period 2 politician is unbiased, the period 2 policy will just equal 2 2 . Given (13), the voter’s

25

expected period 2 welfare conditional on the voter’s period 1 preferred fraction 1 will be given
by 2  ( 2 | 1 ) where:
⎧
R
⎪
⎪
⎪
(min{2 (1 + ) − 2  (1 + ) (1 + )} − (1 + )) 
⎪
2 if 2  1 − 
−
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R 2 −1
⎪
⎪
⎨
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + )} − (1 + )) 
2
−
if 2 ∈ [1 −  1 + ]
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
R
⎪

⎪

⎪
+
(min{2
(
+
)
−


(1
+
)
(
+
)}
−
(
+
))
⎪
1
2
1
1
2
2 −1
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R
⎪

⎪
⎩
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + )} − (1 + )) 
2 if 2  1 + 
−
(14)

This expression is more complicated than that for the static case (i.e., expression (2)) because
there is no guarantee that the second period limit 2 belongs to the range of possible values for

2 (which is [1 −  1 + ]). This reflects the fact that 2 is chosen before the realization of the
voter’s period 1 preferred fraction 1 . A particularly high realization of 1 may result in the limit
being smaller than 1 − . This case is represented by the first part of the expression in (14).
Similarly, a particularly low realization may result in the limit being higher than 1 + , a case
represented by the third component of (14).
Now consider what happens in period 1. Suppose first the period 1 politician is biased. The
period 1 policy choice has no implications for what happens in period 2 and so the politician
behaves as in the static model. Thus, the policy implemented will be min{1 1  (1 + )1 1 }
if the voter’s preferred fraction 1 is less than the limit 1 and min{(21 − 1 ) 1  (1 + )1 1 }
otherwise. If the period 1 politician is unbiased, the period 1 policy will just equal 1 1 . The
voter’s expected period 1 welfare conditional on 0 will therefore be given by 1  ( 1 | 0 ), where
the function  ( | ) is as defined in (14). Note however that because 0 is known at the time the
limits are set at the beginning of period 1 we may assume that 1 belongs to the range of possible
values for the voter’s period 1 preferred fraction 1 (which is [0 −  0 + ]).
The dynamic limit design problem is to choose a sequence of limits {1  2 } to solve
"
#
Z 
1
max  1  ( 1 | 0 ) + 2
 ( 2 | (0 + 1 ))

2
{1 2 }
−

(15)

The following proposition tells us that for bias levels satisfying Assumption 1, the optimal policy
is to set both periods’ limits equal to the voter’s expected preferred fraction conditional on the
information available at the beginning of period 1 (i.e., 0 ).
Proposition 4 In the dynamic model, under Assumption 1, the optimal sequence of limits is
26



{0  0 }.
Proposition 4 is the natural dynamic generalization of Proposition 1. As noted in the introduction, schemes that cap spending to be lower than some constant fraction of community income
are used in practice. This proposition tells us what this fraction should be - it is the optimal
fraction of income that should be devoted to public spending in the period prior to the system
being introduced.

4.3

Spending-contingent limits

The above analysis assumes that the period 2 limit must be set in stone at the beginning of time
1. This creates a welfare loss in period 2 relative to the static model because the period 2 limit
does not reflect the voter’s period 1 preference shock. Implicit in the analysis is the assumption
that the period 2 limit cannot be made conditional on the voter’s period 1 preferred fraction 1 .
The motivation for this assumption is that this preferred fraction reflects the voter’s preference
shock 1 and this depends on too many factors to be coded into a limit formula. Nonetheless, it
is perfectly possible to make the period 2 limit depend upon the actual period 1 spending level
1 . Our next proposition shows that making the period 2 limit contingent on the fraction of
community income devoted to public spending in period 1 results in a welfare improvement for
the voter.
Proposition 5 In the dynamic model, under Assumption 1, the sequence of spending-contingent
limits {0  1 1 } yields the voter a higher level of expected welfare than the optimal non spendingcontingent sequence {0  0 }.
The policy described in Proposition 5 requires that spending in the initial period not exceed
a fraction 0 of the community’s income and that, thereafter, spending not exceed the fraction
of community income that it was in the prior period. The latter requirement amounts to the
restriction that the growth rate of spending, defined as ( − −1 )−1 , should not exceed the
growth rate of community income which is  = ( − −1 )−1 .29 As noted in the introduction,
spending limits that limit the growth rate of spending to a rate tied to the growth of community
income, population, etc, are common in practice. The dynamic analysis therefore tells us that this
29 To see this, note that the policy requires that in period 2   is less than   . By definition,  = (1+ )
2 2
1 1
2
2 1
and hence the policy requires that (2 − 1 )1 is less than 2 .

27

class of spending limits is superior to the class that cap spending at some fixed fraction of community income. This said, it is important to stress that even with a policy that limits the growth
of spending, a cap must be applied in the initial period to move spending to a lower trajectory.
Assuming, as seems reasonable, that spending in the period before limits are introduced exceeds
the voter’s preferred level (i.e., 0 0 exceeds 0 ), a growth based restriction on spending in the
initial period will be insuﬃciently stringent.
To understand Proposition 5 intuitively, recall that the problem with the cap policy of Proposition 4 is that the period 2 limit is not sensitive to the voter’s preference shock in period 1. It
may then diverge markedly from the optimal period 2 limit which, by Proposition 1, is 1 . By
contrast, under the policy that limits growth, the period 2 limit will be exactly 1 if the period 1
politician is unbiased. This is because such a politician will choose the voter’s preferred spending
level 1 1 . The voter is therefore strictly better oﬀ under the growth limiting policy if the period 1
politician is unbiased. Less obviously, the voter must be at least as well oﬀ with the growth policy
if the period 1 politician is biased. Such a politician will either choose a spending level equal to the
limit 0 1 or he will choose some larger spending level. In the former case, the period 2 limit will
be 0 as in the cap case and there is no diﬀerence between the two regimes. In the latter case, it is
unclear what the period 2 limit will be. However, given that the voter has chosen to approve the
period 1 spending level, his two period expected payoﬀ must be at least as large as that resulting
if the period 1 politician just selected 0 1 and the period 2 limit were 0 . Moreover, under the
cap policy, this is precisely the payoﬀ he would obtain in equilibrium.

5

Conclusion

This paper has presented a simple political economy model in which to study the optimal design
of fiscal limits. Reflecting common practice, the focus has been on limits that cap the maximal
fraction of community income that can be devoted to public spending and which can be overriden
with voters’ approval. The analysis of the static version of this model sheds light on how the
optimal limit depends on the level of bias towards spending in the political system and the nature
of uncertainty concerning voters’ spending preferences. When the level of bias is high, the optimal
limit just equals the fraction of community income the representative voter expects to want to
devote to public spending. For smaller levels of bias, more permissive limits are optimal. However,
it is not necessarily the case that limits become increasingly more permissive as the level of bias
28

falls. This will depend on the distribution of preferred spending levels. Our examples suggest
that, for low bias levels, more uncertainty in the voter’s preferred spending level results in a more
permissive optimal limit.
The analysis of the dynamic version of the model sheds light on how limits should evolve over
time. The dynamic model assumes that the fraction of community income the representative
voter would like to see devoted to public spending evolves according to a stochastic process with
persistent shocks. In this setting, systems that limit the growth of spending dominate those that
just cap spending below some constant fraction of community income. Given that both systems
are employed in practice, this is an interesting finding.
While this paper has hopefully made a significant contribution in highlighting the optimal
fiscal limit problem and providing some understanding of the nature of the solution, there is scope
for considerably more work on this practically important and theoretically interesting problem.
Extensions of the static model readily suggest themselves. It would be interesting to go beyond
the simple preferences assumed here by, for example, introducing convexity into the voter’s loss
function. We could then understand how greater convexity influences the permissiveness of the
limit. Relaxing the assumptions on the distribution of preferred spending levels may also prove
instructive. Richer uncertainty in the degree of politician bias could also be introduced. Finally,
recognizing that it is costly to hold an override election might yield interesting results.
Everything that could be done to the static model could of course be done to the dynamic
model. In addition, extensions that generalize the dynamic structure such as adding more periods
or changing how preferences evolve over time readily suggest themselves. However, prior to such
extensions, it would be useful to have a full characterization of optimal limits in the simple
dynamic model of Section 4.1. This would include extending the analysis to cover smaller bias
levels (i.e., relaxing Assumption 1) and understanding precisely how limits should be tied to
spending outcomes in past periods. That is, while Proposition 5 tells us that spending-contingent
limits are optimal, is the best form of spending-contingent limit that described in Proposition 5
or are there better options?
Beyond these conceptually straightforward extensions, considering optimal limits in a legislative setting would be interesting. In such a setting, spending is determined by the collective
decisions of legislators rather than the decision of a single politician. Consistent with practice,
it would be natural to consider override provisions which allow the limit to be overriden by a
29

super-majority of legislators rather than by direct appeal to the voters. Continually undertaking
spending referenda is likely to prove administratively costly and it may be that the same function
can be achieved by appropriate choice of super-majority override.
Of course, even if all these extensions were undertaken, the analysis would only provide insight
into what limits should depend on in principle. Moving in the direction of being able to say what
limits should be in concrete situations would require eﬀort in two directions. First, developing
models like the ones presented here into credible models for thinking about limits empirically.
This requires developing models whose testable implications are consistent with the data. Such
implications would concern the dynamic path of spending and the use of overrides. Second, with
such models in hand, trying to measure the key determinants of the optimal limit. For example,
how could we measure the extent of politicians’ bias and the nature of uncertainty in voters’
preferred spending levels?

30

References
Alonso, Ricardo and Niko Matouschek, 2008, “Optimal Delegation,” Review of Economic
Studies, 75(1), 259-293.
Amador, Manuel and Kyle Bagwell, 2013, “The Theory of Optimal Delegation with an
Application to Tariﬀ Caps,” Econometrica, 81(4), 1541-1599.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, 2001, “Lobbying and Welfare in a Representative
Democracy,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(1), 67-82.
Besley, Timothy and Michael Smart, 2007, “Fiscal Restraints and Voter Welfare,” Journal
of Public Economics, 91(3-4), 755-773.
Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripont, 2004, Contract Theory, MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Bradbury, Katherine, Mayer, Christopher and Karl Case, 2001, “Property Tax Limits, Local
Fiscal Behavior, and Property Values: Evidence from Massachusetts under Proposition 2
1/2,” Journal of Public Economics, 80, 287-311.
Brennan, Geoﬀrey and James Buchanan, 1979, “The Logic of Tax Limits: Alternative Constitutional Constraints on the Power to Tax,” National Tax Journal, 32(2), 11-22.
Brennan, Geoﬀrey and James Buchanan, 1980, The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations
of a Fiscal Constitution, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK.
Brooks, Leah, Halberstam, Yosh and Justin Phillips, 2013, “Spending within Limits: Evidence from Municipal Fiscal Restraints,” University of Toronto Working Paper.
Calabrese, Stephen and Dennis Epple, 2011, “On the Political Economy of Tax Limits,”
Carnegie Mellon University Working Paper.
Citrin, Jack, 1979, “Do People Want Something for Nothing: Public Opinion on Taxes and
Spending,” National Tax Journal, 32(2), 113-129.
Coate, Stephen and Brian Knight, 2011, “Government Form and Public Spending: Theory
and Evidence from U.S. Muncipalities,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
3(3), 82-112.
Courant, Paul, Gramlich, Edward and Daniel Rubinfeld, 1985, “Why Voters Support Tax
Limitations: the Michigan Case,” National Tax Journal, 38(1), 1-20.
Cutler, David, Elmendorf, Douglas and Richard Zeckhauser, 1999, “Restraining the
Leviathan: Property Tax Limitation in Massachusetts,” Journal of Public Economics, 71(3),
313-334.
Dye, Richard and Therese McGuire, 1997, “The Eﬀect of Property Tax Limitation Measures
on Local Government Fiscal Behavior,” Journal of Public Economics, 66(3), 469-487.
Epstein, David and Sharyn O’Halloran, 1994, “Administrative Procedures, Information, and
Agency Discretion,” American Journal of Political Science, 38(3), 697-722.
Figlio, David and Kim Rueben, 2001, “Tax Limits and Qualifications of New Teachers,”
Journal of Public Economics, 80(1), 49-71.
31

Gilligan, Thomas and Keith Krehbiel, 1987, “Collective Decision-Making and Standing Committees: An Informational Rationale for Restrictive Amendment Procedures,” Journal of
Law, Economics, and Organization, 3(2), 287-335.
Gilligan, Thomas and Keith Krehbiel, 1989, “Asymmetric Information and Legislative Rules
with a Heterogeneous Committee,” American Journal of Political Science, 33(2), 459—490.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, 1994, “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
Review, 84(4), 833-850.
Hamilton, Howard and Sylvan Cohen, 1974, Policy Making by Plebiscite: School Referenda,
Lexington Books: Lexington, MA.
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1977, “On Incentives and Control in Organizations,” Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford University.
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1984, “On the Theory of Delegation,” in Boyer, Marcel and Richard
Kihlstrom (eds), Bayesian Models in Economic Theory, North Holland: New York, NY.
Huber, John and Charles Shipan, 2006, “Politics, Delegation, and Bureaucracy,” in Weingast, Barry and Donald Wittman (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Political Economy, Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK.
Knight, Brian, 2000, “Supermajority Voting Requirements for Tax Increases: Evidence from
the States,” Journal of Public Economics, 78(1), 41-67.
Krishna, Vijay and John Morgan, 2001, “Asymmetric Information and Legislative Rules
with a Heterogeneous Committee,” American Journal of Political Science, 33(2), 459-460.
Krol, Robert, 2007, “The Role of Fiscal and Political Institutions in Limiting the Size of
State Government,” Cato Journal, 27(3), 431-445.
Ladd, Helen and Julie Wilson, 1982, “Why Voters Support Tax Limitations: Evidence from
Massachusetts’ Proposition 2 1/2,” National Tax Journal 35(2), 121-148.
Melumad, Nahum and Toshiyaki Shibano, 1991, “Communication in Settings with no Transfers,” Rand Journal of Economics, 22(2), 173-198.
Milyo, Jeﬀrey, 2000, “A Problem with Euclidean Preferences in Spatial Models of Politics,”
Economics Letters, 66, 179-182.
Mullins, Daniel, 2010, “Fiscal Limitations on Local Choice: the Imposition and Eﬀects of
Local Government Tax and Expenditure Limitations,” in Wallace, Sally (ed), State and
Local Fiscal Policy: Thinking Outside the Box?, Edward Elgar: Northampton, MA.
Mullins, Daniel and Bruce Wallin, 2004, “Tax and Expenditure Limitations: Introduction
and Overview,” Public Budgeting and Finance, 24, 1-43.
Mylovanov, Tymofiy, 2008, “Veto-based Delegation,” Journal of Economic Theory, 138,
297-307.
Poterba, James, 1994, “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Eﬀects of Budgetary Institutions and Politics,” Journal of Political Economy, 102(4), 799-821.

32

Poterba, James and Kim Rueben, 1995, “The Eﬀect of Property-Tax Limits on Wages and
Employment in the Local Public Sector,” American Economic Review, 85(2), 384-389.
Poterba, James and Kim Rueben, 2001, “Fiscal News, State Budget Rules, and Tax-Exempt
Bond Yields,” Journal of Urban Economics, 50(3), 537-562.
Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal, 1978, “Political Resource Allocation, Controlled
Agendas, and the Status Quo,” Public Choice, 33, 27-43.
Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal, 1979, “Bureacrats versus Voters: On the Political
Economy of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
93, 563-587.
Rose, Shanna, 2010, “Institutions and Fiscal Sustainability,” National Tax Journal, 63(4),
807-838.
Salanie, Bernard, 1997, The Economics of Contracts: A Primer, MIT Press: Cambridge,
MA.
Vigdor, Jacob, 2004, “Other People’s Taxes: Nonresident Voters and Statewide Limitation
of Local Government,” Journal of Law and Economics, 47(2), 453-476.
Waisanen, Bert, 2010, “State Tax and Expenditure Limits - 2010,” National Conference of
State Legislatures Research Paper.

33

6

Appendix

6.1

Proof of Proposition 1

We need to show that  ( ) exceeds  () for any limit  in the range [  ) or (  ]. Since
 exceeds ( −  ) ,  (1 + ) is less than  for any limit  in the range [  ] and, if  is less
than 1, (1 − ) exceeds  for any limit  in the range [  ]. Thus, from (3), we have that
Z 
Z 
Z 
[(1 + ) −  ] () +
[ − (1 − )] () −
()
(16)
 ( ) =






Recall from the analysis in the text, that we know already that for any  in the range [  ) or
(  ] we have that
Z 
Z
[(1 + ) − ] () +
 ( ) 






[ − (1 − )] () −

Z



()

(17)



Consider a limit  in the range [  ). If  exceeds 1 or if (1 − ) exceeds , then from (3),
 () is equal to the right hand side of (17) and thus the desired inequality holds. If (1 − ) is
less than , then from (3), we have that
Z 
Z
 () =
[(1 + ) − ] () +


1−

[ − (1 − )] () −





From (16) and (18), we have that
Z 
Z
[(1 + ) −  ] () +
 ( ) −  () =


−

Z



[(1 + ) − ] () −





Z

−

Z

[(1 + ) − ] () −



[ − (1 − )] ()

[(1 + ) −  ] () +



[ − (1 − )] () +


[ − (1 − )] ()




1−



()




1−



We can write this diﬀerence as
Z 
Z
[(1 + ) −  ] () +
 ( ) −  () =







Z

Z

Z

Z



1−

[ − (1 − )] ()


1−



[ − (1 − )] ()

which simplifies to
 ( ) −  () =

Z





Z

[ −  ] () +

1−



Z

[2 − ( + )] () +



[ − ] () +
34



Z



1−

[ − (1 − )] ()

(18)

This in turn can be rewritten as
Z

 ( ) −  () =




Z 

[ −  ] () +



Z

Z

[ − ] () +



[2 − ( + ) −  +  ] () +





1−

[ − (1 − ) −  + ] ()

which simplifies to
 ( ) −  () = 2

Z



[ − ] () −



Z



1−

[(1 − ) − ] ()

Thus, we need to show that
2

Z



[ − ] () 



Z



[(1 − ) − ] ()


1−

Because () is non-decreasing on [  ], we know that
¸ Z 
∙
Z 
Z 
 + 
−
2
[ − ] () ≥ 2
() = ( − )
()
2




Similarly, because () is non-increasing on [ 1−
 ], we know that

Z

"



1−

[(1 − ) − ] () ≤ (1 − )

Ã


 + 1−
2

!

−

#Z



() =

1−

µ

(1 − ) − 
2

¶Z



()

1−

Since  ≥ (1 − ), it therefore suﬃces to show that
Z




() ≥

Z



()

1−

Given the assumed properties of , a suﬃcient condition for this is that
 −  ≥  −



⇔
  −  
1−
1−

But we know that


( −  )
≥
≥
  −  
1−
1−
1−
Now consider a limit  in the range (  ]. If (1 + ) is less than , then from (3),  () is
equal to the right hand side of (17) and thus the desired inequality holds. If (1 + ) exceeds ,
then from (3), we have that
 () =

Z



1+

[(1 + ) − ] () +

Z




35

[ − (1 − )] () −

Z





()

(19)

Note that (1 + )   and thus using (16) and (19) we can write

Z 1+
Z 
 ( ) −  () =
[(1 + ) −  ] () +
[(1 + ) −  ] ()

1+



+
−

Z



[ − (1 − )] () +


Z 

1+

[(1 + ) − ] () −

Z

Z



[ − (1 − )] ()






[(1 + ) − ] () −

Z





[ − (1 − )] ()

This equals
 ( ) −  () =

Z


1+

[(1 + ) −  ] () +



+

Z





Z



1+

[ −  ] () +

Z




[ +  − 2] ()

[ − ] ()

which simplifies to
 ( ) −  () = 2

Z





[ − ] () −

Z


1+



[ − (1 + )] ()

This is the diﬀerence illustrated in Panel D of Figure 1. Thus, we need to show that

Z 1+
Z 
[ − ] () 
[ − (1 + )] ()
2




Because () is non-increasing on [  ], we know that
¸Z 
∙
Z 
Z 
 + 
− 
[ − ] () ≥ 2
() = [ −  ]
()
2
2




], we know that
Similarly, because () is non-decreasing on [ 1+
"
Ã
!#
¶Z 
µ


Z 1+
Z 1+

1+
+
 − (1 + )
[ − (1 + )] () ≤  − (1 + ) 1+
() =
()
2
2




We know that  ≤ (1 + ), so it suﬃces to show that

Z 
Z 1+
() ≥
()




Given the assumed properties of , a suﬃcient condition for this is that
 −  ≥



− ⇔
  − 
1+
1+

But we know that

( −  )

≥
≥
  − 
1+
1+
1+
¥
36

6.2

Proof of Lemma 1

Proposition 1 implies that the result is true for  larger than ( −  ) . Thus, we just need to
show that the result is true for  smaller than ( −  ) . Consider some limit    . We will
show that marginally increasing  will increase the voter’s payoﬀ.
Suppose first that  ≥ (1 − ). If  ≥ (1 + ), then, from (3), we have that
 () =

Z



[(1 + ) − ] () +


1+

Note that
 0 () = −

Z

Z



() +

1+

Z



[ − (1 − )] () −





() = 1 + (



Z



()




) − 2()  0
1+

which implies that raising the limit slightly will increase the voter’s payoﬀ. If   (1 + ), then,
from (3), we have that
 () =

Z





[(1 + ) − ] () +

Note that
0

 () = −

Z

Z



() +




[ − (1 − )] () −



Z

Z



()






() = 1 − 2()  0

which again implies that raising  marginally benefits the voter.
Now suppose that   (1 − ). If  ≥ (1 + ), then, from (3), we have that
 () =

Z



1+

[(1 + ) − ] () +

Note that
0

 () = −
Given that


1+

Z

Z


1−

[ − (1 − )] () −





() +

1+

Z

Z



()




1−

()



    and that
−





=

=
− 
1+
1+
1−
1−

the assumption that  is symmetric and non-decreasing on [  ] implies that
Z


1−

() 



Z



()

1+



 ] we can associate a unique  0 ∈ [ 1−
] (e.g.,  0 = 2 − )
To see this, note that for any  ∈ [ 1+

which has a higher density. Thus, it must be the case that  0 ()  0 which implies that raising
37

the limit slightly will increase the voter’s payoﬀ. If   (1 + ), then, from (3), we have that

Z 1−
Z 
Z 
[(1 + ) − ] () +
[ − (1 − )] () −
()
 () =




Note that
 0 () = −
Given that      and that

Z





() +

Z


1−

()









=

=
− 
1+
1+
1−
1−

− −

the assumption that  is symmetric and non-decreasing on [  ] implies that

Z 1−
Z 
() 
()





] (e.g.,  0 = 2 − )
Again, to see this note that for any  ∈ [ ] we can find a unique  0 ∈ [ 1−

which has a higher density. Thus,  0 ()  0 which again implies that raising  marginally benefits
the voter.

6.3

¥

Proof of Proposition 2

For limits  ∈ [  ], we have that (1 + ) is greater than or equal to  (1 + ) which, since
 is less than ( − ) , exceeds . In addition, if   1, we have that (1 − ) is greater than
or equal to  (1 − ) which, since  exceeds ( −  ) , exceeds . Thus, for limits  ∈ [  ],
(3) implies that
 () =

Z



1+

[(1 + ) − ] () +

Z



[ − (1 − )] () −



Z



()



This means that
 0 () = −

Z



() +

1+

Z



() = 1 + 



µ


1+

¶

− 2()

It follows that at the optimal limit
1+

µ

¶


1+

= 2()

which is (6). To see that this equation has a solution, note that
1 + (
and that
1+


)  1 = 2( )
1+

µ


1+

¶

 2() = 2

Thus, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists a solution to equation (6).
38

¥

6.4

Proof of Proposition 3

For limits  ∈ [  ], we have that (1 + ) is greater than or equal to  (1 + ) which, since 
is less than ( −  ) , exceeds . Moreover, since  (1 − ) is less than  which is less than
(1 − ), we have that


≷  as  ≷ (1 − ) 
1−

It follows from (3) that the voter’s welfare with limit  ∈ [  ] is
⎧
R
R 
R
⎪
⎪
⎨   [(1 + ) − ] () +  1− [ − (1 − )] () −  () if   (1 − ) 

1+

 () =
R
R
R
⎪



⎪
⎩
[(1 + ) − ] () +  [ − (1 − )] () −  () if  ≥ (1 − ) 

1+

Thus, the impact on welfare of a small increase in the limit is
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨ (  ) + (  ) − 2() if   (1 − )
1−
1+
0

 () =
⎪
⎪

⎩
1 + (
) − 2() if  ≥ (1 − )
1+

It follows that the optimal limit is either such that  ∈ [  (1 − )) and solves
(



) + (
) = 2()
1−
1+

or is such that  ∈ [(1 − ) ] and solves
1 + (


) = 2()
1+

It is straightforward to show that at least one of these equations must have a solution in
the relevant range. The assumption that  is less than ( −  )  implies that  is less than
( − )  which means that  (1 + ) exceeds . Thus,
1 + (


)  1 = 2( )
1+

Since
1 + (


)  2 = 2()
1+

there exists  ∈ (  ) such that
1 + (


) = 2()
1+

Suppose that for all such  it is the case that   (1 − ), then it must be the case that
1 + (

(1 − )
(1 − )
(1 − )
)  2((1 − )) ⇔ (
) + (
)  2((1 − ))
1+
1+
1−
39

If
(



) + (
)  1 = 2( )
1−
1+

(20)

this implies that there exists  ∈ [  (1 − )] such that
(



) + (
) = 2()
1−
1+

It suﬃces, therefore, to prove that (20) holds. Note that symmetry implies that
(



) = 1 − ( +
)
1+
1+

Moreover, we have that



=  +
  +

1−
1−
1+

This means that
(
¥

6.5





) + (
)  (
) + ( +
) = 1
1+
1−
1+
1+

Proof of Proposition 4

We first show that 1 = 0 . The period 1 limit 1 has no implications for welfare in period
2 and hence the optimal limit just solves the static problem considered in Section 2 under the
assumptions that  = 0 + ,  = 0 − , and () = ( − ) 2. We have that  = 0 . Thus
the result will follow from Proposition 1 if   ( −  )  =  (0 − ). We have that
2


 
0 − 
0 − 2
where the last line follows by Assumption 1.
We now show that 2 = 0 . The diﬃculty in doing this is dealing with the period 2 welfare
expressions in (14) and (15) which are unwieldy. The first point to note is that Assumption 1
implies that 0  ( + 1) (0 − 2) and 0  (1 − ) (0 + 2). This means that for all 1 ∈
[0 −  0 + ] and 2 ∈ [− ], 0  ( + 1) [1 + 2 ] and 0  (1 − ) [1 + 2 ]. Thus, in a
neighborhood of 0 , for all 1 ∈ [0 −  0 + ] we can simplify (14) by writing
⎧
R
⎪
⎪
2
⎪
( + 2 − 2 ) 
⎪
2 if 2  1 − 
− 1
⎪
⎪
⎨
R 2 −1
R
2
2
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
(2 − (1 + 2 )) 
2 + 2 −1 (1 + 2 − 2 ) 2 if 2 ∈ [1 −  1 + ]
−
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R
⎪
⎪
⎩
(2 − (1 + 2 )) 2 if 2  1 + 



2

−

40

(21)

The next point to note is that 2 will be less than 1 −  if and only if 2 − (0 − )  1 .
Similarly, 2 will be greater than 1 +  if and only if 2 − (0 + )  1 . We can use these
observations along with (21) to write
Z 
1
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
2
−
"Z
Z
2 −(0 +)

= −

−

−

Z

2 −(0 −)

2 −(0 +)



⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

2
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
2
−
R 2 −(0 +1 )
−

R

#

1
2

(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))

2
2

2
((0 + 1 + 2 ) − 2 ) 
2
"Z
#
Z 

2 1

((0 + 1 + 2 ) − 2 )
−
2 2
2 −(0 −)
−

+

2 −(0 +1 )

It follows that in a neighborhood of 0 , we have that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
= −

Z

2
2 −(0 +)

−

1
+
2

Z



2 −(0 −)

1
−
2

Z

2 −(0 −)

2 −(0 +)

"Z

2 −(0 +1 )

−

2
−
2

⎤

⎥ 1
⎥
⎦ 2

Z


2 −(0 +1 )

2
2

#

1

2

It is the case that
Z

2 −(0 +1 )

−

and thus
Z 2 −(0 −) "Z
2 −(0 +)

2 −(0 +1 )

−

2
−
2

Z

2
−
2



2 −(0 +1 )



2
2

2 −(0 +1 )

This implies that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
2

Z

=−

Z

#

1
2
= [2 − (0 + 1 )] 
2


1
2

2 −(0 +)

−

!
∙
¸ = −( −) Ã
21 1 2 0
1
=
(2 − 0 ) 1 −
2 1 =2 −(0 +) 2 ()2
Ã
!
1
= [(2 − 0 ) 2 − (2 − 0 ) 2]
= 0
2 ()2

1
+
2

Z


2 −(0 −)

0 − 2
1
=

2


The voter’s period 2 expected welfare is therefore increasing in 2 for 2 smaller than 0 and
R
1
decreasing for 2 larger than 0 . This implies that −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2 achieves a local maximum
at 0 .

It remains to show that a higher level of second period welfare cannot be obtained from a
limit significantly above or below 0 . We deal first with the case in which 2 is significantly below
41

0 . Note that the argument that we have just outlined applies to limits that have the property
that for all 1 ∈ [0 −  0 + ] and 2 ∈ [− ] it is the case that 2  ( + 1) [1 + 2 ] and
2  (1 − ) [1 + 2 ]. While the first inequality is true for all 2 smaller than 0 , the second may
not be. In particular, if 2 ≤ (1 − ) (1 + ), we need to modify the argument.
Note first that given Assumption 1, if 2 ≤ (1 − ) (1 + ) then 2 is less than 1 − . It follows
from this observation and (14) that welfare in this case is
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −

Z



−

[min{2 (1 + ) − 2  (1 + ) (1 + )} − (1 + )]



2

Thus, over this range of limits, period 2 expected welfare is
Z



1
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
2
−
Z "Z

= −



−



2
(min{2 (0 + 1 + 2 ) − 2  (1 + ) (0 + 1 + 2 )} − ((0 + 1 + 2 )))
2
−

#

1
2

By inspection, welfare in this case is increasing in the limit. It follows that the optimal limit
cannot be such that 2 ≤ (1 − ) (1 + ). Since the original argument applies for limits for which
2  (1 − ) (1 + ), we can conclude that the optimal period 2 limit cannot lie below 0 .
We now turn to the case in which 2 is significantly above 0 . Again, our earlier argument
applies to limits that have the property that for all 1 ∈ [0 −  0 + ] and 2 ∈ [− ], it is
the case that 2  ( + 1) [1 + 2 ] and 2  (1 − ) [1 + 2 ]. We know that the second inequality
is true for all 2 larger than 0 , which means that min{2 (1 + ) − 2  (1 + ) (1 + )} is equal
to 2 (1 + ) − 2 . But the first inequality may not be true, which means that it is possible that
min{2  (1 + ) (1 + )} equals (1 + ) (1 + ). Thus, we are interested in the range of limits such
that
2  (1 + ) (0 − 2) 

(22)

For this range of limits, we cannot rule out the possibility that 2  1 + . However, Assumption
1 and (22) imply that 2  1 − . This means that we can simplify (14) as follows:
⎧
R 2 −1
R
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎪
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} − (1 + 2 )) 
⎪
2 + 2 −1 (1 + 2 − 2 ) 2
−
⎪
⎪
⎨
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
if 2 ∈ [1 −  1 + ]
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R
⎪
⎪
⎩
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} − (1 + 2 )) 2 if 2  1 + 
2

−

42

or expressing the intervals in terms of 1
⎧
R
⎪
⎪
2
⎪
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} − (1 + 2 )) 
⎪
2 if 1  2 − 
−
⎪
⎪
⎨
R 2 −1
R
2
2
 ( 2 | 1 ) =
(min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} − (1 + 2 )) 
2 + 2 −1 (1 + 2 − 2 ) 2
−
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
if 1 ∈ [2 −  2 + ]

To make progress with this expression, we need to know the value of min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )}.

Consider first the range in which 1  2 − . Then
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨ (1 + ) (1 + 2 ) if 2 − 1 ≥ 2
1+
min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} =

⎪
⎪
2
⎩
2 if 1+
− 1  2
It follows that if

2
1+

− 1 ∈ [− ], we have

 ( 2 | 1 ) = −

ÃZ

2
1+ −1

−

2
+
 (1 + 2 )
2

Z



2
(2 − (1 + 2 ))
2
2
1+ −1

!



Note that
2
2
2
− 1 ∈ [− ] ⇔ 1 ∈ [
− 
+ ]
1+
1+
1+
Moreover, Assumption 1 implies that
write
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −

ÃZ

2
1+ −1

−

2
1+

2
2
+   2 − . Thus, if 1 ∈ [ 1+
−  1+
+ ], we can

2
+
 (1 + 2 )
2

2
+  2 − ) then it is the case that
If 1 ∈ ( 1+

 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
If 1 

2
1+

−  then it is the case that

2
1+

Z

2
1+

Z



2
(2 − (1 + 2 ))
2
2
1+ −1



− 1  −, so that



(2 − (1 + 2 ))

−

!

2

2

− 1  , and thus

 ( 2 | 1 ) = −

Z



 (1 + 2 )

−

2

2

Putting all this together, we conclude that when 1  2 − 
⎧
R
⎪
2
⎪
2
⎪
 (1 + 2 ) 
⎪
2 if 1  1+ − 
−
⎪
⎪
µ
¶
⎨ R 2
R
1+ −1


2
2
2
2
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
if 1 ∈ [ 1+
 (1 + 2 ) 2 + 2 −1 (2 − (1 + 2 )) 2
−  1+
+ ]
−
⎪
1+
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R
⎪
2
2
⎩
( − (1 + 2 )) 
2 if 1 ∈ ( 1+ +  2 − )
− 2
43



Now consider the range in which 1 ∈ [2 −  2 + ]. In this range, we have
1 

2
+  ⇔ (1 + ) (1 − )  2 .
1+

Thus, we have min{2  (1 + ) (1 + 2 )} = 2 . It follows that
ÃZ
!
Z 
2 −1
2
2
+
(2 − (1 + 2 ))
(1 + 2 − 2 )
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −

2
2
−
2 −1
In summary, when 2  0 , we have that
⎧
R
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎪
 (1 + 2 ) 
⎪
2 if 1  1+ − 
−
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
2
R 1+
R
⎪
−1
⎪
2
2
2
2
⎨ −
2
 (1 + 2 ) 
( − (1 + 2 )) 
2 + 1+
2 if 1 ∈ [ 1+ −  1+ + ]
−1 2
 ( 2 | 1 ) = −
R
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎪
( − (1 + 2 )) 
⎪
2 if 1 ∈ ( 1+ +  2 − )
− 2
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
R 2 −1
R
⎪
⎪
2
2
⎩
(2 − (1 + 2 )) 
2 + 2 −1 (1 + 2 − 2 ) 2 if 1 ∈ [2 −  2 + ]
−

(23)

Next observe that

1 

2
2
−⇔
− 0 −   1 
1+
1+

(24)

1 

2
2
+⇔+
− 0  1 
1+
1+

(25)

and that

Similarly,
1  2 −  ⇔ 2 − 0 −   1 

(26)

1  2 +  ⇔  + 2 − 0  1 

(27)

and that

All this leaves us with four diﬀerent ranges of limits to consider:
Range 1 The first range is
2
− 0 −  ≥  ⇔ 2 ≥ (1 + ) (0 + 2)
1+
In this case, from (24) we have that for all 1 0 + 1 
Z



1
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
2
−

Z



−

"Z

44



2
1+

− . Thus from (23), we have that

2
 (0 + 1 + 2 )
2
−

#

1

2



In this range, the voter’s expected period 2 welfare is independent of the limit, so that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
= 0
2

Range 2 The next range is
2
− 0 − 
1+



≤+

2
− 0
1+

⇔ 2 ∈ [(1 + )0  (1 + ) (0 + 2))
In this case, from (25) we have that for all 1 0 + 1 
2
1+

− (0 + ) we have that 0 + 1 

2
1+

2
1+

+ . For realizations of 1 less than

− , while for realizations in excess of this threshold,

2
2
we have 0 + 1 ∈ [ 1+
−  1+
+ ]. Thus from (23), we have that

"
#
2
Z 1+
−(0 +) Z 
1
2 1
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
 (0 + 1 + 2 )
2
2 2
−
−
−
"Z 2
#
Z 
Z

1+ −(0 +1 )
2
2 1
−
+

 (0 + 1 + 2 )
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
2
2
2
2 2
−
1+ −(0 +)
1+ −(0 +1 )

Z



In this case


R

1
 ( 2 | (1 + )0 + 1 ) 
2

−

2

=−

Z

"Z


2
1+ −(0 +)


2
1+ −(0 +1 )

2
2

#

1
 0
2

Range 3 The next range is that
+

2
− 0   ≤ 2 − 0 −  ⇔ 2 ∈ [0 + 2 (1 + )0 )
1+

In this case, from (26) we have that for all 1 0 + 1  2 − . There are two possibilities:
2
+  2 − ), and thus
Possibility i) 2  (1 + ) (0 − 2) in which case for all 1 0 + 1 ∈ ( 1+

from (23), we have that
Z



1
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
2
−

Z



−

"Z



2
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
2
−

It follows in this case that


R

−

1
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2

2

45

=−

Z



−

1
 0
2

#

1

2

Possibility ii) (1 + ) (0 − 2)  2  (1 + )0 in which case for realizations of 1 less than
2
1+

− (0 − ) we have that
0 + 1 ∈ [

2
2
− 
+ ]
1+
1+

while for realizations in excess of this threshold we have
0 + 1 ∈ (

2
+  2 − )
1+

Thus from (23), we have that
Z 
1
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
2
−
" 2
#
2
Z 
Z 1+
−(0 −) Z 1+
−(0 +1 )
2
2 1
+
 (0 + 1 + 2 )
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
= −
2
2
2 2
−
−
1+ −(0 +1 )
"Z
#
Z 

2 1

(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
−
2
2 2
−
1+ −(0 −)
It follows in this case that
ÃZ 2
"Z
#
!
R
Z 
1

1+ −(0 −)
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2 1
1
2
+
=−
 0
2
2
2
2 2
2
−
1+ −(0 +1 )
1+ −(0 −)

Range 4 The final range is that
2 − 0 −    ≤  + 2 − 0 ⇔ 2 ∈ [0  0 + 2)
In this case, from (27), we have that for all 1 0 + 1  2 + . There are three possibilities:
Possibility i) 2  (1 + ) (0 − 2) in which case for realizations of 1 less than 2 − (0 + ) we
2
have that 0 + 1 ∈ ( 1+
+  2 − ), while for realizations in excess of this threshold 0 + 1 ∈

[2 −  2 + ]. Thus, from (23), we have that
#
Z 2 −(0 +) "Z 
1
2 1
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
2
2 2
−
−
−
"
#
Z 2 −(0 +1 )
Z 
Z 
2
2 1
+

(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
(0 + 1 + 2 − 2 )
−
2
2 2
2 −(0 +)
−
2 −(0 +1 )
Z



It follows that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
2

=−

ÃZ

2 −(0 +)
−

1
+
2

Z


2 −(0 +)

46

"Z

2 −(0 +1 )

−

2
−
2

Z



2 −(0 +1 )

2
2

#

1
2

!



We claim that
Z



2 −(0 +)

To see this note first that
"Z
Z

2 −(0 +1 )



2 −(0 +)

−

"Z

2 −(0 +1 )

−

2
−
2

Z

2
−
2


2 −(0 +1 )

2
2

#

Z


2 −(0 +1 )

1
2

=

=
=

2
2

"

#

1
≥ 0
2

21
2

(2 − 0 ) 1 −


 (2 − 0 ) −

2


2

³
(2 − 0 )  −

#1 =

1 =2 −(0 +)

−


(2 −0 )2
2

(2 −0 )
2



´

+

2
2

≥0

where the inequality follows from the fact that 2 ≤ 0 + 2. It follows that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
 0
2
Possibility ii) (1 + ) (0 − 2)  2  (1 + )0 in which case for realizations of 1 less than
2
1+

2
2
− (0 − ) we have 0 + 1 ∈ [ 1+
−  1+
+ ], for realizations between

2
1+

− (0 − ) and

2
2 −(0 + ) we have that 0 +1 ∈ ( 1+
+ 2 −), while for realizations in excess of this threshold

0 + 1 ∈ [2 −  2 + ]. Thus, from (23), we have that
⎡
2
R 1+
−(0 +1 )
2
Z 1+
Z 
2
−(0 +) ⎢
 (0 + 1 + 2 ) 
−
1
2
⎢
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
⎣ R
2
−
−
2
+ 2 −(0 +1 ) (2 − (0 + 1 + 2 )) 
2
1+
"
#
2
Z 1+
−(0 −) Z 
2 1
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
−
2
2 2
−
1+ −(0 +)
⎡
⎤
R 2 −(0 +1 )
2
Z 
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 )) 2 ⎥ 1
⎢ −
⎢
⎥
−
⎣
⎦ 2 
2
R
2
1+ −(0 −)
+ 2 −(0 +1 ) ((0 + 1 + 2 ) − 2 ) 2

It follows that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
2

⎡

⎢
= −⎢
⎣

+

µ
R

2
1+ −(0 −)
2
1+ −(0 +)

1
2

R

2
1+ −(0 +)

−

+

R

³R


2
1+ −(0 +1 )

2
1+ −(0 −)

2
2

hR
2 −(0 +1 )
−

´

2
2

−

Given our analysis of possibility i), it is clear that this is negative.
47

2
2 −(0 +1 ) 2

i

⎥ 1
⎥
⎦ 2

⎤

1
2

R

⎤

1
2

⎥
¶ ⎥
⎦

2
1+

Possibility iii) 2  (1 + )0 in which case for realizations of 1 less than
have 0 + 1 

2
1+

− , for realizations of 1 between

2
2
0 + 1 ∈ [ 1+
−  1+
+ ], for realizations between

2
1+

2
1+

− (0 + ) and

2
1+

− (0 + ) we

− (0 − ) we have

− (0 − ) and 2 − (0 + ) we have that

2
0 + 1 ∈ ( 1+
+  2 − ), while for realizations in excess of this threshold 0 + 1 ∈ [2 −  2 + ].

Thus, from (23), we have that
"
#
2
Z 1+
−(0 +) Z 
1
2 1
=−
 ( 2 | 0 + 1 )
 (0 + 1 + 2 )
2
2 2
−
−
−
"
#
2
2
Z 1+
Z 
−(0 −) Z 1+
−(0 +1 )
2
2 1
−
+
 (0 + 1 + 2 )
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
2
2
2
2 2
−
1+ −(0 +)
1+ −(0 +1 )
#
Z 2 −(0 +) "Z 
2 1
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
−
2
2 2
−
1+ −(0 −)
"
#
Z 2 −(0 +1 )
Z 
Z 
2
2 1
+
(2 − (0 + 1 + 2 ))
((0 + 1 + 2 ) − 2 )
−
2
2 2
2 −(0 +)
−
2 −(0 +1 )

Z



It follows that
R
1
 −  ( 2 | 0 + 1 ) 
2
2

⎡

⎢
= −⎢
⎣

+

µ
R 2 −(0 +)

2
1+ −(0 −)

R

1
2

2
1+ −(0 −)
2
1+ −(0 +)

+

R

³R


2
2
1+ −(0 +1 ) 2

2 −(0 +)

hR
2 −(0 +1 )
−

2
2

´

−

Given our analysis of possibility i), it is clear that this is negative.

6.6

⎤

1
2

R

2
2 −(0 +1 ) 2

¥

i

1
2

⎥
¶ ⎥
⎦

Proof of Proposition 5

The voter’s expected welfare under the sequence {1  2 } = {0  0 } is given by
"
#
Z 
1
 ( 0 | 0 + 1 )
 1  ( 0 | 0 ) + 2

2
−

(28)

where the function  ( | ) is as defined in (14). So we need to show that the sequence of spendingcontingent limits {1  2 } = {0  1 1 } generates the voter a strictly higher expected payoﬀ than
(28).
Consider what happens under the sequence of spending-contingent limits {1  2 } = {0  1 1 }.
We begin in period 2. Suppose that the period 1 shock was 1 . There are two possibilities: either
the period 1 politician was biased or he was unbiased. In the latter case, 1 = (0 + 1 ) 1 and
thus 2 = 0 + 1 . The voter’s period 2 expected payoﬀ is therefore 2  ( 0 + 1 | 0 + 1 ). In the
48

former case, let 1 (1 ) denote the policy choice made by the period 1 politician. Then, the voter’s
¯
¯
period 2 expected payoﬀ is 2  ( 1(11 ) ¯ 0 + 1 ).

Now consider the policy choice 1 (1 ) made by the biased politician in period 1. There are

two possibilities: the first is that the policy 1 (1 ) respects the limit; i.e., 1 (1 ) ≤ 0 1 . In this
case, we claim that it must be the case that 1 (1 ) equals 0 1 . It suﬃces to show that for all
1 it must be the case that the biased politician prefers a higher level of policy than 0 1 ; that
is, (1 + ) (0 + 1 ) ≥ 0 . This is true if and only if (1 + ) (0 − ) ≥ 0 , which follows from
Assumption 1. The fact that 1 (1 ) equals 0 1 in this case means that the voter’s period 2
expected payoﬀ is 2  ( 0 | 0 + 1 ). His two period payoﬀ is therefore
−1 |0 − (0 + 1 )| + 2  ( 0 | 0 + 1 )

(29)

The second possibility is that the policy 1 (1 ) exceeds the limit; i.e., 1 (1 )  0 . In this
case, given that the voter knows that the politician will choose policy 0 1 if he respects the limit,
by revealed preference we must have
¯
1 (1 ) ¯¯
−1 |1 (1 ) − (0 + 1 )| + 2  (
0 + 1 )
1 ¯

≥ −1 |0 − (0 + 1 )| + 2  ( 0 | 0 + 1 )

Otherwise the voter would not have approved the proposal 1 (1 ). The voter’s two period payoﬀ
therefore is at least as large as (29).
Taking expectations over 1 and the probability that the period 1 politician is biased, we conclude that the voter’s expected payoﬀ under the sequence of spending-contingent limits {1  2 } =
{0  1 1 } is at least as large as
"Z


1

[−1 |0 − (0 + 1 )| + 2  ( 0 | 0 + 1 )]
2
−
"
#
Z 
1
 ( 0 + 1 | 0 + 1 )
+(1 − ) 2

2
−

Now observe that
−

Z


−

[|0 − (0 + 1 )|]

#

1
=  ( 0 | 0 )
2

where the function  ( | ) is as defined in (14). To see this, note that by definition
(Z
)
Z 
0


+
 ( 0 | 0 ) = −
(0 − (0 + ))
(min{0 + 2 (1 + ) (0 + )} − (0 + ))
2
2
−
0
49

But Assumption 1 implies that 0 + 2  (1 + ) (0 + ).
It follows that the voter’s expected payoﬀ under the sequence of spending-contingent limits
{1  2 } = {0  1 1 } is at least as large as
2

1  ( 0 | 0 ) +  2

Z



1
+ (1 − )2
 ( 0 | 0 + 1 )
2
−

Z



−

 ( 0 + 1 | 0 + 1 )

1
2

This strictly exceeds the voter’s expected welfare under the sequence {1  2 } = {0  0 } as given
by (28).

¥

50

