NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG RUN HUMAN CAPITAL AND ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF
HIGH-STAKES EXAMINATIONS
Victor Lavy
Avraham Ebenstein
Sefi Roth
Working Paper 20647
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20647
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

Excellent research assistance was provided by Eyal Frank, Michael Freedman, Michal Hodor, Susan
Schwartz, and Ben Raven. We thank Josh Angrist, Andrea Ichino, Sascha Becker, Eric Maurin, Erik
Plug, Fabian Waldinger, seminar participants at Hebrew University, University of London Royal Holloway,
RES annual meeting 2014, and CAGE May 2014 conference on Education, Human Capital and Labor
Market Outcomes for useful comments and suggestions. We thank Israel's National Insurance Institute
(NII) for allowing restricted access to data in the NII protected research lab. Research of the first author
is supported by European Research Council (ERC) Advance Grant No. 323439. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Victor Lavy, Avraham Ebenstein, and Sefi Roth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Long Run Human Capital and Economic Consequences of High-Stakes Examinations
Victor Lavy, Avraham Ebenstein, and Sefi Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 20647
October 2014
JEL No. I21,I26,J24
ABSTRACT
Cognitive performance during high-stakes exams can be affected by random disturbances that, even
if transitory, may have permanent consequences for long-term schooling attainment and labor market
outcomes. We evaluate this hypothesis among Israeli high school students who took a series of high
stakes matriculation exams between 2000 and 2002. As a source of random (transitory) shocks to highstakes matriculation test scores, we use exposure to ambient air pollution during the day of the exam.
First, we document a significant and negative relationship between average PM2.5 exposure during exams
and student composite scores, post-secondary educational attainment, and earnings during adulthood.
Second, using PM2.5 as an instrument, we estimate a large economic return to each point on the exam
and each additional year of post-secondary education. Third, we examine the return to exam scores
and schooling across sub-populations, and find the largest effects among boys, better students, and
children from higher socio-economic backgrounds. The results suggest that random disturbances during
high-stakes examinations can have long-term consequences for schooling and labor market outcomes,
while also highlighting the drawbacks of using high-stakes examinations in university admissions.
Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk
Avraham Ebenstein
Department of Economics
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Mount Scopus Campus, #4208
Jerusalem, Israel 91905
ebenstein@mscc.huji.ac.il

Sefi Roth
Department of Economics
Royal Holloway
University of London
Egham TW20 0EX
United Kingdom
s.j.roth@rhul.ac.uk

I.

Introduction
Cognitive performance is critical to scholastic achievement and to successful performance in many

occupations. Cognitive acuity can be affected temporarily by a variety of factors, including the intake of
caffeine, nicotine, and sleep deprivation (Jarvis 1993, Angus, Heslegrave and Myles 1985). Factors that
induce variation in the cognitive performance of students during high-stakes exams may be of particular
interest because they potentially affect long-term schooling attainment, and therefore can have permanent
effects on wages and earnings. In this paper, we examine the potential long-term effect of transitory
disturbances to cognitive performance during high-stakes exit exams in Israeli high schools. The exams are
known as a the Bagrut and are a critical component of Israel’s college admissions system, acting as a
gatekeeper for the most selective schools, similar to the role played by Scholastic Aptitude Tests in the
United States or A-levels in England and other European countries. Access to college majors is also
determined by Bagrut performance, with many lucrative professional programs requiring minimum overall
average scores for admission, such as law and medicine. As a consequence, Bagrut scores can affect an
individual’s entire academic career, and subsequent labor market outcomes.
Although many countries use high-stakes testing to rank students for college admission, the
consequences of this policy are largely unknown. Does having a particularly good or bad performance on
a high-stakes examination have long-term consequences for test takers, after accounting for a student’s
cognitive ability? Insofar as there are permanent wage consequences to variation induced by completely
random shocks to student performance on a test like the Bagrut, it suggests that the use of high-stakes
testing as a primary method for ranking students may be inefficient. Aggregate welfare may also be reduced
by relying too heavily on examinations that provide noisy measures of student quality, since it may lead to
poor matching between students and occupations, and an inefficient allocation of labor. Recent debate over
the planned redesign of the SATs has been in part motivated by concerns that the current version is highly

1

random and does not represent a fair measure of student quality (New York Times 2014).1 In spite of a
dearth of evidence regarding the consequences of these tests, they are used extensively globally to rank
students and allocate opportunity by acting as a gatekeeper in admissions.
Assessing the consequences of using high-stakes examinations for ranking students is challenging.
First, large data samples are generally not available with standardized test scores and wages during
adulthood for a representative population.2 Second, since higher-ability students presumably perform better
on high-stakes tests, it is difficult to separately distinguish the return to cognitive ability from the return to
doing well on the examination. One possible solution is to examine the consequences of fluctuations in a
random component affecting performance on these tests. A candidate is fluctuation in air pollution that
might have an effect on cognitive acuity and test scores, therefore generating plausibly random variation in
a given student’s outcome. Air pollution has been demonstrated to adversely affect human productivity
across a variety of tasks (Graff Zivin and Neidell 2012, Chang et al. 2014). Since students are assigned to
test sites without prior knowledge of pollution or the ability to reschedule, it represents an exogenous factor
affecting performance. This may enable direct measurement of the return to the component of a student’s
score which is related entirely to luck, and provide evidence regarding whether these tests do or do not have
long-term consequences.
In this paper, we examine the long-term consequences of high-stakes examinations using
exogenous variation in scores generated by pollution exposure. We examine student performance on the
Bagrut, a series of examinations across different subjects that Israeli students must pass as a prerequisite
for entry into elite universities. The analysis presented here builds on earlier work where we estimated the
reduced form causal impact of various pollutants on cognitive performance (Lavy et al. 2013). In

In a recent discussion of the planned revisions to the SATs, the president of the College Board stated that “only 20
percent…see the college-admission tests as a fair measure of the work their students have done.” (New York Times
2014)
2
Note that in the United States, Educational Testing Service (ETS) is notoriously private and no scholarship (to our
knowledge) has been carried out linking SAT scores to adult outcomes for even small subsets of the population. For
military recruits, the ASVAB has been made available but it is unclear how relevant this is for other sub-populations
(Cawley et al. 2001).
1

2

Lavy et al. (2013), we exploit exam-level data to demonstrate that pollution harms student performance,
even in models with student-fixed effects where we exploit variation in pollution across test administrations
for the same student. We find significant effects of particulate matter (PM2.5) and carbon monoxide (CO)
on student performance, and demonstrate in a set of placebo exercises that the effects are very short-term:
no significant effect is found of pollution on days before or after the exam. In this paper, we focus more
narrowly on fine particulate matter (PM2.5), considered to be particularly harmful to human health and
cognition, and use it as an instrumental variable for a student’s average Bagrut score across the series of
examinations. Since Israel has frequent sandstorms, we are able to exploit severe short-term pollution which
generates a first-stage relationship between pollution exposure and a student’s Bagrut scores.3 Another
feature that makes Israel a suitable context for answering this research question is data availability. Israel’s
national registration system allows us to match the universe of students who take the Bagrut with their
completed post-high school education and their wages in adulthood, enabling us to examine the impact of
these tests in the long run for every test taker.
In the first part of our analysis, we examine the relationship between average pollution exposure
during the Bagrut exams and long-term academic and economic outcomes. We exploit variation across
students at the same school in their average pollution exposure, which stems from differences in the exam
dates across different subjects. The identification assumption is that variation across students from the same
school in the dates of Bagrut exams is not correlated with potential outcomes, which is a plausible
assumption because dates of national Bagrut exams are determined by the Ministry of Education, and
students choose their Bagrut study program years before the dates of exams are determined.4 Using this

We note here that most of the Southern and central European countries, even England, are seriously affected by the
same sand storms that originate from the Sahara. See for example media coverage of early April 2014 episodes of
extremely high pollution levels in this region at: http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-26844425.
4
In support of this assumption, we provide the results of balancing tests that demonstrate that pollution does not
appear to be correlated with observable features of the student, after conditioning on the student’s school. As additional
support for our approach, we cite evidence presented in Lavy, Ebenstein and Roth (2013) where we use exam-level
data to estimate the effect of pollution on test scores, allowing us to simultaneously control for time-invariant features
of localities, schools and individual students. We present evidence that the results are broadly similar with student
fixed effects or school fixed effects, supporting our identification strategy.
3

3

design, we present evidence that completely random variation in Bagrut scores has a long term impact on
both academic and economic outcomes. We estimate that an additional 10 units of PM2.5 (AQI) in average
exposure is associated with a .023% decline in a student’s Bagrut composite score, a 0.03% percent decline
in Bagrut matriculation certification, a .019% decline in enrollment in post-secondary education, and a 0.15
decline in years of education at a university. The wage consequences are also significant, with an additional
10 units of PM2.5 in average pollution exposure lowering monthly income by 109 Israeli shekel ($29),
roughly a 2% decline. This suggests that students who take an exam during a severe pollution episode
experience non-trivial long run consequences, both academically and economically.
We then exploit the strong first-stage relationship between average pollution exposure during
Bagrut exams and Bagrut composite scores to estimate the economic return to each additional point on the
Bagrut. Using 2SLS, we estimate that each point is worth (in 2010) 66 shekels ($18) in additional monthly
earnings. Since the standard deviation on Bagrut composite scores is roughly 24 points, this implies that
there are significant wage consequences to the exam, even for relatively small deviations in one’s score.
We examine mechanisms for this result by examining our other academic outcomes, treating the Bagrut
composite score as the endogenous regressor and using pollution as our instrument. We find that each
additional instrumented point increases the probability of receiving a matriculation certificate by 2
percentage points, enrollment rates in post-secondary academic schooling by 1.9 percentage points, and
post-secondary education by .092 years. This suggests that the mechanism for the Bagrut’s impact on
student outcomes is through the posited channel of affecting a student’s prospects for post-secondary
education.
In light of the strong relationship between Bagrut pollution exposure and post-secondary education,
we are able to use 2SLS to estimate the implied return to education. We estimate that an additional postsecondary year of schooling is worth 707 shekels ($191) per month, an implied return to college education
of 14%. This rate is only marginally higher relative to existing estimates found in Israel and elsewhere for
the return to post-secondary education (Frish 2009, Oreopoulos and Petronijevic 2013, Angrist and Chen

4

2011, Angrist and Lavy 2013). 5 As we discuss, the exclusion restriction may be violated in this context,
but the similarity of our estimates to existing estimates of the return to post-secondary education is
supporting evidence that the magnitude of our estimated effects of PM2.5 on schooling and economic
outcomes are reasonable.6
In the last section, we examine the heterogeneity of pollution’s effect on scores and wages across
sub-populations in Israel. We find that our first-stage relationship is strongest among populations of Israel
which have the highest rates of asthma, suggesting a physiological mechanism for the observed relationship
between pollution and exam outcomes. Our estimated effects are four times larger for boys than girls, twice
as large for weaker students relative to stronger students, and a fifth larger for students from lower SES
relative to students from high SES background. We then examine the impact of pollution on long run
outcomes for these groups. We estimate that a point on the Bagrut is worth more for boys than girls (78
shekels versus 59 shekels), for stronger students than weaker students (124 shekels versus 80 shekels), and
for higher SES students relative to lower SES students (105 shekels versus 56 shekels). These magnitudes
suggest that the return to an extra point is quite substantial, especially for already-strong students or students
from privileged backgrounds, who presumably can capitalize on the opportunity of gaining admission to a
longer academic programs or professions that require long (and poorly paid) internships, like law or
medicine.
Our analysis highlights a major drawback of using high-stakes examinations to rank students. If
completely random variation in scores can still matter ten years after a student completes high school, this
suggests that placing too much weight on high-stakes exams like the Bagrut may not be consistent with
meritocratic principles. A second implication of this finding is that by temporarily lowering the productivity
of human capital, high pollution levels lead to allocative inefficiency as students with higher human capital

For example, Angrist and Lavy (2009) estimate that Bagrut holders earn 13 percent more than other individuals
with exactly 12 years of schooling.
6
Since the Bagrut composite score directly affects the post-secondary education options available to a student, 2SLS
models of the return to post-secondary education using pollution as an instrument will be biased by the omission of
the Bagrut composite score.
5

5

may be assigned a lower rank than their less qualified peers. This may lead to inefficient allocation of
workers across occupations, and possibly a less productive workforce. The results highlight the danger in
assigning too much weight to a student’s performance on a high-stakes exam, rather than their overall
academic record. Our results also contribute to existing evidence that transitory random shocks that are
unrelated to levels of human capital can have long-term implications for earnings (Oreopoulos et al. 2012).
Our study also highlights the role of luck in determining wages, a pattern noted by other scholars (Bertrand
and Mulinathan 2001).
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In the second section, we present relevant background
information on air pollution and cognition, and on the controversial use of high-stakes examinations in
college admissions both in Israel and abroad. In Section III, we present our empirical results for the overall
sample and examine heterogeneity in the results across sub-populations in Section IV. We conclude in
Section V.
II.

Background and Data

A.

Air pollution and Cognitive Performance
The existing literature provides compelling evidence that cognition may be affected by pollution,

as a result of pollution’s effect on the respiratory system. Researchers have documented that short-term
acute exposure to particulate matter leads to increased risk of illness including heart disease, stroke, and
lung cancer, in addition to increased hospitalization rates (Pope et al. 1995, Dockery and Pope 1996;
Schlenker and Walker 2011, Chay and Greenstone 2003). Exposure to fine particulate matter is particularly
dangerous since these small particles penetrate deep in to the lungs effecting blood flow and oxygen
circulation, which may also affect other aspects of human life, and in particular, cognition (Pope and
Dockery 2006). Since the brain consumes a large fraction of the body’s oxygen needs, any deterioration in
oxygen quality can in theory affect cognition (Clark and Sokoloff 1999, Calderón-Garcidueñas et al. 2008).
Air pollution can also impact the nervous system, leading to symptoms such as memory disturbance, fatigue
and blurred vision (Kampa and Castanas 2007). As a result of these physiological effects, a recent literature

6

has been able to document that pollution significantly lowers labor productivity in a variety of contexts
(Graff Zivin and Neidell 2012, Chang et al. 2014).
In a related paper (Lavy, Ebenstein and Roth, 2013), we examine the effect of pollution on
cognition in the Israeli context, examining the relationship between test scores and exposure to particulate
matter and carbon monoxide. We analyze the impact of pollution in a panel data set where we observe the
same student taking multiple exams with different levels of pollution on each day, enabling us to estimate
models with student fixed effects. For particulate matter exposure, we find that a one standard deviation
increase in the PM2.5 AQI value (sd=22.81) on the day of an exam is associated with a .65 point decrease
in score, or 2.8% of a standard deviation. 7 We also find that our results are largely driven by poor
performance of test takers on extremely polluted days, with an AQI reading above 101 for PM2.5 associated
with a decline in test score of 1.95 points, or 8.2% of a standard deviation. These results suggest that modest
pollution levels have only a marginal impact, but extremely polluted days can have much larger impacts,
suggesting a non-linearity in pollution’s relationship with cognitive performance.
In this paper, we focus our attention exclusively on particulate matter (PM2.5): a complex mixture
of solid and liquid microscopic droplets found in the air that consists of various components including acids,
metals, dust particles, organic chemicals and allergens. This is a natural choice since it is arguably the most
harmful pollutant for human health, and presumably most likely to affect cognition. We also focus on
student-level data instead of exam-level data, since our interest here is understanding how a particular
student is affected by variation in their composite Bagrut score, which has more relevance for understanding
the long-term consequences of the exam.
B.

High-Stakes Examinations in Israel and Abroad
Since the Scholastic Aptitude Test’s (SAT) first administration in 1926, it has been taken by

millions of test-takers and has been used to rank students applying for college in the United States, and

We find the effect is concentrated on the day of the exam, with insignificant effects on the day before and day after
the exam. Results can be found in Ebenstein, Lavy, and Roth (2013).

7

7

similar tests are used around the globe. However, the use of these tests is extremely controversial. Numerous
concerns have been voiced by both popular and academic sources, including allegations of racial bias,
arguments that test prep courses give privileged students an unfair advantage, and suggestions that the test
places too much emotional stress on students.8 Nevertheless, the SAT remains a critical component of
college admissions in the US and, just as the Bagrut does in the Israeli educational system. The great weight
placed on an exam given on one particular day has the benefit of being a cost-effective way of comparing
students across schools with a similar metric, but may also represent a noisy measure of student quality.
Many factors can affect student performance that are unrelated to cognitive ability, including how a student
slept the previous night, whether the testing room has a comfortable temperature, and potentially, exposure
to ambient air pollution. In light of the great weight placed on test scores in admissions processes at many
elite schools, it is worth knowing whether (a) these scores are sensitive to random shocks and (b) whether
bad draws have long-run consequences. Since this would be an extremely challenging question to address
in the US, where SAT score data is fiercely guarded and generally not available for matching to adult
outcomes, the Israeli Bagrut represents a novel opportunity to examine this question.
All universities and most academic and teachers’ colleges require a Bagrut certificate for
enrollment, while entry requirements for other post-secondary education establishments, such as academic
colleges, are lower.9 For a given field of study, it is typically more difficult to be admitted to a university
than to an academic college, since universities are both more prestigious and more heavily subsidized by
the government. Students earn a Bagrut certificate by passing a series of national exams (Bagrut tests) in
core and elective subjects following tenth and eleventh grade, and then passing a larger set of exams

In 2001, the President of University of California famously threatened to remove the SAT requirement for admission,
leading to a re-design of the examination and the introduction of a writing section. However, the writing section later
came under fire for rewarding students simply for lengthy essays (Winerip 2005).

8

The post-secondary education system in Israel consist of eight universities that grant PhDs (as well as
other degrees), approximately 50 academic colleges which offer undergraduate degrees (of which a very
limited subset which offer masters degrees), and a set of non-university institutions of higher education that
confer teaching and vocational certificates. Practical engineering colleges run two-year programs awarding
9

degrees (or certificates) in fields like electronics, computers, and industrial production. An additional two years of
study in an engineering school is required in order to complete a BSc in engineering.
8

following twelfth grade. The exam focuses on seven mandatory subjects and one or more elective subjects,
allowing us to observe students completing exams with separate grades for each examination and over a
range of subjects. About 52 percent of high-school graduates in 2002 and 46 percent of the overall cohort
received matriculation certificates, a figure that is publicized in the national media in light of the great
significance of passing the Bagrut in the Israeli educational system
Students are admitted to university programs on the basis of their average Bagrut scores and a
separate psychometric examination. Each university ranks applicants according to the same formula, thus
producing an index based on a weighted average of the student’s average score on all his or her Bagrut
exams and the psychometric examination. This ranking determines students’ eligibility for university
admission, and even which major they can choose within the university. Therefore, pollution levels can
affect students’ university schooling by affecting their probability of passing Bagrut exams, and also by
affecting the average score in these exams. The first channel will affect eligibility for university admission
while the second will affect which programs (or majors) will be available to the student.

III.

Evaluating the Consequences of High-Stakes Examinations

A.

Data
Our data set is generated by combining Israeli test score data with air pollution and meteorological

data for 2000-2002, and subsequent higher education and earnings outcomes from 2010-2011. The Bagrut
exam information and demographic information for each test taker are provided by the Israeli Ministry of
Education. These files also contain rich demographic information on the student and the student’s family,
such as parental education level, number of siblings, country of origin, and ethnicity. For each exam, we
also know the exact date of the test and the precise location of the testing site, allowing us to assign pollution
measures to each test administration. Our pollution data are taken from files published by the Israeli
Ministry of Environmental Protection, which reports daily mean readings of particular matter less than 2.5
microns in width, or PM2.5 (µg/m3) at 139 monitoring stations throughout Israel for the sample period (see
Figure 1). Readings are taken at 5 minute intervals and averaged over the course of the day. Each test site,
9

which is at the student’s school, is assigned the average pollution reading for all monitoring stations within
2.5 kilometers of the city limits of the school. Since Israeli cities are not very large, we generally are taking
readings from stations very close to the schools. While we ideally would have a measure of pollution inside
the test room, the air quality inside a test site is presumed to be highly correlated with the ambient reading
outdoors (Branis et al. 2005). Schools that had no monitoring station within the city limits or 2.5 kilometers
of the city limits were dropped from the sample.10 These monitoring stations also record temperature and
relative humidity, which are also assigned in a similar manner to pollution and are used as control variables.
We use the daily average reading of pollution, temperature, and humidity at the monitoring stations in our
analysis. The pollution measure is then converted into units of Air Quality Index (AQI) using a formula
specified by the US EPA.
Our information on post-secondary enrollment and earnings is taken from administrative records
provided by the National Insurance Institute of Israel (NII). In order to facilitate the analysis presented here,
the NII Research and Planning Division constructed an extract containing indicators of post-secondary
enrollment, the number of years of post-secondary schooling, annual earnings, and number of months
employed among all individuals in our study. This file was then merged with our original sample and
analyzed at a secure research lab at the NII headquarters in Jerusalem, Israel. Our administrative sample
includes information for each student on whether they have ever enrolled in higher education for each of
the aforementioned institution types, and the number of years they were enrolled in higher education by
institution type. This information is available for all students, and is recorded as of the 2010-2011 academic
year. The youngest cohorts in our sample are already 28 years old at this time, implying that even after
accounting for compulsory military service, most students who enrolled in post-secondary education,
including those who continued on to graduate school, will have graduated by 2010-2011.11

Since Israel’s population is densely concentrated in several metropolitan areas, this led to the dropping of less than
5% of schools.
11
Boys serve for three years in the military and girls for two (longer if they take a commission).
10

10

The summary statistics for our sample are presented in Table 1 in two panels; Panel A reports
sample means of our exam-level data, and Panel B reports sample means of our student-level data. The
sample is composed of 415,219 examinations taken by 55,873 students at 712 schools throughout Israel. In
columns (2) and (3) we stratify the sample by sex, and in columns (4) and (5), we stratify by a measure of
achievement known as the Magen score. The Magen score is calculated using the student’s performance
over the course of the school-year, and on exam similar to the Bagrut, making it a natural candidate for
stratifying the sample by student quality.12 As shown in Table 1, for each Bagrut examination we observe
the exam score, the pollution the day of the exam (PM2.5), and the average temperature and humidity that
day. 13 The table reveals that students face average pollution levels (AQI) that appear balanced along
observables, with similar average readings among boys and girls (59.5 versus 59.9), and among
higher/lower achievement students (60.0 versus 59.5). The sample means also reflect that girls perform
better than boys, and student with higher Magen scores also have higher Bagrut scores.
In Panel B, we report our student-level means, which includes demographic information on the
student, the education of both parents, and the student’s earnings in 2010. Since our analysis of long-term
economic outcomes will rely on school fixed effects, it is particularly important that we are able to include
this rich set of control variables. The sample means also reveal several interesting patterns, including the
higher achievement of girls: roughly 71% of girls receive a matriculation certificate, compared to only 64%
of boys. Interestingly, however, girls earn lower earnings than their male counterparts. Boys earn on average
5,531 New Israeli Shekels (NIS) versus 4,699 for girls ($1≈ 3.75NIS). In columns (4) and (5), we observe
higher rates of matriculation certification (91% versus 48%) and wages (5,352 versus 4,867) in the group
of high achievement students, consistent with our expectations. Almost two thirds (63%) of a high school
cohort are enrolled in post-secondary studies, 27% in universities, and 25% in academic colleges. The
sample also reveals that we are able to match the entire universe of student test takers with their long-term
outcomes, a particularly desirable feature of our data relative to panel data sets that face attrition.

12
13

The date on which the Magen exam is given is unavailable, precluding a direct analysis of these scores.
These variables are not shown due to space considerations but are used in regressions available in the appendix.
11

B.

Empirical Strategy
Our analysis focuses on student-level data, where we exploit variation across students in their

average level of pollution across all their Bagrut tests. In this setup, the endogenous regressor is the
student’s Bagrut composite score, which is calculated as the average score across the Bagrut examinations.
The identification assumption in the 2SLS analysis is that variation in the timing of Bagrut exams is not
correlated with potential outcomes, after conditioning on a student’s school. This is a plausible assumption
because dates of national Bagrut exams are determined by the Ministry of Education, and students choose
their Bagrut study program years before the dates of exams are determined. The realization of pollution
level on different exam dates is random, and therefore variation in average pollution exposure is also
random. In support of this assumption, we provide balancing estimates that demonstrate that, conditioned
on locality or school, pollution does not appear to be correlated with observable features of the student.
A likely possibility is that pollution is correlated with time invariant features of a testing location
or a particular student. For example, if poorer schools are located in more polluted parts of cities, OLS will
likely overstate the causal link between pollution and test scores. Conversely, if schools in denser (and
wealthier) cities have more pollution exposure, OLS might understate the true cost of pollution, as it is
mitigated by other compensating factors (e.g. tutoring). More generally, endogenous sorting across schools,
heterogeneity in avoidance behavior, or measurement error in assigning pollution exposure to individuals
will all bias results that do not properly account for unobserved factors correlated with both our outcome
of interest and ambient pollution (Moretti and Neidell 2011). In our setup, since we account for timeinvariant features of schools and students with fixed effects, the challenge relevant to our estimation is to
account for omitted variables that are varying over time but are potentially correlated with pollution and
Bagrut scores. For example, if weather or traffic the day of the exam is correlated with pollution, our fixed
effects models will fail to identify the true effect. In our empirical analysis, we include controls for timevarying factors that could be contemporaneous with pollution, such as daily temperature and relative
humidity, but of course it is untestable whether there are factors that are unobserved that are both correlated
with pollution and Bagrut exam scores. In Lavy et al. (2013), we conduct a rich set of robustness checks
12

and placebo tests documenting the impact of pollution on test performance. 14 In this paper, we are interested
in exploiting this relationship to examine the consequences of high-stakes exams.
Our estimation strategy is relatively straightforward. We estimate models relating the average air
quality conditions during the examination to the student’s composite score. Formally, the first stage model
that we estimate is of the following form:

(1) Ris   0 X is  1 POL is   2 Tempis   3 RH is  S s   is
where

Ris

is the Bagrut composite test score of student i at school s; ; X it is a vector of individual

characteristics possibly related to test outcomes, such as parental education: POL is is average air pollution
exposure of student i at school s across the examinations; Temp is is the mean temperature for student i at
school s across the examinations; RH is is the average humidity measure of student i at school s across the
examinations; S s and

eist

is an idiosyncratic error term. The second stage equation is as follows:

(2) Ois   0 X is   1 Rˆ is   2 Tempis   3 RH is  S s   is
where Ois are the other long-term outcomes: Bagrut matriculation, post-secondary enrollment, postsecondary years of schooling, and monthly earnings, all measured at age 30 and S s is a school-fixed effect.
C.

Estimates of Pollution’s Impact on Long-Term Outcomes
In this section, we first examine the reduced form relationship between average PM2.5 exposure

during the Bagrut exams and long-term outcomes. For identification we rely on variation in average
pollution exposure across students within school which is driven by the timing of different exams across
different subject areas. As previously discussed, this is unlikely to be correlated with student potential
outcomes. We empirically support this in balancing exercises presented in Table A1, where we demonstrate

In Lavy et al. (2013), we estimate models with higher order polynomial functions of temperature. The results are
very similar, which is logical, since most classrooms where the exams are held have air conditioners.
14

13

that, conditioned on city or school, pollution does not appear to be correlated with observable features of
the student. We find that the balancing coefficients estimates are of small magnitude and not significantly
different than zero. As further evidence in support of our identification strategy, we also note that in results
presented in Lavy et al. (2013), the estimated effect of pollution was not systematically sensitive to adding
student fixed effects, suggesting that our results are robust to the type of fixed effects included.
In Table 2, we present the reduced form effect of average PM2.5 on four academic outcomes related
to the Bagrut. In the first two rows, we report the outcomes most directly related to performance on the
Bagrut: the composite score and receiving a matriculation certificate. Receiving a matriculation certificate
is of paramount importance, since this is a prerequisite for post-secondary college and university studies.
However, the Bagrut composite score can also influence the range of programs accessible to a student. As
highlighted in the table, both exhibit a robust negative relationship with air quality. An additional 100 units
of PM2.5 (AQI) is associated with a 16.4 reduction in a student’s composite score and a .33% decline in
certification in our preferred estimation strategy which include school fixed effects.15
In rows 3 and 4, we present the estimated effect of average pollution exposure on two longitudinal
educational outcomes: enrollment in post-secondary institution (1=yes), and years of post-secondary
schooling attained. The results demonstrate that these academic outcomes are affected by pollution
exposure. In particular, enrollment rates in higher education decline by .30% when a student is exposed to
an additional 100 units of PM2.5, schooling declines by .15 years. All estimates are statistically significant
at the 5% level, and suggest that taking Bagrut exams in highly polluted days can have long-lasting effects
on schooling attainment. In the fifth row, we present the reduced form effect of average PM 2.5 on average
monthly earnings. In our preferred specification with school fixed effects in column 3, we estimate that a
student exposed during the Bagrut exams dates to an additional 100 units of PM2.5 is associated with an

We also estimated the reduced form effect of pollution on the number of exams a student failed and on the
proportion of failed exams. We find that higher PM 2.5 exposure is associated with an increased chance of failing an
exam in models with student fixed effects, and increases the proportion of failed exams in models with school fixed
effects. This evidence is available from the authors upon request.
15

14

average monthly earnings decline at age 28 of 1,093 shekels ($291). This estimate is also precisely
estimated, with a T statistic greater than three.
As a summary of the reduced form effects, we note that a one standard deviation (sd=16.7) change
in average air quality is associated with the following effects: a decrease in average test scores by 0.10 sd
(16.8), average matriculation rates by 0.11 sd (0.48), average years of post-secondary schooling by 0.11 sd
(2.2) and in average monthly earnings by 0.033 sd (IS 4,515).
D.

The Long-Term Consequences of the Bagrut
In Table 3, we use as a first-stage relationship the highly significant reduced form effect of pollution

on a student’s Bagrut composite score to examine the long-term consequences of the examination. In Panel
A, we estimate the return to an additional point on the Bagrut composite score using 2SLS. In the first row,
we reproduce the relationship between the Bagrut composite score and PM2.5 shown in Table 2 that is used
here as our first-stage. Exploiting the relationship between scores and pollution, we find using 2SLS that
an additional point is worth 45 shekels in monthly earnings in models with city fixed effects, and 66 shekels
in our preferred specification including school fixed effects. Since the standard deviation of the Bagrut
composite score is roughly 17 points, these estimates imply that even small deviations from a student’s
“average” score can have significant consequences on adult income.
In Panel B, we use the first-stage relationship between pollution and the Bagrut composite score to
examine the mechanisms underlying the strong relationship between scores and earnings. Since the Bagrut
composite score is an important factor in gaining admission into lucrative courses of study, it is logical to
examine whether the instrumented score is correlated with subsequent educational outcomes. As shown in
Panel B, we find that each additional instrumented point increases the probability of receiving a
matriculation certificate by 2 percentage points, enrollment rates in post-secondary schooling by 1.9
percentage points, and post-secondary educational attainment by .092 years. This indicates that an
additional Bagrut point has a tremendous economic value to a student, and even random variation in scores
can have important consequences for a student’s future attainment of post-secondary schooling.

15

In Panel C, we exploit the relationship between pollution exposure and the Bagrut composite score
to estimate the return to an additional year of post-secondary schooling. It is worth noting that this strategy
does not identify ‘cleanly’ the rate of return to schooling since the Bagrut score can directly affect earnings,
and therefore its omission might violate the exclusion restriction. However, as way of benchmarking our
results, we wish to compute the return to education and compare our estimates to those found in the existing
literature. Treating post-secondary schooling as the endogenous regressor and PM2.5 as the instrument, we
estimate using 2SLS that each additional year of post-secondary schooling is worth 707 ($191) shekels.
This estimate implies that a one sd (16.7) change in average air quality changes average monthly earnings
by 0.1 sd (16.8). Relative to the average monthly earnings of 5,084 shekels ($1,374) in our sample of young
adults, this means that fortunate students who have less pollution on their Bagrut exams dates will have
long-term economic benefits to their good luck. This estimate implies a rate of return to college education
of 14%, which is somewhat higher in comparison with recent estimates in Israel and elsewhere. For
example, Angrist and Chen exploit variation in veteran status and the GI Bill to estimate a return to
education of roughly 9% (Angrist and Chen 2011).
While our IV approach will not be valid if pollution exposure on exam dates leads to a permanent
diminution of intellectual ability, in light of the highly temporary nature of pollution in Israel, such as
sandstorms, we think it is unlikely that our effects are picking up such an effect. In Lavy et al. (2013), we
present evidence that exposure to pollution in our data is only related to temporary variation in performance.
We find that a student’s average pollution exposure during the Bagrut period (May-July) in 11th grade has
no correlation with his or her average Bagrut scores on exams taken in May-July of 12th grade, suggesting
that the effects we estimate are capturing the consequences of short-term random shocks, rather than
reflecting long-term cognitive diminution.
We examine possible mechanisms for our results by examining how pollution affects the
probability of a student matriculating at different types of post-secondary institutions. If our results are
operating through a mechanism in which the Bagrut is a gatekeeper to lucrative occupations, we should
find that our results are driven by large estimated effects for universities, and milder effects for academic
16

colleges. In fact, it may be that for students who attend technical schools, there is no financial value to
passing the Bagrut, insofar as they purse a profession of a technical nature. This could similarly be true for
students planning to be small business managers, which is common in Israel, especially among the IsraeliArab population, who generally have more limited access to lucrative professions. 16 As reported in Table
A3, this is indeed the case, with our effects significant and negative only for the probability of attending a
university. In fact, interestingly, the impact of pollution is positive (though imprecisely measured) for the
less competitive programs, such as teacher’s colleges and semi-engineering programs, possibly due to
students being shifted out of universities or academic colleges and into these less selective programs.

IV.

Heterogeneity
In this section, we examine heterogeneity in the relationship between the average Bagrut score and

long-term schooling and economic outcomes using the variation generated by pollution. We stratify our
data by comparing three groups: boys and girls, academically stronger and weaker students, and students
from high and low socioeconomic background. We begin with an analysis of the first stage relationship
between pollution and test scores in the three sub-samples. Our motivation for this stratification is twofold.
First, we have a prior that asthma rates are higher among boys and among those of lower SES. Insofar as
we observe larger effects for these groups, it sheds light on a possible mechanism for our finding, and
implies that our result is being driven partly by a physiological mechanism. Second, in terms of fairness, it
is worth considering how these exams affect different students. Since these exams are often the gatekeeper
for prized occupations in Israel, it is worth investigating how different students are able to capitalize on
these forms of achievement.
A.

Heterogeneity in the Responsiveness to Pollution
We first examine whether there is heterogeneity in the relationship between scores and pollution

Willis and Rosen (1979) find that, in a sample of World War II veterans, comparative advantage dictates whether
people sort into higher education. This is consistent with our findings, which indicate that there is almost no marginal
value of academic achievement for the lower ability students.
16

17

by building on a set of stylized facts regarding which groups would be most sensitive to poor air quality,
taken from an extensive medical literature. First, Israeli boys are more likely to be asthmatic than Israeli
girls (Laor et al. 1993). Second, children of lower economic status are known to have higher rates of asthma
and respiratory illnesses (Eriksson et al. 2006, Basagana et al. 2004). Third, Laor et al. (1993) also found
that Ashdkenazic Jews (ethnic origin from America and Europe) have 63% higher incidence of these
illnesses than Sephardim (ethnic origin from Africa and Asia). This gives a rich set of potential comparisons
for gauging whether asthma (or other respiratory illnesses) is a mechanism for the observed reduced form
relationship between pollution and exam outcomes.
We estimate models in the same manner as those reported in Table 2, based on panel data at the
exam level, separately by sex, student quality, and student background (SES). These results are presented
in Table A4. The evidence in Panel A suggest that boys are between 2 and 4 times more sensitive to
pollution than girls. We posit that the difference could be partly generated by the different asthma rates in
these cohorts. Another possibility is that male students are more likely to be affected by small cognitive
decline and distraction, consistent with higher rates of Attention Deficit Disorder in males (Biederman et
al. 2002). As shown in Panel B, a similar pattern is found when comparing between academically weaker
and stronger students. When we stratify the students by whether their Magen score is above or below the
median, our estimated treatment effects for PM2.5 are more than two times larger among those classified as
low achievers. The results also indicate a similarity between results estimated with school and student fixed
effects, which is reassuring since our results on earnings are estimated at the student level and rely on school
fixed effects. Lastly, in Panel C, we stratify the sample by SES. It may be that poorer families are more
affected by air pollution as well, due to lower ability to engage in compensating behavior (Neidell 2004).
Poorer children also have higher incidence of asthma (Basagana et al. 2004, Eriksson et al. 2006). We proxy
SES with the student’s father’s education, with high SES being students with a father above the median

18

value in our sample. We again find evidence in support of an interpretation that the relationship between
pollution and exam performance is driven by a physiological mechanism.17
B.

Heterogeneity in the Long-Term Consequences of the Bagrut
In this section, we examine the long term schooling and economic consequences of the Bagrut for

different sub-populations in Israel. We repeat the group breakdowns used earlier, dstratifying students by
sex, quality, and socio-economic background. In Table 4, columns 1 and 2 of Panel A, we present estimates
of the return to an additional point on the Bagrut using 2SLS, where the Bagrut composite score is treated
as the endogenous regressor and PM2.5 is the instrument. Our results by student sex are reported in columns
1 and 2, and indicate that the return to an additional point is roughly 60% higher for boys than girls: 78
shekels vs 59 shekels ($21 vs $16). One explanation is that women choose less financially rewarding fields
of study than men, even when they have similar qualifications, as a result of gender attitudes in Israel. It is
also worth noting that although female labor force participation rates are relatively similar to the US, Israeli
women have much higher fertility than their American counterparts. 18 This may lead Israeli women to
choose less lucrative professions than men and often work part time, which would be reflected in a lower
payoff per additional year of higher education. In our context, this is plausible, since many Israelis work in
government jobs which are lower-wage, offer more flexible work schedules, and have generous maternity
leave policies. A second explanation is that this is driven by discrimination against women in the labor
market, resulting in a lower payoff to an additional year of schooling.

In Lavy, Ebenstein and Roth (2013), we examine the relationship between air pollution exposure and the probability
of failing a Bagrut exam for each of these sub-populations. The results indicate that boys are more sensitive to PM 2.5
than girls, lower quality students are more sensitive than stronger students, and students from lower SES backgrounds
are more sensitive than those from higher SES backgrounds. For example, raising the fraction of days with very
polluted air by 10 percentage points is associated with a .57 percentage point increase for boys in the chance of failing
a particular Bagrut in models with student fixed effects. Girls appear largely unaffected, with the increased chance of
not passing being statistically indistinguishable from zero. The gap is even more striking for student with low Magen
scores: a 10 percentage point increase in the fraction of days with very polluted air is associated with a .59 percentage
point increase in failure probability.
18
Average fertility rates in Israel are 3.0, roughly 50% higher than the US rate of 2.0 (World Bank, 2010). However,
employment rates are relatively similar. Among women 25-45, the employment rates among Israeli men and women
were 80% and 61% respectively (Israel 1995 census), compared to rates in the US of 86% and 69% (US 2010 census).
17

19

In columns 3 and 4, we find larger returns to a point among higher achievement students.
Specifically, stronger students experience a 124 shekel return to each point, compared to only a 80 shekel
return among lower quality students ($34 vs $22). We offer two explanations for this finding. First, it may
be related to the instrument we are using; insofar as our estimate is a local average treatment effect where
the disturbance to a student’s true potential is relatively small, the estimated return to an additional point
on the Bagrut will be larger among those who could participate in lucrative occupations. For weaker
students, pollution is not affecting their already-low chance of being accepted into a very lucrative
profession. A second explanation is that there are heterogeneous returns to different types of higher
education. So, for example, the return to an additional year of studying economics might be different than
the return to philosophy. Since Israeli majors have different standards for admission, with humanities
having lower standards generally, our estimates may be picking up the differences between the return to
different majors, which provide an avenue to different occupations. Unfortunately, our data do not contain
information on area of study, precluding further examination into this hypothesis.
In columns 5 and 6, we observe very large differences between students of high and low SES. The
return to an additional point is 105 shekels ($28) among high SES, and roughly half that amount for low
SES (56 shekels or $15). Interestingly, this gap is even larger than when we had previously split the sample
by Magen score in columns 1 and 2. This suggests that coming from a wealthier background raises the
return to education significantly, and in a more dramatic way than even stratifying by student quality. One
possible explanation is that parental income enables students to undertake longer and more costly academic
paths, but results in them landing ultimately in more lucrative positions. Having a non-binding funding
constraint could be a partial explanation for the higher return to higher education. Another explanation is
that credentials and connections are complements, so students with greater social capital and qualifications
can capitalize on their qualifications more than students from less privileged background.
In Panel B of Table 4, we examine the mechanisms for the aforementioned results by estimating
2SLS models where we instrument for a point with pollution and treat the Bagrut composite score as our
endogenous regressor. We repeat our earlier analysis performed on the overall sample, and examine 3
20

channels through which Bagrut scores may influence long run economic outcomes: by affecting the
probability of receiving a matriculation certificate, by affecting enrollment rates in post-secondary
institutions, and through its effect on total completed post-secondary education. Interestingly, we find that
girls, weaker students, and lower SES background students are more affected by each additional
instrumented point on the Bagrut than boys, stronger students, or higher SES background students. We
interpret this as evidence that the stakes of each point is higher for students with lower labor-force
attachment or less economic advantage – not necessarily economically in terms of the consequences for
wages, but in terms of their likelihood of pursuing post-secondary education.
For example, if male students are committed to participating in a lucrative profession, they will
perhaps be less dissuaded by a poor score; in Israel, students can attend a lower-ranked school in their field
of study of choice, if they are denied admission in the top programs in Tel Aviv or Jerusalem. Likewise,
stronger students and students from high SES background may proceed with their intended course of study
in spite of a bad score. Greater commitment to the labor force or greater access financial resources may
result in matriculation at campuses in other cities, such as Be’er Sheva, where students generally cannot
live at home and need to pay for dormitories but often have lower Bagrut score thresholds for admission.
Having sufficient economic resources could also facilitate a student retaking the exam in a subsequent year,
lowering the stakes of a single bad outcome for students from privileged backgrounds.19 Our analysis of
mechanisms highlights the disruptive effect of a poor Bagrut outcome on female and weaker/low SES
students, and is further evidence that reliance on the Bagrut has questionable properties in terms of
supporting a meritocratic environment.

C.

Heterogeneity in the Returns to Higher Education

Vigdor and Clotfelter found this to be important in the US context, where students from wealthier backgrounds
are more likely to retake the SAT (2003). However, since Israeli high-school graduates immediately begin a period
of military service (3 years for boys and 2 years for girls), retaking the exam is only possible with a long delay.
Therefore, retaking the exam is relatively uncommon but could explain in part the weaker relationship between
instrumented Bagrut scores and post-secondary education for students from high SES.
19

21

In Table 5, we examine heterogeneity in the estimated return to education by sub-population in
Israel using 2SLS, with pollution again as our instrument for Bagrut composite scores. Note that since
pollution affects scores as well, this will not satisfy the exclusion restriction, but is worth exploring
nonetheless to assess the economic magnitude of our estimated effects. In Panel A, where we stratify the
sample by sex, we estimate that an additional 100 units of PM2.5 reduces male and female post-secondary
schooling by 1.73 and 1.44 years respectively. We estimate that the return to an additional year of schooling
is 888 shekels and 564 shekels respectively ($240 versus $152), suggesting that male students are more
able to capitalize on post-secondary education, possibly due to the choice of more lucrative majors and
professions, discrimination in the labor force, or due to their stronger labor-force attachment. We also find
that stronger students are able to capitalize more from higher education: the wage return to post-secondary
schooling is nearly twice as high among stronger students, with each year increasing wages by 1,131 shekels
per month for strong students and only by 698 for weaker students. This pattern is even more extreme when
we consider students stratified by SES: an additional year is worth 1,264 shekels to a student of high SES
background, more than twice the return to low SES students (580 shekels). Similar to our discussion of the
return to a point on the Bagrut, this highlights the interplay between achievement and status: the results
indicate that the return to post-secondary education is largest among those most able to leverage this
achievement, highlighting an additional avenue by which high stakes examinations can affect the wage
distribution and wage inequality.
V.

Conclusion
This paper has examined the relationship between transitory shocks to performance in high stakes

exams and their long term consequences for determining college schooling attainment and earnings. We
exploited variation in ambient air pollution during high-stakes examinations as an instrumental variable,
and demonstrated that pollution affects student test scores on very important high-school exit exams, which
in turn affects post-secondary schooling and long run earnings. Our analysis consisted of two parts. First,
using a large sample of Israeli high-school Bagrut examinations (2000-2002), we presented evidence that

22

there is a robust negative relationship between academic outcomes and random fluctuations in ambient
pollution concentrations. Among Israeli sub-populations with higher rates of asthma and respiratory
illnesses, our estimated treatment effects for PM2.5 are larger, suggesting that physiological impairment is a
potential mechanism for our findings. Second, using matched data between students and their adult
earnings, we find that ambient pollution exposure during the Bagrut has long-term consequences; students
exposed to high levels of pollution during the Bagrut are less likely to receive a matriculation certificate,
have fewer years of post-secondary schooling, and have lower wages when they are observed 8-10 years
after high school graduation.
We argue that this is evidence that placing so much weight on Bagrut scores may reduce welfare
for unlucky students and lead to allocative inefficiencies. As a result this will negatively affect the overall
economy, as the mis-ranking of students due to variability in pollution exposure could result in poor
assignment of workers to different occupations and reduce labor productivity. Our findings also suggest
that the exams may be generating random variation in people’s opportunities, consistent with recent
concerns voiced by officials in the US regarding the reliance of the SATs for college admissions (Lewin
2014).

References
Angrist, J.D., and S.H. Chen. 2011. "Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill: Evidence from the Draft
Lottery." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2): 96-118.
Angrist, J. and Lavy, V. 1999. “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size on Scholastic
Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 533–575.
Angus, R. and R. Heslegrave, and W. Stewart Myles. 1985. “Effects of Prolonged Sleep Deprivation, With
and Without Chronic Physical Exercise, on Mood and Performance.” Psychophysiology, 22(3):276-282.
Basagaña, X., S. Jordi, K. Manolis, Zock, J., Duran-Tauleria, Enric, J.D., Burney, P. and Josep Maria Anto.
2004. “Socioeconomic status and asthma prevalence in young adults: the European Community
Respiratory Health Survey.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 160: 178–188.
Bell, M., JK and Lin Z. 2008. “The effect of sandstorms and air pollution on cause-specific hospital
admissions in Taipei, Taiwan.” Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 65: 104-111.

23

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan. 2001. “Are CEO’s Rewarded for Luck? The Ones Without Principals
Are.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3):901-932.
Biederman, J.M., E. Faraone, S. Braaten, E. Doyle, A. Spencer, T. Wilens, T. Frazier, E. and M.A. Johnson.
2002. "Influence of Gender on Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children Referred to a
Psychiatric Clinic." The American Journal of Psychiatry, 159: 36–42.
Braniš, M., Ř. Pavla, and M. Domasová. 2005. "The effect of outdoor air and indoor human activity on
mass concentrations of PM10, PM2.5, and PM1 in a classroom." Environmental Research, 99: 143–
149.
Calderón-Garcidueñas, L., Mora-Tiscareño, A., Ontiveros, E., Gómez-Garza, G., Barragán-Mejía, G.,
Broadway, J., Chapman, S., Valencia-Salazar, G., Jewells, V., Maronpot, RR., Henríquez-Roldán, C.,
Pérez-Guillé, B., Torres-Jardón, R., Herrit, L., Brooks, D., Osnaya-Brizuela, N., Monroy, M., GonzálezMaciel, A., Reynoso-Robles, R., Villarreal-Calderon, R., Solt. A., and R. Engle. 2008. "Air pollution,
cognitive deficits and brain abnormalities: a pilot study with children and dogs." Brain and Cognition,
68(2): 117-127.
Cawley, J, J. Heckman and E. Vytlacil. 2001. “Three observations on wages and cognitive ability.” Labour
Economics 8:419-442.
Chang, Tom, Joshua Graff Zivin, Tal Gross, Matthew Neidell. 2014. “Particulate Pollution and the
Productivity of Pear Packers”. NBER WP 19444.
Chay, Kenneth Y and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118(3):1121-116
Clark, D. and L. Sokoloff. 1999. "Circulation and energy metabolism of the brain," in G. Siegel, B.
Agranoff, R. Albers, S. Fisher and M. Uhler, eds., Basic Neurochemistry. Molecular, Cellular and
Medical Aspects, Lippincott-Raven, pp. 637–670.
Dockery, W., and C. Pope. 1996. “Epidemiology of Acute Health Effects: Summary of Time Series
Studies.” in R. Wilson and J. Spengler, eds., Particles in Our Air, Harvard University Press, 123-148.
Eriksson K., Hedlund U., and E. Ronmark. 2006. "Socio-economic status is related to incidence of asthma
and respiratory symptoms in adults." European Respiratory Journal, 28(2): 303-310.
Frisch, R. 2009. “The Economic Returns to Schooling in Israel”. Israel Economic Review (7)1:113–141.
Graff Z., J. S. and M. J. Neidell. 2012. "The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity." American
Economic Review 102:3652-3673.
Jarvis, Martin. 1993. Does caffeine intake enhance absolute levels of cognitive performance?
Psychopharmacology 110:45-52.

24

Lewin, Tamar. “A New SAT Aims to Realign With Schoolwork”. The New York Times 5 March 2014;
accessed

at:

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/06/education/major-changes-in-sat-announced-by-

college-board.html?_r=0. 10 March 2014.
Kampa, M., and E. Castanas. 2007. "Human health effects of air pollution." Environmental Pollution, 151:
362-367.
Laor, A., Cohen, L., and Y Danon. 1993. "Effects of time, sex, ethnic origin, and area of residence on
prevalence of asthma in Israeli adolescents." British Medical Journal, 307(6908): 841-844.
Lavy, V. 2009. “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading Ethics”, American
Economic Review, 99(5): 1979-2011.
Lavy, V., A. Ebenstein and S. Roth, “The Impact of Short Term Exposure to Ambient Air Pollution on
Cognitive Performance”, Mimeo 2013.
Moretti, E. and M. Neidell. 2011. "Pollution, Health, and Avoidance Behavior Evidence from the Ports of
Los Angeles." The Journal of Human Resources, 46(1): 154-175.
Neidell, M. 2004. "Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of outdoor air quality on
childhood asthma." Journal of Health Economics, 23: 1209–1236.
Oreopoulos, P., von Wachter, T. and Heisz, A. 2012 “The Short-and Long-Term Career Effects of
Graduating in a Recession.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(1): 1-29.
Oreopoulos, P. and U. Petronijevic, 2013. "Making College Worth It: A Review of Research on the Returns
to Higher Education," NBER Working Papers 19053.
Pope, C. III, Bates, D., and M. Raizenne. 1995. "Health Effects of Particulate Air Pollution: Time for
Reassessment?" Environmental Health Perspectives, 103: 472-480.
Pope, C. III, and D. Dockery. 2006. "Critical Review–Health effects of fine particulate air pollution: Lines
that connect." Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 56: 709-742.
Vigdor, Jacob L. and C. Clotfelter. 2003. “Retaking the SAT”. Journal of Human Resources 38:1-33.
Schlenker, W. and W. R. Walker. 2011. "Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous Health." NBER
Working Paper #17684.
Winerip, M. 2005. "SAT Essay Test Rewards Length and Ignores Errors". New York Times, May 5th.
Willis, R. and S. Rosen. 1979. “Education and Self-selection.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(5):S7S36.

25

Table 1
Summary Statistics: Particulate Matter Exposure and Israeli Bagrut Scores
By Magen Score
1
(Course Grade )

By Sex
Variable

All
(1)

Boys
(2)

Girls
(3)

Low Scores
(4)

High Scores
(5)

Panel A: Exam-Level Data
Pollution Measures
PM2.5

21.05

20.89

21.18

21.15

20.96

3

(10.86)

(10.57)

(11.10)

(10.88)

(10.87)

PM2.5
(AQI Index)

59.74

59.47

59.98

60.01

59.51

(22.81)

(22.50)

(23.08)

(22.89)

(22.75)

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

(0.21)

(0.21)

(0.22)

(0.22)

(0.21)

70.76

68.91

72.33

53.22

77.10

(23.74)

(24.86)

(22.64)

(30.69)

(22.18)

0.19

0.21

0.17

0.33

0.04

(0.39)

(0.41)

(0.37)

(0.47)

(0.19)

75.45

73.27

77.30

64.09

86.93

(21.37)

(22.50)

(20.19)

(23.25)

(10.47)

Temperature
(celsius)

23.81
(2.61)

23.81
(2.61)

23.82
(2.62)

23.84
(2.66)

23.83
(2.50)

Relative Humidity
(percent saturation)

50.90

50.86

50.94

50.98

50.95

(14.71)

(14.52)

(14.87)

(15.08)

(14.35)

Observations

415,219

190,410

224,809

206,571

204,527

(µg/m )

PM2.5
(AQI ≥101)
Examination Outcomes
Bagrut Exam Score
(1-100 points)
Failed a Bagrut Exam
(1=yes)
Magen Score
(1-100 points)
Climate Controls

Panel B: Student-Level Data
Demographic Information
Mother’s Education
(years)

11.44
(5.04)

11.60
(5.09)

11.30
(5.00)

10.79
(4.87)

12.08
(5.13)

Father’s Education
(years)

11.62
(5.03)

11.83
(5.02)

11.44
(5.03)

10.85
(4.84)

12.39
(5.10)

Number of Siblings

2.02
(1.58)

1.95
(1.49)

2.07
(1.65)

2.03
(1.61)

2.00
(1.55)

72.33
(22.64)

53.22
(30.69)

77.10
(22.18)

Bagrut Outcomes and Matriculation Certification Rates
Bagrut Composite Score

70.76
(23.74)

68.91
(24.86)

0.68
(0.47)

0.64
(0.48)

0.71
(0.45)

0.48
(0.50)

0.91
(0.28)

Post-Secondary Enrollment Rates
Any Post-Secondary
0.631

0.602

0.656

0.475

0.821

Matriculation
Certification Rate

University

0.274

0.258

0.289

0.115

0.469

Academic Colleges

0.248

0.253

0.244

0.244

0.253

Teacher & Semi-eng.

0.070

0.063

0.076

0.078

0.059

Other2

0.046

0.036

0.055

0.046

0.047

Post-Secondary Schooling in Years
Any Post-Secondary
2.25
(2.15)

2.05
(2.10)

2.42
(2.18)

1.45
(1.86)

3.23
(2.08)

University

1.03
(1.90)

0.95
(1.83)

1.10
(1.95)

0.35
(1.13)

1.85
(2.28)

Academic Colleges

0.83
(1.47)

0.80
(1.44)

0.85
(1.50)

0.73
(1.38)

0.95
(1.57)

Teachers & Semiengineering

0.26

0.21

0.31

0.25

0.27

(0.87)

(0.68)

(1.00)

(0.82)

(0.92)

( NIS 2010)

5,084
(4,515)

5,531
(5,198)

4,699
(3,788)

4,867
(4,053)

5,352
(5,013)

Observations

55,796

26,158

29,638

30,668

25,128

Adult Earnings
Monthly Wages
3

Notes : Standard deviations are in parentheses. In Panel A, each observation represents a Bagrut exam. The
measure of pollution is particulate matter smaller than 2.5 microns, or PM2.5. The AQI value for each reading
is calculated from a formula that converts micrograms (µg/m3) into a 1-500 index value. Relative humidity is
1
the amount of moisture in the air as a share of what the air can hold at that temperature. The low and high
subsamples were based on being above or below the median of a student's average Magen score over all
subjects. In Panel B, each observation represents a student. The pollution and climate controls are averages
over a student's exams. Receiving a matriculation certificate is determined by a combination of the student's
average Bagrut and Magen score. 2The other programs include technical schools, non-academic colleges,
3
and smaller schools. Wages are repoted in monthly New Israeli Shekels ($1=3.6 NIS) and are taken for
2010 from the students who took Bagrut examinations between 2000 and 2002. The schooling and wage
outcomes were made available by the Israeli National Insurance Institute (Bituach Leumi). Each student's
record contains whether they matriculated at a post-secondary institution, and the number of years they were
enrolled at the institution.

Table 2
Reduced Form Effect of Particulate Matter On Post-Secondary
Education and Adult Earnings
Pooled OLS

Fixed Effects

Controls
(1)

City
(2)

School
(3)

Bagrut Composite Score

-6.7
(0.84)

-26.6
(1.28)

-16.4
(1.85)

Number of Bagrut Failures

0.81
(0.84)

1.97
(0.11)

1.06
(0.20)

Proportion of Bagrut Failures

0.08
(0.01)

0.27
(0.02)

0.15
(0.03)

Matriculation Certification

-0.23
(0.02)

-0.53
(0.03)

-0.33
(0.05)

Enrolled in Post Secondary
Institution (1=yes)

-0.09
(0.02)

-0.50
(0.03)

-0.31
(0.04)

Completed Years of Postsecondary Education

-0.67
(0.09)

-2.36
(0.13)

-1.52
(0.18)

Average Monthly Earnings
(NIS)

-1,548
(326)

-1,199
(331)

-1,093
(344)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. The table reports
the relationship between average PM2.5(AQI) during the Bagrut and the listed
outcome, estimated using the student-level sample described in Table 1. All
regressions include suppressed controls for average temperature and humidity
during the Bagrut , mother's and father's years of schooling, sex, and age in 2010.
The coefficients are reported per 100 units of AQI. Standard errors are clustered
at the school level, are heteroskedastic-consistent, and are reported below the
coefficients in parentheses.

Table 3
The Economic and Academic Return to the Bagrut Composite Score
Pooled OLS
Controls
(1)

Fixed Effects
City
(2)

School
(3)

Panel A: Effect of the Bagrut Composite Score on Adult Earnings using
PM 2.5 (AQI) as an IV
First Stage

-6.66
(0.84)

-26.57
(1.27)

-16.38
(1.85)

Reduced Form

-1528
(324)

-1203
(327)

-1073
(341)

2SLS

229
(147)

45
(13)

66
(21)

Panel B: Effect of the Bagrut Composite Score on Follow Up Academic Outcomes
using PM 2.5 (AQI) as an IV
Matriculation Certification

0.034
(0.011)

0.020
(0.002)

0.020
(0.002)

Enrolled in Post Secondary
Institution (1=yes)

0.016
(0.006)

0.019
(0.002)

0.019
(0.002)

Completed Years of Postsecondary Education

0.105
(0.026)

0.089
(0.006)

0.092
(0.009)

Panel C: Estimated Return to Post-Secondary Education using PM 2.5 (AQI) as an IV
First Stage

-0.67
(0.09)

-2.36
(0.13)

-1.52
(0.18)

Reduced Form

-1548
(326)

-1199
(331)

-1093
(344)

2SLS

2278
(1343)

509
(139)

707
(219)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. The regressions are
estimated in the same manner as those reported in Table 4. In Panel A, we present 2SLS
models of the relationship between the Bagrut Composite Score and Adult Earnings
using PM2.5(AQI) as an instrumental variable. In Panel B, we present 2SLS models of
the relationship between Bagrut Composite Score and other academic outcomes, using
PM2.5(AQI) as an instrumental variable. In Panel C, we estimate the implied return to
post-secondary schooling using PM2.5(AQI) as the instrument. Standard errors are
clustered at the school level, are heteroskedastic-consistent, and are reported below the
coefficients in parentheses.

Table 4
Heterogeneity in the Economic and Academic Return to the Bagrut Composite Score
By Sex
Boys
Girls
(1)
(2)

By Student Quality
Low
High
(3)
(4)

By Socio-Economic
Status
Low
High
(5)
(6)

Panel A: Effect of the Bagrut Composite Score on Adults Earnings using PM 2.5 (AQI) as an IV
First Stage

-19.72
(2.65)

-13.69
(1.94)

-6.61
(1.84)

-12.15
(1.65)

-13.22
(1.98)

-21.10
(2.52)

Reduced Form

-1,540
(495)

-810
(421)

-530
(352)

-1,510
(622)

-747
(288)

-2,205
(734)

78
(27)

59
(30)

80
(58)

124
(51)

56
(24)

105
(32)

2SLS

Panel B: Effect of the Bagrut Composite Score on Follow up Academic Outcomes
Matriculation
Certification

0.017
(0.002)

0.025
(0.003)

0.032
(0.008)

0.011
(0.004)

0.023
(0.003)

0.015
(0.002)

Enrolled in Post
Secondary
Institution (1=yes)

0.018
(0.002)

0.020
(0.003)

0.029
(0.008)

0.019
(0.004)

0.021
(0.003)

0.013
(0.002)

Completed Years
of Post-secondary
Education

0.087
(0.010)

0.108
(0.014)

0.108
(0.030)

0.118
(0.015)

0.096
(0.013)

0.085
(0.010)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. The regressions are estimated in the same manner as
those reported in Table 4. Student quality is determined by whether the student's average Magen score was above
or below the median. High SES is defined as children whose father was above the median level of education.

Table 5
Heterogeneity in the Estimated Return to Post-Secondary Education
By Sex
Boys
Girls
(1)
(2)

By Student Quality
Low
High
(3)
(4)

By Socio-Economic
Status
Low
High
(5)
(6)

First Stage

-1.73
(0.22)

-1.44
(0.23)

-0.76
(0.15)

-1.33
(0.27)

-1.29
(0.19)

-1.74
(0.29)

Reduced Form

-1,559
(498)

-839
(428)

-521
(355)

-1,568
(617)

-743
(288)

-2,251
(747)

2SLS

888
(296)

564
(265)

698
(484)

1,131
(454)

580
(235)

1,264
(405)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. Standard errors are clustered by school. Each
estimate is in terms of a single year of additional post-secondary schooling, and the instrument is PM 2.5(AQI).
Student quality is determined by whether the student's average Magen score was above or below the median.
High SES is defined as children whose father was above the median level of education. Standard errors are
heteroskedastic-consistent and are reported below the coefficients in parentheses.

Figure 1
Locations of Major Cities and Air Quality Monitoring Stations in
Israel

Notes : The boundaries of Israel are reported in the plot, with the main cities
shaded in.

Table A1
Balancing Tests: Assessing the Relationship between
Students' Characteristics and Pollution
Variable

Pooled OLS
(1)

School Fixed Effects
(2)

Female
(1=yes)

0.00
(0.00)

0.10
(0.00)

Father’s Education

0.10
(1.00)

0.40
(0.50)

Mother’s Education

0.30
(1.00)

-0.10
(0.60)

Number of Siblings

0.60
(0.30)

0.30
(0.10)

Ashkenazi
(1=yes)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

Sephardi
(1=yes)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

Father Born in Israel
(1=yes)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

Observations

54,294

54,294

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression, where
the dependent variable is PM2.5(AQI) and the independent variable
is the coviate listed in the row. The regressions are estimated in the
same manners as those presented in Table 2.

Table A2
Relationship Between Particulate Matter Exposure During Previous
Exams and Average Bagrut Scores at Conclusion of 12th Grade
Pooled OLS
No controls Controls
(1)
(2)

Fixed Effects
City
School
(3)
(4)

Panel A: All Students
-0.80
(2.90)

0.90
(2.80)

-0.40
(3.50)

1.70
(2.10)

Boys

-0.90
(3.40)

0.30
(3.50)

-2.40
(4.50)

-0.70
(2.80)

Girls

-1.20

1.30

0.90

4.00

(2.80)

(3.00)

(3.60)

(2.40)

Panel B: By Sex

Panel C: By Student Quality
Low Achievement
Students

2.60
(2.50)

3.30
(2.50)

0.20
(3.30)

2.60
(2.30)

High Achievement
Students

1.30
(1.10)

1.40
(1.10)

1.10
(1.60)

2.30
(1.30)

Panel D: By Socio-Economic Status (SES)
Low SES

-2.10
(2.90)

0.80
(3.00)

1.00
(3.50)

1.30
(2.30)

High SES

1.10
(3.00)

0.10
(2.80)

-1.30
(4.10)

2.20
(2.80)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. The regressions are
estimated in the same manners as those presented in Table 2. Student quality is
determined by whether the student's average Magen score was above or below the
median. High SES is defined as children whose father was above the median level
of education. Standard errors are heteroskedastic-consistent and are reported
below the coefficients in parentheses.

Table A3
Particulate Matter's Impact on Post-Secondary Schooling by Type
LHS: Enrolled in PostSecondary Institution (1=yes)
City
School
(1)
(2)

LHS: Completed Years of PostSecondary Education
City
School
(3)
(4)

All Post-Secondary
Institutions

-0.495
(0.069)

-0.298
(0.040)

-2.353
(0.306)

-1.527
(0.182)

Universities

-0.537
(0.070)

-0.369
(0.044)

-2.225
(0.292)

-1.568
(0.184)

Academic Colleges

-0.086
(0.042)

0.019
(0.031)

-0.411
(0.130)

-0.036
(0.102)

Teacher and Semiengineering

0.039
(0.030)

0.008
(0.019)

0.119
(0.070)

0.058
(0.049)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. In each regression, the dependent
variable is either enrollment (columns 1 and 2) or years of schooling (columns 3 and 4) at the
listed academic type. The depdent variable is the average PM2.5 (AQI) exposure during the
student's Bagrut examinations. The regressions are estimated with the same controls as those
presented in Table 4, and the coefficients are reported per 100 units of PM2.5 (AQI). The column
title reports whether fixed effects are included at the city or school level. Standard errors are
heteroskedastic-consistent and are reported below the coefficients in parentheses.

Table A4
Heterogeneity in the Impact of PM2.5 on Bagrut Test Scores
PM2.5 (AQI Index)
School
Student
(1)
(2)

PM2.5 (AQI >=101)
School
Student
(3)
(4)

Panel A: By Sex
Boys

-0.10
(0.01)

-0.08
(0.01)

-5.33
(0.82)

-4.10
(0.87)

Girls

-0.04
(0.01)

-0.02
(0.01)

-0.66
(0.80)

-0.38
(0.83)

Panel B: By Student Quality
Low Achievement
Students

-0.08
(0.01)

-0.06
(0.01)

-3.86
(1.04)

-3.49
(1.10)

High Achievement
Students

-0.03
(0.01)

-0.03
(0.01)

-0.93
(0.57)

-0.76
(0.68)

Panel C: By Socio-Economic Status (SES)
Low SES

-0.07
(0.01)

-0.05
(0.01)

-2.76
(0.74)

-2.07
(0.77)

High SES

-0.06
(0.01)

-0.04
(0.01)

-2.40
(0.86)

-1.66
(0.93)

Notes : Each cell in the table represents a separate regression. The regressions are
estimated in the same manners as those reported in Table 2. Student quality is
determined by whether the student's average Magen score was above or below the
median. High SES is composed of children whose father was above the median level of
education in the sample. The column title reports whether fixed effects are included at
the school or student level. Coefficients are reported per 100 units of AQI. Standard
errors are heteroskedastic-consistent and are reported below the coefficients in
parentheses.

