NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

“NASH-IN-NASH” BARGAINING:
A MICROFOUNDATION FOR APPLIED WORK
Allan Collard-Wexler
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Robin S. Lee
Working Paper 20641
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20641

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014, Revised June 2017

This paper was previously circulated under the title “Bargaining in Bilateral Oligopoly: An
Alternating Offers Representation of the Nash-in-Nash Solution.” We would like to thank Elliot
Lipnowski, Sebastián Fleitas, and Eli Liebman for excellent research assistance; Attila Ambrus,
John Asker, Catherine de Fontenay, Joshua Gans, Patrick Greenlee, Heski Bar-Isaac, Rachel
Kranton, Volcker Nocke, Janine Miklos-Thal, Dan O'Brien, Alexander Raskovich, Stan
Reynolds, Michael Riordan, Christopher Snyder, Mike Whinston, Tom Wiseman, Ali Yurukoglu,
and numerous seminar audiences for useful discussion; and the editor and three anonymous
referees for helpful comments. Gowrisankaran acknowledges funding from the National Science
Foundation (Grant SES-1425063). The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Allan Collard-Wexler, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robin S. Lee. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

“Nash-in-Nash” Bargaining: A Microfoundation for Applied Work
Allan Collard-Wexler, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robin S. Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 20641
October 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. C78,D43,L13
ABSTRACT
A “Nash equilibrium in Nash bargains” has become a workhorse bargaining model in applied
analyses of bilateral oligopoly. This paper proposes a non-cooperative foundation for “Nash-inNash” bargaining that extends the Rubinstein (1982) alternating offers model to multiple
upstream and downstream firms. We provide conditions on firms’ marginal contributions under
which there exists, for sufficiently short time between offers, an equilibrium with agreement
among all firms at prices arbitrarily close to “Nash-in-Nash prices”—i.e., each pair's Nash
bargaining solution given agreement by all other pairs. Conditioning on equilibria without
delayed agreement, limiting prices are unique. Unconditionally, they are unique under stronger
assumptions.
Allan Collard-Wexler
Department of Economics
Duke University
233 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
allan.collard-wexler@duke.edu
Gautam Gowrisankaran
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
P.O. Box 210108
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and HEC Montreal
and also NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu

Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

Bilateral bargaining between pairs of agents is pervasive in many economic environments.
Manufacturers bargain with retailers over wholesale prices, and firms negotiate with unions
over wages paid to workers. As an example, in 2015, private insurers in the United States
paid hospitals $403 billion and physicians and clinics $272 billion for their services.1 Private
prices for medical services are determined neither by perfect competition, nor by take-itor-leave-it offers (as is assumed in Bertrand competition). Instead, they are predominantly
determined by bilateral negotiations between medical providers and insurers.
A substantial theoretical literature has sought to understand the equilibrium outcomes
of bilateral bargaining in a variety of settings, including buyer-seller networks (e.g., Kranton
and Minehart, 2001; Corominas-Bosch, 2004; Manea, 2011) and wage negotiations (e.g., Jun,
1989; Stole and Zwiebel, 1996). To derive meaningful predictions, many of these papers have
focused on environments where a single agent is involved in all bargains, or where a transaction between two agents does not affect the value of trade for others. Concurrently, an
applied literature—both empirical and theoretical—has focused on surplus division within
bilateral oligopoly environments with the goal of evaluating a range of industrial organization questions, including: the welfare impact of horizontal mergers (Chipty and Snyder,
1999), bundling (Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012), and vertical integration (Crawford, Lee,
Whinston, and Yurukoglu, 2015) in cable television; the effects of price discrimination for
medical devices (Grennan, 2013); and the price impact of hospital mergers (Gowrisankaran,
Nevo, and Town, 2015) and health insurance competition (Ho and Lee, 2017). Increasingly,
this applied literature is influencing antitrust and regulatory policy.2 The applied literature
has emphasized interdependencies and externalities across firms and agreements, because
they are often fundamental to bilateral oligopoly environments.3
To tractably and feasibly analyze the division of surplus in bilateral oligopoly settings
1

See Exhibit 1 on p. 4 of “National Health Expenditure Accounts: Methodology Paper, 2015” at
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
NationalHealthExpendData/Downloads/DSM-15.pdf accessed on May 2, 2017.
2
The Federal Communication Commission used a bargaining model similar to that analyzed in this paper
in its analysis of the Comcast-NBC merger (Rogerson, 2013) and in recent hospital merger cases (Farrell,
Balan, Brand, and Wendling, 2011). Also, in a recent ruling in a restraint of trade case in sports broadcasting,
Judge Shira Scheindlin’s opinion heavily referenced the Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) bargaining framework
as an appropriate way to consider competition in this sector (cf. Thomas Laumann v National Hockey League
(J. Scheindlin, S.D.N.Y. 2015 12-cv-1817 Doc. 431)).
3
For instance, negotiations between insurers and hospitals are typically interdependent: i.e., an insurer’s
value from having one hospital in its network depends on the other hospitals are already in its network. Thus,
hospital mergers may raise prices in a bargaining context because the loss to an insurance company from
removing multiple hospitals is worse than the sum of the losses from removing individual hospitals (Capps,
Dranove, and Satterthwaite, 2003). A bargaining model that did not allow for such interdependencies would
typically rule out a price increase following a merger.

2

with interdependent payoffs, the applied literature has leveraged the relatively simple solution concept proposed by Horn and Wolinsky (1988a) (which studied horizontal merger
incentives in the presence of exclusive vertical relationships). This bargaining solution is a
set of transfer prices between “upstream” and “downstream” firms where the price negotiated between any pair of firms is the Nash bargaining solution (Nash, 1950) for that pair
given that all other pairs reach agreement. Because this solution can be cast as a “Nash equilibrium in Nash bargains”—i.e., separate bilateral Nash bargaining problems within a Nash
equilibrium to a game played among all pairs of firms—we refer to it as the “Nash-in-Nash”
solution.4 The Nash-in-Nash solution provides easily computable payments for complicated
environments with interdependencies. It is also based on marginal valuations, which fits well
with classical price theory. Yet, the Nash-in-Nash solution has been criticized by some as an
ad hoc solution that nests a cooperative game theory concept of Nash bargaining within a
non-cooperative Nash equilibrium. Non-cooperative microfoundations for the Nash-in-Nash
solution that have been previously developed generally have assumed that firms do not use
all the information that may be at their disposal at any point in time: i.e., most use “delegated agent” models where firms involved in multiple bilateral bargains rely on separate
agents for each negotiation, and agents (even those from the same firm) cannot communicate
with one another during the course of bargaining.5
The purpose of this paper is to provide support for the Nash-in-Nash solution as a
viable surplus division rule in the applied analysis of bilateral oligopoly by specifying a
non-cooperative microfoundation that does not require firms to behave independently (or
“schizophrenically”) across bargains. We contribute to the “Nash program” of pairing noncooperative and axiomatic approaches to strategic bargaining problems (cf. Binmore, 1987;
Serrano, 2005), and share the same motivation as Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986)
who sought to “provide a more solid grounding for applications of the Nash bargaining
solution in economic modeling.” We develop a simple extensive form bargaining game that
extends their analysis and the classic Rubinstein (1982) model of alternating offers between
two parties to the bilateral oligopoly case with multiple upstream and downstream firms.
Focusing on environments where transfer prices between firms are lump-sum and where there
4

Crucially, this solution assumes that each bilateral pair bargains as if the negotiated prices (or contracts)
of all other pairs of firms do not adjust in response to a bargaining disagreement or breakdown. The Nashin-Nash solution is a type of contract equilibrium as defined in Cremer and Riordan (1987), and has also been
employed in several theoretical papers including Davidson (1988), Dobson (1994), Björnerstedt and Stennek
(2007), Dobson and Waterson (2007), and Inderst and Montez (2014).
5
For instance, Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) sketch a non-cooperative extensive form game generating this solution, writing: “Each distributor and each conglomerate sends separate representatives to each
meeting. Once negotiations start, representatives of the same firm do not coordinate with each other. We
view this absence of informational asymmetries as a weakness of the bargaining model.” See also Chipty and
Snyder (1999) and Björnerstedt and Stennek (2007).

3

are gains from trade between every pair of firms that are allowed to contract, we prove two
main sets of results.
The first set of results provides sufficient conditions for the existence of a Nash-in-Nash
limit equilibrium—i.e., an equilibrium where all agreements are formed, with formation at
prices that are arbitrarily close to the Nash-in-Nash solution when the time between offers
is sufficiently short. Our conditions place limits on the extent to which the sum of a firm’s
marginal gains from individual agreements within a set can exceed its marginal gains from
the entire set of agreements. These conditions are satisfied in environments where firms on
the same side of the market are substitutes for one another, and also in environments with
limited complementarities.
Our second set of results concerns the uniqueness of equilibrium prices. We prove that
any no-delay equilibrium—i.e., an equilibrium where all agreements (that have not yet been
formed) form immediately following every history of play (as is the case for the equilibria
that we construct for our existence results)—must have agreements that form at prices that
are arbitrarily close to the Nash-in-Nash solution when the time between offers is sufficiently
short. We also provide sufficient conditions for all equilibria to have this property without conditioning on no-delay equilibria. Our results do not restrict attention to stationary
strategies, as is the case with refinements such as Markov perfect equilibrium.
We believe that our work has three general takeaways. First, by extending the Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986) non-cooperative foundation for Nash bargaining to
environments with multiple upstream and downstream firms, we provide a microfoundation
for applied work using the the Nash-in-Nash solution as a surplus division rule in bilateral
oligopoly. Second, our equilibrium existence results clarify when and provide conditions under which Nash-in-Nash may be an appropriate solution concept. Finally, our uniqueness
results suggest that the Nash-in-Nash solution may be a relatively robust outcome across a
variety of settings.
Overview. We now briefly discuss our model, results, and proofs.
We consider the class of bilateral oligopoly games where firm profits (net of negotiated
transfers) depend only on the set of bilateral agreements that have been formed between
upstream and downstream firms. We condition on the set of agreements that can be formed,
and assume that there are gains from trade from each agreement within that set (given that
all other agreements in that set form). Our extensive form game adapts the Rubinstein (1982)
bargaining protocol to a setting with multiple agents. In odd periods, each downstream firm
makes simultaneous private offers to each upstream firm with which it has not yet formed
an agreement; each upstream firm then accepts or rejects any subset of its offers. In even
4

periods, roles are reversed, with upstream firms making private offers and downstream firms
accepting or rejecting them. If an offer is accepted, a fixed lump-sum payment (or “price”)
is made and an agreement forms between the two firms. At the end of each period, the set
(or “network”) of agreements that has been formed is observed by all firms, and upstream
and downstream firms earn flow profits. These profits, assumed to be a primitive of the
analysis, are a function only of the set of agreements formed up to that point, and allow for
flexible interdependencies across agreements.6 Crucially, our model admits the possibility
that a firm can engage in deviations across multiple negotiations, and also optimally respond
to information acquired from one of its negotiations in others.
Our game has imperfect information since, within a period, firms do not see offers for
agreements that do not involve them. We employ pure-strategy weak perfect Bayesian
equilibrium with passive beliefs as our solution concept. Passive beliefs restricts firms to
believe, upon receiving an off-the-equilibrium path offer, that all unobserved actions remain
equilibrium actions. This solution concept has been widely used and employed in the vertical
contracting literature to analyze similar types of problems (cf. Hart and Tirole, 1990; McAfee
and Schwartz, 1994).
We provide two sets of conditions that ensure the existence of a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium. The first set is a single assumption which we refer to as weak conditional decreasing
marginal contributions (abbreviated as A.WCDMC, where “A.” refers to assumption). It
requires that the marginal contribution from any set of agreements be no less than the sum
of the marginal contributions from each individual agreement within that set for all firms
when all other agreements have been formed. A.WCDMC is implied if firms on the same
side of the market were viewed as at least weak substitutes by the other side. We show that
A.WCDMC is necessary and sufficient for there to exist an equilibrium of our bargaining
game where agreements form immediately at prices that correspond to the pairwise Rubinstein (1982) prices for each pair of firms (given that all other firms reach agreement). These
prices converge to the Nash-in-Nash solution as the length of time between offers goes to
zero (Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky, 1986).
Our second set of conditions is a pair of assumptions that simultaneously weakens
A.WCDMC for one side of the market (i.e., either upstream or downstream firms) and
strengthens it for the other side, thereby extending the settings under which our results apply. The weaker assumption—feasibility (A.FEAS)—states that the marginal profits to each
firm from any set of its agreements are weakly greater than the sum of the Nash-in-Nash
prices that are made (or received) for those agreements.7 A.WCDMC implies A.FEAS. The
6

This rules out, e.g., certain settings where agreements specify linear wholesale prices, and downstream
firms then engage in price competition for consumers. See Section 5 for further discussion.
7
Since downstream firms pay upstream firms, these payments are the prices for downstream firms and

5

stronger assumption—strong conditional decreasing marginal contributions (A.SCDMC)—
states that the marginal contribution to each firm from an agreement are lower when all
other agreements have been formed than when certain subsets of agreements have been
formed. A.SCDMC implies A.WCDMC. We prove that A.FEAS is necessary for there to
exist a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium where all agreements form immediately, and is sufficient when combined with A.SCDMC holding for one side of the market. We view our
existence results to be the most important from the point of view of applied work, as they
provide conditions under which the Nash-in-Nash solution may be viewed as a reasonable
surplus division rule.
We prove two results concerning the uniqueness of equilibrium outcomes. The first result
is that, in any no-delay equilibrium, all agreements are formed at prices that are arbitrarily
close to the Nash-in-Nash solution when the time between offers is sufficiently short. The
bargaining literature has sometimes restricted attention to no-delay equilibria (e.g., Ray and
Vohra, 2015), and we believe that our first uniqueness result highlights the robustness of
the Nash-in-Nash solution in environments where delay is unlikely to occur. The second
result—proven without conditioning on immediate agreement—is that all equilibria involve
all agreements (that have not yet been formed) forming immediately at the pairwise Rubinstein (1982) prices, given a restriction on how firms break ties when indifferent over best
responses and two assumptions on profits that are stronger than those used to prove existence. In particular, we assume that both upstream and downstream firm profits satisfy
our stronger decreasing returns assumption used to establish existence (A.SCDMC), and
also satisfy a limited negative externalities assumption (A.LNEXT). We prove our second
uniqueness result via induction on the set of agreements formed at any point in time, and
leverage: (i) our timing assumptions that allow for multiple offers to be made and multiple
agreements formed at any period; (ii) the fact that our candidate equilibrium prices make
a firm indifferent between accepting an offer and rejecting it (and forming the agreement
in the next period); and (iii) our stronger assumptions on profits to rule out the possibility
that some agreements do not immediately form following any history of play.
Related Literature. Although our results complement a broader theoretical literature
that examines vertical contracting in industrial organization settings (e.g., Hart and Tirole
(1990); O’Brien and Shaffer (1992); McAfee and Schwartz (1994); Segal (1999); Rey and
Vergé (2004); cf., Whinston (2006)), our modeling approach is most similar to that adopted
by the literature on wage bargaining (e.g., Davidson, 1988; Horn and Wolinsky, 1988b; Jun,
1989; Stole and Zwiebel, 1996; Westermark, 2003; Brügemann, Gautier, and Menzio, 2015).
the negative of the prices for upstream firms.

6

The wage bargaining literature typically examines extensive form bargaining games between
a single firm and multiple workers (or a single union and multiple firms), and uses a payoff
structure that is a special case of ours (i.e., multiple upstream firms, or workers, bargaining
with a single downstream firm that accrues all profits). Part of this literature has analyzed
games under which workers are paid according to the Nash-in-Nash solution as the period
length between offers goes to zero; we generalize some of these results.8
Other papers in the wage bargaining literature, including Stole and Zwiebel (1996) and
Brügemann, Gautier, and Menzio (2015), provide alternative games under which Shapley
values emerge as the division of surplus; both of these papers adopt the assumption that
following a breakdown in negotiation between a firm and any given worker, all other negotiations restart and begin anew with any worker previously involved in a breakdown no longer
involved in bargaining. Similar to papers that have provided extensive form representations
of the generalization of the Shapley value to networked or bilateral oligopoly settings—
by relying on renegotiation following disagreement (Navarro and Perea, 2013), or contracts
that are contingent on the set of realized agreements (Inderst and Wey, 2003; de Fontenay
and Gans, 2014)—our paper extends the settings under which the Nash-in-Nash solution
emerges as an equilibrium outcome.9 We further discuss the relationship between extensive
form representations and surplus division rules in Section 5.
Our focus on environments where contracts are bilaterally negotiated and the network
of agreements matter in determining profits distinguishes our analysis from a broader literature on multilateral and coalitional bargaining and contracting, both with and without
externalities (e.g., Chatterjee, Dutta, Ray, and Sengupta, 1993; Chae and Yang, 1994; Merlo
and Wilson, 1995; Krishna and Serrano, 1996; Gomes, 2005; Ray and Vohra, 2015).10
Finally, many of the assumptions that we use have analogs in the literatures previously
mentioned as well as in the network formation literature. This literature examines conditions
under which efficient or pairwise stable networks form but is not primarily concerned with
the division of surplus (e.g., Bloch and Jackson, 2007; Hellmann, 2013).11
8

E.g., both Jun (1989) and Westermark (2003) analyze bargaining between a single firm and two workers.
One of Jun (1989)’s settings is a special case of our model with one downstream firm, two upstream firms,
equal discounting factors, and profits only on the downstream side. Our existence results in Theorem 3.4
generalize the equilibrium construction in Jun (1989) to multiple upstream and downstream firms, where
profits for both sides can be non-zero. Westermark (2003)’s game form also uses an alternating offers
framework, but, unlike our setting, assumes that offers are made sequentially with randomly determined
proposers.
9
Also related to our paper is a literature that examines the trade of goods in fixed networks (e.g.,
Corominas-Bosch, 2004; Polanski, 2007; Manea, 2011; Elliott, 2015); most of this literature rules out externalities from trades that do not involve a given buyer or seller.
10
In many applied settings, side payments among firms on the same side of the market (or between firms
without a contractual relationship) would generally violate antitrust laws.
11
For example, our A.WCDMC assumption is analogous to Bloch and Jackson’s “superadditive in own-

7

The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our extensive
form bargaining model and our equilibrium concept. Section 3 provides our assumptions and
results for the existence of Nash-in-Nash limit equilibria. Section 4 provides our assumptions
and results for the uniqueness of equilibrium outcomes. Section 5 discusses connections
between our results and the applied literature, as well as directions for future work. Section 6
concludes.

2

Model

Consider the bipartite negotiations between N upstream firms, U1 , U2 , . . . , UN , and M downstream firms, D1 , D2 , . . . , DM . We only permit agreements to be formed between upstream
and downstream firms and not between firms on the same “side” of the market.12 Let G
represent the set of potential or feasible agreements; G can be represented by a bipartite
network between upstream and downstream firms.13 Denote a potential agreement between
Ui and Dj as ij; the set of agreements that Ui can form as Gi,U ; and the set of agreements
that Dj can form as Gj,D . For any subset of agreements A ⊆ G, let Aj,D ≡ A ∩ Gj,D denote
the set of agreements in A that involve firm Dj , and let A−j,D ≡ A \ Aj,D denote the set of
all agreements in A that do not involve Dj . Define Ai,U and A−i,U analogously.
We take as primitives profit functions {πi,U (A)}i=1,...,N ;A⊆G and {πj,D (A)}j=1,...,M ;A⊆G ,
which represent the surpluses realized by upstream and downstream firms for a set or “network” of agreements that have been formed at any point in time; these do not include
transfers. Importantly, profits from an agreement may depend on the set of other agreements formed; this allows for profit interdependencies and externalities across agreements.
We assume that each upstream firm Ui and downstream firm Dj negotiate over a lump-sum
payment (or “price”) pij made from Dj to Ui in exchange for forming an agreement; this
implies that profits (not including transfers) depend on the set of agreements formed but
links” property and our A.LNEXT is strictly weaker than their “nonnegative externalities” assumption. In
addition, our A.SCDMC assumption is related to Hellmann (2013)’s “strategic substitutes” property. We
discuss these connections further when our assumptions are formally introduced.
12
In many market settings, contractual agreements between two firms on the same side of the market can
be interpreted as collusion and hence may constitute per se antitrust violations. Alternatively, agreements
between two firms on the same side of the market can be viewed as a horizontal merger, in which case our
analysis would treat those merged firms as one entity. We do not explicitly model the determination of such
mergers in this paper. Additionally, vertical integration and price formation, as modeled in de Fontenay and
Gans (2005), is also outside the scope of the paper.
13
Note that G need not contain all agreements between all upstream and downstream firm pairs; some
agreements may be infeasible or impossible to form. As in Lee and Fong (2013), there may be a prior
network formation game that leads to a set of agreements G being feasible before bargaining commences. A
model that determines the realized set of agreements is outside the scope of this paper, as we focus on the
determination of transfers given the set of agreements G.

8

not on the negotiated prices.14
We model a dynamic game with infinitely many discrete periods. Periods are indexed
t = 1, 2, 3, . . ., and the time between periods is Λ > 0. Total payoffs (profits and prices)
for each firm are discounted. The discount factors between periods for an upstream and a
downstream firm are represented by δi,U ≡ exp(−ri,U Λ) and δj,D ≡ exp(−rj,D Λ) respectively.
The game begins in period t0 ≥ 1 with no agreements in G formed: i.e., all agreements in
G are “open.” In odd periods, each downstream firm Dj simultaneously makes private offers
{pij }ij∈Gj,D to each Ui with an offer in Gj,D with which it does not yet have an agreement;
each upstream firm Ui then simultaneously accepts or rejects any offers it receives. In even
periods, each Ui simultaneously makes private offers {pij }ij∈Gi,U to downstream firms with
which it does not yet have an agreement; each Dj then simultaneously accepts or rejects any
offers that it receives. If Dj accepts an offer from Ui , or Ui accepts an offer from Dj , then
an agreement is formed between two firms, and that agreement remains “formed” for the
rest of the game. Each Ui receives its payment of pij from Dj immediately in the period in
which an agreement is formed.
We assume that within a period, a firm only observes the set of contracts that it offers,
or that are offered to it. However, at the end of any period, all information—including the
terms of every contract, accepted or not—is observed by every firm; this implies that at
the beginning of each period, every firm observes and can condition their strategies on a
common history of play.15 This history, denoted ht , is the set of all actions (price offers and
acceptances or rejections) that have been made by every firm in all periods prior to t. We
denote by C(ht ) the set of open agreements at history ht .
At the end of each period (after lump-sum payments from new agreements have been
made), each upstream firm Ui and downstream firm Dj receives a flow payment equal to
(1 − δi,U )πi,U (A) or (1 − δj,D )πj,D (A) (respectively), where A is the set of agreements that
has been formed up to that point in time.16
14

See Section 5 for further discussion on this point.
We make this assumption for tractability, as our approach would be difficult without being able to
condition on a common history of play. Institutionally, the bilaterally contracted price between firms may
not be observable to others (e.g., for competitive or antitrust concerns). The vertical contracting literature
has considered how private offers may lead to commitment and opportunism (Hart and Tirole, 1990; O’Brien
and Shaffer, 1992; McAfee and Schwartz, 1994). Using a delegated agent model, de Fontenay and Gans (2005)
examine the impact of vertical integration on bargaining assuming that agents do not observe the terms of
contracts that do not involve them.
16
Our model can also be recast without discounting but with an exogenous probability each period that
negotiations end and with a lump-sum payment made based on the set of agreements that has been formed
when negotiations end (Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky, 1986). The reason for this is that, in our model,
externalities across firms generate endogenous “inside options” rather than “outside options” (Muthoo, 1999)
since flow payments depend on the set of agreements that has been formed.
15

9

Figure 1: Example: Market with Three Agreements Already Formed
UO 1
p11

D1

UO 2 a
p22

D2

U3

p23

D3

Example. Figure 1 depicts a potential market with 3 upstream and 3 downstream firms.
Assume that in period 1, the set of agreements A1 ≡ {11, 22, 23} form. This implies that in
period 1, U1 receives a payment p11 from D1 , and U2 receives p22 from D2 and p23 from D3 ;
in the same period, each downstream firm Dj receives flow profits (1 − δj,D )πj,D (A1 ) and
each upstream firm Ui receives flow profits (1 − δi,U )πi,U (A1 ). If, in period 2, D1 forms an
agreement with U2 at some price p21 (and that is the only agreement that is formed), D1
would pay U2 a payment p21 in period 2, and all firms would earn period 2 flow profits as a
function of the new realized set of agreements, A2 ≡ A1 ∪ {12}.
Two points about our model are worth noting. First, while the flow profits continue to
accrue to all firms forever, no additional actions are made after the last agreement is formed.
Thus, the game can also be formulated to end in the period of last agreement, with each
upstream firm Ui realizing a one-time payoff of (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G)/(1 − δi,U ) = πi,U (G) (and
analogously for each downstream firm). Second, if M = N = 1, our game is equivalent to
the Rubinstein (1982) alternating offers model.

2.1

Equilibrium Concept

We use pure-strategy weak perfect Bayesian equilibrium as our solution concept. This differs from Rubinstein (1982)—who considers subgame perfect equilibria—because our model
has imperfect information within a period (i.e., a firm only observes offers that it makes or
receives). Weak perfect Bayesian equilibrium does not place restrictions on beliefs for information sets that are not reached in equilibrium, and hence may admit many equilibrium
outcomes. To refine our predictions further, we follow the literature on vertical contracting
(e.g., Hart and Tirole, 1990; O’Brien and Shaffer, 1992; McAfee and Schwartz, 1994; Segal,
1999; de Fontenay and Gans, 2014) and restrict firms to hold passive beliefs:
Passive Beliefs. At any period t information set with history ht , each firm’s beliefs over
actions that it does not observe are consistent with equilibrium play at ht , even if its information set reflects actions that are not consistent with equilibrium play at ht .

10

The assumption of passive beliefs is a key ingredient in many of the results of the literature
on vertical contracting and opportunism, and in our setting restricts how beliefs can change
following an off-the-equilibrium path (henceforth, off-equilibrium) action.17 For example,
this assumption implies that an upstream firm Ui , upon receiving an off-equilibrium price
offer from some Dj in period t following history ht , believes that all other offers made by Dj
and actions taken by other firms remain equilibrium actions. Henceforth, we use equilibrium
to refer to a pure-strategy weak perfect Bayesian equilibrium with passive beliefs.

2.2

Nash-in-Nash and Rubinstein Prices

For exposition, it will be useful to define ∆πi,U (A, B) ≡ πi,U (A)−πi,U (A\B), for B ⊆ A ⊆ G.
This term is the increase in profits to Ui of adding agreements in B to the set of agreements
A \ B. We refer to ∆πi,U (A, B) as the marginal contribution to Ui of agreements B at A.
Correspondingly, let ∆πj,D (A, B) ≡ πj,D (A) − πj,D (A \ B). Importantly, as in Bloch and
Jackson (2007), we define the marginal contribution of a set of agreements B as their value
relative to removing them from the larger set A that includes B.
For analysis, we assume that for any ij ∈ G, the joint surplus created by Ui and Dj
coming to an agreement (given that all other agreements in G have been formed) is positive:
Assumption (A.GFT: Gains From Trade)
∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) > 0

∀ij ∈ G .

This assumption implies that each pair of firms that can form an agreement in G has an
incentive to keep that agreement given that all other agreements in G form. We believe that
it is natural in many settings of interest as without A.GFT, firms may prefer to drop any
agreements in which there are losses from trade. Rubinstein (1982) implies A.GFT as his
first assumption, naming it “[the] ‘pie’ is desirable.”
We now define “Nash-in-Nash” and “Rubinstein” prices for our game. Assume that
A.GFT holds. For a given set of agreements G and set of positive bargaining weights {bi,U }∀i
17

The vertical contracting literature has recognized an implicit relationship between passive beliefs and
the Nash-in-Nash solution: e.g., Rey and Vergé (2004) state that “Horn and Wolinsky (1988) use a bilateral
Nash bargaining approach that also relates somewhat to passive beliefs.” It is possible that other belief
restrictions may lead to different results (cf. McAfee and Schwartz, 1994; Rey and Vergé, 2004).

11

and {bj,D }∀j , Nash-in-Nash prices are a vector of prices {pNash
}∀ij∈G such that, ∀ij ∈ G:
ij
≡ arg max[∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − p]bj,D × [∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + p]bi,U
pNash
ij
p

=

bi,U ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − bj,D ∆πi,U (G, {ij})
.
bi,U + bj,D

ash
corresponds to the Nash bargaining solution between Dj and Ui given that
Each price pN
ij
all other agreements in G are formed.
R
For a given set of agreements G, Rubinstein prices are a vector of prices {pR
ij,D , pij,U }∀ij∈G
such that, ∀ij ∈ G:

δi,U (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij})
,
1 − δi,U δj,D
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − δj,D (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij})
=
.
1 − δi,U δj,D

pR
ij,D =
pR
ij,U

R
Each pair of prices {pR
ij,D , pij,U } correspond to the offers made in odd or even periods when
Dj and Ui engage in a Rubinstein (1982) alternating offers bargaining game given that all
other agreements in G are formed.
Let the Nash bargaining weights be parameterized so that bj,D = ri,U /(ri,U + rj,D ) and
bi,U = rj,D /(ri,U + rj,D ). Then, as noted in Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986),
Rubinstein prices converge to the Nash-in-Nash prices as the time between offers becomes
arbitrarily short:
Nash
R
.
Lemma 2.1 limΛ→0 pR
ij,D = limΛ→0 pij,U = pij

(All proofs are in the appendices.)
There are properties of Rubinstein and Nash-in-Nash prices that will prove crucial in
our proofs. First, Rubinstein prices make the receiving agent indifferent between accepting
its offer or waiting until the next period and having its counteroffer accepted given that all
other agreements form. In our case, in an even (upstream-proposing) period, this implies
that downstream firms are indifferent between accepting an offer and waiting until the next
period (given that it believes that all agreements G \ {ij} have been or will be formed).
Equivalently:
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) =
|
{z
}
Loss in profit from waiting

R
pR
ij,U − δj,D pij,D
|
{z
}

Decrease in transfer payment from waiting

12

∀ij ∈ G.

(1)

Correspondingly, for upstream firms in odd periods,
R
(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) = δi,U pR
ij,U − pij,D

∀ij ∈ G.

(2)

Second, the value from agreement to each party is higher than prices paid or received, and
Nash-in-Nash prices lie between the upstream and downstream proposing Rubinstein prices:
Lemma 2.2 Assume A.GFT. Then ∀ij ∈ G:
R
∆πj,D (G, {ij}) > pR
ij,U > pij,D ,
R
∆πi,U (G, {ij}) > −pR
ij,D > −pij,U ,

(3)

N ash
> pR
pR
ij,D .
ij,U > pij

2.3

A Delegated Agent Model for Nash-in-Nash Prices

Before proceeding, in this subsection we detail an alternative “delegated agents” extensive
form that generates Nash-in-Nash prices as Λ → 0 (see also Chipty and Snyder, 1999;
Björnerstedt and Stennek, 2007). In this model, firms appoint separate agents to conduct
each bilateral bargain. Each bargain follows the alternating offers protocol based on Binmore,
Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986): there is no discounting, but each bargain breaks down
with a fixed exogenous probability—that is independent across bargains—at the end of
every period, if an agreement has not yet been formed. Agents do not know the outcome of
other bilateral bargains until their own bargain has concluded (by either breaking down or
forming). Payments are made based on the set of agreements that have been formed after
all bargains have concluded.
In Appendix A, we prove that A.GFT is sufficient for there to exist an equilibrium
where all agreements in G immediately form at prices that are arbitrarily close to Nash-inNash prices as the probability of a bilateral bargain breaking down in each period goes to
0. However, this alternative model may be viewed as unsatisfying: firms do not leverage
information learned in one negotiation in another, and cannot coordinate actions across
different concurrent negotiations.

3

Equilibrium Existence

Our paper is concerned with equilibrium outcomes of our bargaining game as the time
between offers becomes arbitrarily short. For this purpose, we define the concept of a Nashin-Nash limit equilibrium. We say that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium exists if, for any
ε > 0 and t0 , there exists a Λ̄ > 0 such that for all Λ ∈ (0, Λ̄], there is an equilibrium with
13

complete agreement (i.e., where all agreements in G are formed), and where all agreements
are formed at prices that are within ε of Nash-in-Nash prices.

3.1

Equilibrium Existence at Rubinstein Prices

We first present a necessary and sufficient condition for there to exist an equilibrium of
the bargaining game where, for any Λ > 0, all open agreements at any history of play
immediately form at Rubinstein prices. Since Rubinstein prices converge to Nash-in-Nash
prices as Λ → 0 (by Lemma 2.1), this guarantees that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium
exists.
Assumption (A.WCDMC: Weak Conditional Decreasing Marginal Contribution)
For upstream firms: for all i = 1, . . . , N and all A ⊆ Gi,U ,
∆πi,U (G, A) ≥

X

∆πi,U (G, {ik}).

ik∈A

For downstream firms: for all j = 1, . . . , M and all A ⊆ Gj,D ,
∆πj,D (G, A) ≥

X

∆πj,D (G, {hj}).

hj∈A

This condition states that, for both upstream and downstream firms, the marginal contribution of any set of agreements to a firm is weakly greater than the sum of the marginal
contributions of each individual agreement within the set when all other agreements in G
have formed. This condition will generally be satisfied if firms on the same side of the market
are substitutes, rather than complements, for firms on the other side of the market. Similar
conditions have been used in the network formation and wage bargaining literature (e.g.,
Stole and Zwiebel, 1996; Westermark, 2003; Bloch and Jackson, 2007; Hellmann, 2013).
For example, using Bloch and Jackson (2007)’s terminology, A.WCDMC is equivalent to
assuming that profit functions for all firms are superadditive in own-links at G.18
We now state our first existence result:
Theorem 3.1 (Existence at Rubinstein Prices) Assume A.GFT. For any Λ > 0, there
exists an equilibrium of the bargaining game where at every period t and history ht all open
R
agreements ij ∈ C(ht ) immediately form at prices pR
ij,D (pij,U ) if t is odd (even) if and only
if A.WCDMC holds.
18

Bloch and Jackson (2007) define superadditivity in own-links as a condition analogous to A.WCDMC
holding at any network, and not just at G; Hellmann (2013) refers to this assumption as “convex in own
current links.”

14

The proof of Theorem 3.1, contained in Appendix C, constructs candidate equilibrium strategies based on the above statement and then confirms that these strategies are robust to oneshot deviations by any firm. Furthermore, it demonstrates that if A.WCDMC does not hold
for some firm and a subset of its agreements, then that firm—when deciding to accept or
reject that set of offers at Rubinstein prices—would have a profitable deviation of rejecting
those offers.19
A.WCDMC rules out the possibility that any agent would wish to not form or delay
forming any subset of its open agreements at Rubinstein prices. To see this, without loss of
generality, consider any upstream firm Ui in an odd (downstream-proposing) period and any
subset of its agreements A ⊆ Gi,U . A.WCDMC implies that the gain to Ui from accepting
the agreements in A (given that all other agreements are formed) is weakly greater than
the gain from rejecting the offers in A and forming the agreements in A in the subsequent
period at candidate equilibrium prices; i.e.,:
Change in Ui ’s profits by forming agreements A in period t as opposed to t + 1

}| X 
{
z
R
R
(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, A) +
pik,D − δi,U pik,U
ik∈A

(4)

X

R
≥
(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ik}) + pR
ik,D − δi,U pik,U = 0.
ik∈A

where the inequality follows from A.WCDMC and the equality from (2). A similar inequality
shows that each downstream firm Dj in even (upstream-proposing) periods would not wish
to reject any subset of offers that it receives at even-period Rubinstein prices.
We illustrate the necessity of A.WCDMC for the existence of an equilibrium with immediate agreement at Rubinstein prices with two counterexamples. Consider first a setting
where there are large complementarities across agreements. Assume that: there are three
upstream parts “suppliers” that each provide a necessary component to a downstream “manufacturer” for production of an automobile, which is then resold for some fixed surplus; there
are zero marginal costs for all firms; the manufacturer can sell the product for a surplus of 1
if all agreements are reached, and 0 otherwise; and firms share a common discount factor δ.
A.WCMDC does not hold here because the marginal contribution of a supplier to the
manufacturer when not all agreements have been formed, at zero, is less than its marginal
contribution of 1 when all agreements have been formed. The Nash-in-Nash prices here are
19

Proposition 3 in Bloch and Jackson (2007) shows that the network G is supportable as an equilibrium
of a “direct transfer game” if superadditivity in own-links and a condition that implies A.GFT hold. Thus,
Theorem 3.1 proves that the same assumptions on underlying payoffs as used in Bloch and Jackson (2007)
are sufficient for there to exist an equilibrium of our alternating offers bargaining game in which agreements
in G are formed at Rubinstein prices.

15

a half of the marginal contributions when all agreements have been formed, or 0.5. At Nashin-Nash prices, the downstream firm would realize a loss of 0.5 (with gross profits of 1 and
supplier costs of 1.5), implying that the downstream firm would not wish to reach agreement
at such prices with its suppliers. In this setting, it is implausible that transfers will be based
on marginal contributions: either no agreements will be reached, or surplus division would
be based on some other bargaining protocol or solution concept.20
Now consider a similar counterexample, but with two instead of three suppliers. We
generalize the above example to assume that the manufacturer with one supplier earns profits
a, 0 ≤ a < 0.5, so that the suppliers still exhibit complementarities from the perspective of
the downstream firm. Note that the Rubinstein prices paid to each supplier Ui are pR
i1,D =
R
δ(1 − a)/(1 + δ) and pi1,U = (1 − a)/(1 + δ). Because profits to the manufacturer with one
supplier are less than 0.5, A.WCDMC still does not hold here. Hence, by Theorem 3.1, there
still is no equilibrium with immediate agreement at Rubinstein prices.
To understand why an equilibrium with immediate agreement at Rubinstein prices does
not exist, consider any even (upstream-proposing) period where no agreements have yet
been formed. By equation (1), the downstream firm will be exactly indifferent between (a)
accepting both candidate equilibrium offers and (b) accepting one offer and rejecting the
other (which will then be formed in the following period). In other words, the reduction
in the present value of the payment from delaying an offer to the following (odd) period,
R
pR
i1,U − δpi1,D , is equal to the loss in profits from this delay, (1 − δ)(1 − a). But, the loss
in profits from rejecting the second offer is only (1 − δ)a < (1 − δ)(1 − a) (since a < 0.5),
while the reduction in the present value of this payment remains (1 − δ)(1 − a). Thus, the
downstream firm would strictly prefer rejecting both offers, implying that the strategy profile
from Theorem 3.1 is not an equilibrium.
However, unlike in the three supplier example, the downstream firm here would strictly
prefer agreement with both suppliers at any price below Nash-in-Nash to no agreement,
as it would then obtain positive surplus instead of none (even in the limit case of perfect
complements where a = 0). This suggests that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium might exist
here—though at different prices from Rubinstein. Our next results verify that this is the
case.

3.2

Equilibrium Existence with Complementarities

We now provide an alternative set of conditions for the existence of a Nash-in-Nash limit
equilibrium. Importantly, our conditions allow for limited complementarities and are not
20
This example is mathematically equivalent to example 1 in Westermark (2003), who makes a similar
point with an example of a firm bargaining over wages with three workers.

16

nested by A.WCDMC.
Our first condition ensures that all firms obtain value at the margin from all sets of its
own agreements being formed at Nash-in-Nash prices:
Assumption (A.FEAS: Feasibility) For upstream firms: for all i = 1, . . . , N and all
A ⊆ Gi,U ,
X
ash
∆πi,U (G, A) ≥ −
pN
.
ij
ij∈A

For downstream firms: for all j = 1, . . . , M and all A ⊆ Gj,D ,
∆πj,D (G, A) ≥

X

ash
.
pN
ij

ij∈A

In words, A.FEAS states that each firm would prefer maintaining all of its agreements at
Nash-in-Nash prices to dropping any set of its agreements (holding all other agreements
fixed). This is a strictly weaker condition than A.WCDMC when A.GFT holds, as Nash-inNash prices are then strictly less (greater) than the marginal contributions of each agreement
at G for downstream (upstream) firms (see Lemma 2.2). Similar conditions to A.FEAS have
been used in other settings: e.g., in Stole and Zwiebel (1996), a feasibility condition ensures
that each worker receives an equilibrium wage higher than her outside wage offer. In our
setting, A.GFT alone is sufficient to ensure that this condition holds for all subsets involving a
single agreement (see Lemma 2.2), but not for subsets that involve more than one agreement.
The following demonstrates the importance of A.FEAS.
Theorem 3.2 Suppose that A.FEAS does not hold. Then a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium
where all agreements in G immediately form does not exist.
The proof of this theorem leverages the insight that if all agreements immediately form
but A.FEAS is violated, then there exists a firm that would wish to reject (and never form)
some set of its own agreements at prices that are arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices. For
example, in our upstream supplier example with three suppliers, one can verify that A.FEAS
does not hold for the downstream manufacturer when A includes all three suppliers; thus,
Theorem 3.2 confirms the intuition from Section 3.1 that there is no Nash-in-Nash limit
equilibrium for this three supplier game where all agreements immediately form. We discuss
the role of equilibria with immediate agreement further in Section 4.
The second sufficient condition that we impose to establish existence is stronger than
A.WCDMC (and hence A.FEAS) and, for existence, is only required to hold for either
downstream or upstream firms:

17

Assumption (A.SCDMC: Strong Conditional Decreasing Marginal Contribution)

(a) For upstream firms: for all ij ∈ G, B ⊆ G−j,D , and A, A0 ⊆ Gj,D \ {ij},
πi,U (A ∪ B ∪ {ij}) − πi,U (A0 ∪ B) ≥ ∆πi,U (G, {ij}).
(b) For downstream firms: for all ij ∈ G, B ⊆ G−i,U , and A, A0 ⊆ Gi,U \ {ij},
πj,D (A ∪ B ∪ {ij}) − πj,D (A0 ∪ B) ≥ ∆πj,D (G, {ij}).
A.SCDMC(a) states that the marginal contribution to any upstream firm Ui of agreement
ij at G—which is ∆πi,U (G, {ij})—is no greater than the marginal contribution to Ui of that
agreement at any subset of agreements A ∪ B, even if Dj were to change its agreements
(from A to A0 ) when making such a comparison. A.SCDMC(b) states a similar condition
for downstream firms. Unless explicitly noted, when we assume A.SCDMC, we assume that
both parts (a) and (b) hold.
We rely on A.SCDMC to ensure that, whenever there are open agreements, a proposing
firm would wish to make an acceptable offer and form an agreement, even if the receiving
firm were to change its actions with respect to its other open agreements in that period.
This rules out the possibility that an off-equilibrium offer from a proposing firm leads the
receiving firm to change its set of other accepted offers, which in turn harms the proposing
firm. A.SCDMC strictly implies A.WCDMC, as it places more restrictions on the marginal
values of individual agreements when a subset of other agreements in G have formed than
does A.WCDMC.
Similar to our use of A.SCDMC, the network formation literature has often restricted
the marginal contribution of a link ij to be lower than the marginal contribution of that link
when certain other agreements are removed; see, for instance, Hellmann (2013)’s strategic
substitutes property. However, A.SCDMC differs in the set of other agreements that can be
removed, and also that it allows the counterparty to adjust its agreements when computing
the marginal contribution of an agreement to a firm.21
Before proceeding to our existence proof, we formalize the relationship of our three assumptions on marginal contributions:
21

An additional difference is that the pairwise stability condition often employed in the network formation
literature implies that a link would be formed if the two agents involved in that link value its formation
holding fixed the actions of other players. In contrast, in our setting, even if two firms would prefer to form
an agreement holding fixed the actions of others, such an agreement may not form since other agreements
may be affected.

18

Lemma 3.3 Assume that A.GFT holds. Then:
(a) A.SCDMC ⇒ A.WCDMC ⇒ A.FEAS.
(b) A.FEAS 6⇒ A.WCDMC 6⇒ A.SCDMC.
We now state our final existence result:
Theorem 3.4 (Existence of a Nash-in-Nash Limit Equilibrium) Assume A.GFT,
A.FEAS, and either A.SCDMC(a) or A.SCDMC(b). Then, there exists a Nash-in-Nash
limit equilibrium where all agreements in G immediately form.
Our proof of existence in Theorem 3.4 is constructive, building on insights from Jun
(1989). In the equilibrium that we construct, if A.SCDMC(a) holds, then downstream firms
always propose Rubinstein prices in odd periods.22 In even periods, upstream firms propose
offers that ensure that downstream firms do not want to reject a single offer or multiple offers,
and also ensure that every downstream firm is indifferent between complete acceptance and
rejecting some subset of its offers.
If A.WCMDC holds, then by Theorem 3.1 there exists an equilibrium with immediate
agreement at Rubinstein prices. However, if A.SCDMC(a) holds (for upstream firms) but
A.WCDMC does not hold (for downstream firms), then some downstream firm in an even
period would prefer to reject of some set of offers as opposed to accepting all offers at Rubinstein prices. To eliminate the incentive to reject multiple offers, the even-period equilibrium
prices are then lower than even-period Rubinstein prices (though still higher than odd-period
Rubinstein prices).
By not imposing A.WCDMC on one side of the market (but still requiring that A.FEAS
hold for that side), Theorem 3.4 admits certain forms of complementarities, thereby extending the settings under which there exists a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium where all
agreements in G immediately form, relative to Theorem 3.1. For example, consider again
the two upstream supplier counterexample from Section 3.1. Although this example does
not satisfy A.WCDMC since the suppliers produce complementary inputs, A.FEAS will be
satisfied on the downstream side so long as the profits with one supplier are not negative
(a ≥ 0). Moreover, A.SCDMC is trivially satisfied for the upstream suppliers (as they realize
no flow profits). Thus, by Theorem 3.4, a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium exists (even in
the limiting case of a = 0). To ensure that the manufacturer does not want to reject both
offers, our constructed equilibrium for this example has even-period prices that are lower
than Rubinstein prices, and in some cases, lower than Nash-in-Nash prices.23
22

While we focus our discussion here on the case where A.SCMDC(a) holds, the case where A.SCDMC(b)
holds is analogous.
23
Because the manufacturer strictly prefers accepting both even-period offers to rejecting one, we can

19

4

Uniqueness of Equilibrium Outcomes

Having established results on existence, we now turn to the uniqueness of equilibrium outcomes. We prove two results. Our first result is that all no-delay equilibria—defined to
be equilibria in which at any history of play ht , all open agreements C(ht ) immediately
form—have agreements formed at prices that are arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices for
sufficiently short time periods. Note that the equilibria constructed to establish existence in
Section 3 are no-delay equilibria. This result does not require any assumptions on profits,
highlighting the generality of the Nash-in-Nash solution when agreement is immediate.
Our second result is complementary to the first, and provides sufficient conditions for
all equilibria to have agreements formed at Rubinstein prices (and hence at prices that are
arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices for sufficiently short time periods). This second
result uses the same A.SCDMC condition used to establish existence, a further assumption
on profits that limits how severe negative externalities can be across agreements (A.LNEXT),
and a restriction on strategies that governs how ties are broken when firms are indifferent
over actions. It does not require any assumptions on equilibrium behavior (such as no-delay).

4.1

Uniqueness for No-Delay Equilibria

Our first theorem states that for sufficiently short time periods, any no-delay equilibrium
has prices that are arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices:
Theorem 4.1 (Uniqueness for No-Delay Equilibria) For any ε > 0, there exists Λ̄ >
0 such that for any Λ ∈ (0, Λ̄], any no-delay equilibrium has prices at every period t and
history ht that are within ε of Nash-in-Nash prices.
Theorem 4.1 does not use any assumptions on underlying profits, but instead conditions on
the immediate formation of all open agreements following all histories of play. Restricting
attention to equilibria without delay is an assumption that has been used in the bargaining
literature (e.g., Brügemann, Gautier, and Menzio, 2015; Ray and Vohra, 2015).24
construct multiple equilibria which differ in the payment made to each upstream firm in even periods. These
equilibria all make the manufacturer indifferent between rejecting and accepting both offers in even periods,
and all have prices that are arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices for sufficiently short time periods.
24
Ray and Vohra (2015), in motivating such a restriction, note that delays in complete information bargaining models are “more artificial [than delays in bargaining with incomplete information] and stem from
two possible sources. The first is a typical folk theorem-like reason in which history-dependent strategies
are bootstrapped to generate inefficient outcomes... [The second] will only happen for protocols that are
sensitive to the identity of previous rejectors,” which is not the case for the model in Rubinstein (1982) or
in our model.

20

The intuition of the result is as follows. Given complete and immediate agreement at
every period, we first show that a receiving firm cannot receive a worse offer than its Rubinstein price in that period. If it were to receive a worse offer, a deviation for this firm would
be for it to reject this offer and, in the following period when only one agreement would
remain open, form the agreement at the corresponding Rubinstein price (Rubinstein, 1982).
Equations (1) and (2) ensure that such a deviation is profitable.
Next, we show that a proposing firm cannot make an offer that is accepted and significantly worse than its Nash-in-Nash price. Here, a no-delay equilibrium implies that a
proposing firm anticipates that all open agreements will form in the next period, regardless
of actions that are taken in the current period. If a proposing firm were to “withdraw” an
offer that it is supposed to make (i.e., by making a sufficiently worse offer that would be
rejected), that agreement—and potentially other agreements formed by the receiving firm—
would be rejected and instead formed in the following period. Using the fact that prices in
the subsequent period must be no worse for the proposing firm than Rubinstein prices (as
noted above), we show that for a sufficiently short time period, a proposing firm would have
a profitable deviation from withdrawing this agreement. Thus, the proposing firm would
never form an agreement at a price significantly worse than the Nash-in-Nash price.
Consequently, in any no-delay equilibrium, prices must be arbitrary close to Nash-in-Nash
prices as Λ → 0. However, we have not addressed whether there exist equilibria with delay
at some histories of play. We next provide sufficient conditions on primitives and strategies
to rule out this possibility.

4.2

Uniqueness Without Conditioning on Immediate Agreement

Under stronger conditions than used to establish existence, we now prove that every equilibrium is a no-delay equilibrium where, for any history of play, all open agreements are formed
at Rubinstein prices. Under these conditions, equilibrium outcomes will be unique. If there
are multiple equilibria, they will only differ in their prescribed off-equilibrium play.
The first condition requires that A.SCDMC, introduced in Section 3.2 and used in establishing our second existence result, holds for both upstream and downstream firms. This
condition, again, states that the marginal contribution to any firm forming an agreement
when all other agreements have been formed can be no greater than that agreement’s contribution when certain subsets of agreements have been formed.
Our second condition is new:
Assumption (A.LNEXT: Limited Negative Externalities) For all non-empty A ⊆

21

G, there exists ij ∈ A s.t.:
∆πi,U (G, A) ≥

X

∆πi,U (G, {ik}) and

ik∈Ai,U

∆πj,D (G, A) ≥

X

∆πj,D (G, {hj}).

hj∈Aj,D

A.LNEXT states that for any nonempty subset of agreements A, there exists some agreement
ij ∈ A such that the marginal contribution to Ui (and Dj ) of agreements A at G is weakly
greater than the sum of the individual marginal contributions of all agreements in A that
involve Ui (and Dj ) at G. This is also equivalent to imposing a lower bound on the value to
Ui of agreements in A−i,U (with a similar condition holding for some Dj and agreements in
A−j,D ). We refer to the assumption as “limited negative externalities” since, when paired
with A.SCDMC, this lower bound is weakly negative.25 Importantly, for each different subset
of agreements A, there can be a different pair Ui and Dj that satisfy this condition. We use
A.LNEXT to help rule out equilibria with delay as it ensures that at any history of play,
there is some pair of firms with an open agreement that would prefer all remaining open
agreements to form. Given A.SCDMC, A.LNEXT is implied by Bloch and Jackson (2007)’s
nonnegative externalities condition.
Finally, we also restrict attention to equilibria that satisfy common tie-breaking: at any
history of play ht , if there are two information sets in which any receiving firm has the
same set of best responses, the firm chooses the same best response across both information
sets.26 Similar types of restrictions—both informally and formally—have been used in the
bargaining literature.27
We now state our second uniqueness result:
25

To see why A.LNEXT and A.SCDMC admit weakly negative
externalities, focus on the A.LNEXT
P
condition for some A and firm Ui , ij ∈ A: ∆πi,U (G, A) ≥
ik∈Ai,U ∆πi,U (G, {ik}). The left-hand side
of this inequality can be expressed as ∆πi,U (G, A) = ∆πi,U (G, A−i,U ) + ∆πi,U (G \ A−i,U , Ai,U ). Substituting
this expression into the A.LNEXT condition and re-arranging terms yields ∆πi,U (G, A−i,U ) ≥
P
ik∈Ai,U ∆πi,U (G, {ik}) − ∆πi,U (G \ A−i,U , Ai,U ). Applying A.SCDMC, the right side of the inequality is
less than or equal to 0. Thus, the marginal value of A−i,U to Ui at G needs to be greater than a value that
is weakly negative for Ui to satisfy the conditions of A.LNEXT.
26
Common tie-breaking is substantively different than restricting strategies to be Markovian or stationary.
Markov strategies require that firms follow the same actions across different even or odd histories of play ht
that share the same set of open agreements C(ht ). Common tie-breaking does not require this, but rather
only restricts actions for receiving firms to be the same for a given history of play ht across different sets of
price offers that induce the same set of best responses.
27
Ray and Vohra (2015) impose an equilibrium restriction that they call “compliance,” which requires
that a receiver of a bargaining proposal, when indifferent over a set of actions, chooses the action that is
most preferred by the proposer (given equilibrium play). Brügemann, Gautier, and Menzio (2015) note that
a related tie-breaking assumption, which they describe as “reasonable,” is necessary to obtain uniqueness
results under the Stole and Zwiebel (1996) union wage-bargaining model.

22

Theorem 4.2 (Uniqueness) Assume A.GFT, A.SCDMC, and A.LNEXT. For any Λ > 0,
every common tie-breaking equilibrium has the following properties: at every period t and
R
history ht , all open agreements ij ∈ C(ht ) immediately form at prices pR
ij,D (pij,U ) if t is odd
(even).
As discussed in the previous section, when A.SCDMC is violated, there may exist no-delay
equilibria where prices are not Rubinstein but still arbitrarily close to Nash-in-Nash prices
as Λ → 0 (as in Theorem 3.4). It is an open research question whether, with weaker
assumptions, all equilibria with complete (but not necessarily immediate) agreement have
prices that are close to Nash-in-Nash prices as the time between periods becomes short.
We note that Theorem 4.2 also holds under an alternative set of assumptions: instead
of assuming A.LNEXT and restricting attention to common tie-breaking equilibria, it is
sufficient to impose a “no externality” assumption (formally defined in Appendix E) alongside
A.SCDMC. This assumption still allows for interdependencies across agreements for a given
firm, but rules out externalities. We prove the statement of Theorem 4.2 for both our main
and alternative set of assumptions.
Overview of Proof and Role of Assumptions. The proof for Theorem 4.2 proceeds by
induction on the set of open agreements at any history of the game, C. The proof establishes
that if any subgame that begins with a strict subset of C agreements being open results in all
open agreements forming immediately at Rubinstein prices (i.e., the inductive hypothesis),
then any subgame beginning with C open agreements also must result in all open agreements
forming immediately at Rubinstein prices (i.e., the inductive step). The base case follows
from Rubinstein (1982), who establishes this result for any subgame with a single open
agreement.
We start by proving the simultaneity of agreements—i.e., in any equilibrium, if any
open agreements are formed at period t, all open agreements are formed at t—when C
contains agreements that involve multiple “receiving” firms (e.g., if t is odd, there are multiple
upstream firms with open agreements). Here, A.SCDMC allows us to rule out equilibria
where only a strict subset of open agreements are formed in a given period. To illustrate,
consider a subgame where there are C open agreements, and suppose that in an equilibrium,
at least one agreement in C forms at period t, but not all agreements in C do. Consider some
agreement ij ∈ C that does not form at t and for which there exists another agreement that
does form at t where the receiving firm at t differs from ij. We establish a contradiction by
showing that the proposing firm involved in agreement ij will find it profitable to make an
deviant offer at t that is slightly more generous than the Rubinstein price for this agreement.
A.SCDMC ensures that the marginal value of forming this agreement to the receiving firm
23

is weakly higher with open agreements than at G, and hence the receiving firm will find it
optimal to accept this offer. A.SCDMC further ensures that the proposing firm finds this
deviation profitable even if the receiving firm were to change its set of acceptances upon
receiving this deviant offer.
We next prove that when all open agreements are formed in a period where there are
multiple receiving firms, they are all formed at Rubinstein prices. We show that a receiving
firm will reject an offer that is worse than the Rubinstein price by leveraging the fact that
offers are simultaneous, and that Rubinstein prices make a receiving firm indifferent between
accepting and waiting (where, upon waiting, the agreement will then be formed at the
Rubinstein price in the next period when only one open agreement remains). We show that
a proposing firm will choose to adjust an offer that is worse for it than the Rubinstein price by
showing that, if it were to adjust its offer slightly towards the Rubinstein price, this deviant
offer would still be accepted by the receiving firm. Our restriction to common tie-breaking
equilibria ensures that the receiving firm will not change its set of other acceptances upon
accepting this deviant offer, thus ensuring that the deviation is profitable for the proposing
firm.
We then prove the simultaneity of agreements at Rubinstein prices when open agreements
are formed in a period where there is only a single receiving firm with open agreements.
With multiple receiving firms, we are able to leverage our inductive hypothesis to prove the
previous results; with a single receiving firm, we can no longer always rely on induction: if
the receiving firm rejects all offers in a given period, the set of open agreements will remain
the same in the following period. To proceed, we employ arguments similar to those used in
Shaked and Sutton (1984) to prove the uniqueness result in Rubinstein (1982). While the
proof with a single receiving firm is more involved than with multiple receiving firms, the
role of our assumptions is similar.
Finally, we prove that any equilibrium results in all open agreements being formed immediately. We leverage A.LNEXT to rule out delay, as it implies that, at any history, there
is a pair of firms with an open agreement that benefits from all open agreements forming.28
Consequently, if there was not immediate agreement in a given period, there would be a
profitable deviation for the proposer of this pair, whereby it would propose an offer to the
receiver of this pair that would be accepted, resulting in the formation of all remaining open
agreements by the next period at latest (by the inductive hypothesis). As with our proof of
simultaneity, A.SCDMC ensures that if the proposer in this pair makes the offer at a price
that is slightly more generous than Rubinstein, then the receiver would accept this offer and
28

Relatedly, Jehiel and Moldovanu (1995) show that the presence of negative externalities can potentially
lead to delay in negotiations in a finite horizon sequential bargaining game.

24

the deviation would be profitable for the proposer. This rules out equilibria with delayed
agreement, and establishes our result.
To illustrate the possibility of an equilibrium with delay when A.LNEXT is violated,
consider the following counterexample. Let there be two upstream firms, U1 and U2 and
two downstream firms D1 and D2 , and let firms share a common discount factor δ. Assume
that G = {11, 22}, so that “1” firms cannot form agreements with “2” firms. Suppose that
the marginal value of agreement {11} is 1 to both U1 and D1 . However, suppose that the
establishment of agreement {22} imposes a negative externality of −10 on both D1 and U1 .
Let the “2” firms’ payoffs be symmetric to these. Note that profits in this example satisfy
A.GFT and A.SCDMC but not A.LNEXT (due to the large negative externalities imposed
across pairs). There are (at least) two equilibria of this game. First, since this example
satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 3.2, one equilibrium involves the immediate formation
of all agreements in G at Rubinstein prices. Second, another equilibrium has the four firms
always proposing unattractive offers so that no agreements ever form in equilibrium. No pair
has an incentive to “break” this second equilibrium because even though it knows that the
marginal gain from its own agreement would be positive, the formation of this agreement
would result in the other agreement forming in the following period and thereby impose a
(present value) negative externality of −10δ.29

5

Relation of our Model to the Applied Literature

In this section, we discuss the connections between our model and applied papers that have,
either directly or indirectly, appealed to the Nash-in-Nash solution concept. We first explain
the key assumptions used in our analysis and their relation to the literature. We then detail
the use of Nash-in-Nash in two strands of applied work. Our goal in this section is to inform
the application of Nash-in-Nash, and to highlight avenues for future research.

5.1

Key Assumptions

Contract Space. The applied literature has defined the Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution
to be a set of bilateral contracts, such that each contract is the solution to a bilateral Nash
bargaining problem holding fixed the contracts of all other bilateral pairs. We make two
key assumptions. First, contracts are over lump-sum transfer payments that are finalized
upon agreement. Second, although profit functions depend on the set of agreements that
29

Note that the equilibria in this counterexample are similar to defection and cooperative equilibria of a
repeated prisoner’s dilemma game.

25

have been formed, they do not depend on negotiated payments. Both restrictions hold in
many models of wage negotiations between employers and workers (e.g., Horn and Wolinsky,
1988b; Jun, 1989; Westermark, 2003) and in some applied papers in industrial organization
settings (e.g., Noton and Elberg, 2017).
Violations of these assumptions would significantly complicate our analysis: when profit
functions are no longer only a function of the set of open agreements, strategies may also
condition on additional information such as formed contract terms.30 Nevertheless, even in
these more general settings, Nash-in-Nash solutions may still arise as an equilibrium outcome
of a delegated agent model similar to the one provided in Section 2.3.31
Many applied papers examine richer environments where, for instance firms agree on twopart or linear tariffs and then engage in further competition conditioning on these contracts
(e.g., Draganska, Klapper, and Villas-Boas, 2010; Crawford and Yurukoglu, 2012). Our
fundamental requirement is not specific to the contract space, per se, but rather that the
terms of negotiated contracts have no effect on profit functions and that payments between
firms are not affected by other actions. Thus, it may be possible to adapt our approach to
such settings. For example, Villas-Boas (2007) analyzes a model with two-part tariffs where a
single retailer negotiates with multiple upstream manufacturers. In their case, the firms may
optimally set a linear fee equal to each upstream firm’s (constant) marginal costs; bargaining
would then be essentially only over lump-sum payments, and manufacturer profits would not
depend on the agreements formed by others.32
Even with lump-sum transfers, payments may not be finalized once agreements are
formed. This may occur if contracts are: renegotiated upon disagreement (e.g., Stole and
Zwiebel, 1996; Navarro and Perea, 2013; Brügemann, Gautier, and Menzio, 2015); contingent
on the set of agreements that have been formed (e.g., Inderst and Wey, 2003; de Fontenay and
Gans, 2014); or have exogenously determined contingencies due to, for example, bankruptcy
(e.g., Raskovich, 2003). Different results may hold in these settings. For example, consider
again the automobile parts supplier example with three suppliers from Section 3.1, which
violates A.FEAS and hence for which a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium of our alternating
offers game does not exist. Now, modify the example so that the manufacturer pays suppliers
30

Extending the analysis would also raise similar issues to those studied in the vertical contracting literature
on opportunism (Hart and Tirole, 1990; McAfee and Schwartz, 1994; Rey and Vergé, 2004).
31
The literature on two-party alternating-offers bargaining games has been extended to richer contract
spaces (Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky, 1986; Herrero, 1989). In such contract spaces, if delegated
agents believe that all other bilateral agreements will immediately form with contracts that converge to the
Nash-in-Nash solution, then their own agreements can be shown under certain conditions to also converge
to the Nash-in-Nash solution.
32
A similar insight holds when linear fees are negotiated alongside fixed quantities (e.g., as in Beckert,
Smith, and Takahashi, 2015).

26

only if all three agreements have been formed.33 The Nash-in-Nash solution here results in
each supplier being paid 1/4 (and hence a viable outcome with production), as opposed to
1/2 in our original example.34
Ultimately, characterizing outcomes in bilateral oligopoly environments with more general
contract spaces remains an open research agenda. We view our current analysis as a step
towards understanding the applicability of Nash-in-Nash to these environments.
Network of Potential Agreements. In applied work, the Nash-in-Nash solution has
typically conditioned on the set of agreements that are formed, and focused on negotiated
contracts given those agreements. Mirroring this practice, we have assumed that the set
of agreements allowed to form, G, is exogenous, and that all agreements in this set create
bilateral gains from trade (A.GFT), thereby motivating our focus on equilibria in which
all agreements in G form. Our paper thus focuses on surplus division for a given set of
agreements, and does not provide an analysis of which network of agreements form.
As noted in Lee and Fong (2013), the equilibrium set of agreements that forms and
the division of surplus for those agreements may be intertwined. For example, potential
agreements that are not formed in equilibrium can be used as threats to improve bargaining
outcomes.35 Combining insights from the bargaining literature with those from the network
formation literature with transfers (cf. Jackson, 2004; Bloch and Jackson, 2007) continues
to be a fruitful avenue for future research.
Profit Assumptions. Our results rely upon several assumptions on firm profits.
First, all our results rely upon A.GFT. In most applied settings, this assumption is often
explicitly or implicitly maintained: it is unreasonable to expect that firms form bilateral
agreements in equilibrium when doing so reduces their bilateral surplus.
We next focus on A.WCDMC, which (together with A.GFT) ensures the existence of
a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium. A.WCDMC restricts the marginal contribution of any
set of agreements to be weakly greater than the sum of the marginal contribution of each
individual agreement within the set. An important setting in which A.WCDMC is satisfied
is one where a single downstream firm negotiates with multiple upstream suppliers that are
33

This can occur if the manufacturer is able to declare bankruptcy as in Raskovich (2003), or if linear fees
are negotiated and a manufacturer only engages in production if all three agreements are formed.
34
This outcome coincides with the Myerson-Shapley value. See also Iozzi and Valletti (2014) who explore
the importance of specifying whether or not disagreement is observable to rivals before a price competition
stage between downstream firms.
35
For instance, a number of recent working papers including Ghili (2016); Ho and Lee (2016); Liebman
(2016); Prager (2016) examine selective contracting by health insurance firms and hospitals and allow for
firms to use potential agreements not contained in G as threats.

27

(imperfect) substitutes for one another, as the marginal contribution of any given supplier
to the downstream firm is decreasing as the downstream firm forms additional agreements.
This setting is common to applied theory papers that examine the impact of downstream
“buyer power” on negotiated prices, upstream supplier incentives, and welfare (e.g., Inderst
and Wey, 2007; Chipty and Snyder, 1999; Inderst and Valletti, 2011; O’Brien, 2014; Chen,
2015), and in certain empirical work in health care markets (e.g., Capps, Dranove, and
Satterthwaite, 2003; Grennan, 2013; Gowrisankaran, Nevo, and Town, 2015).36
We have also shown that A.FEAS holding on one side of the market and A.SCDMC
holding on the other side ensures the existence of a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium. These
assumptions hold in Easterbrook, Gowrisankaran, Older Aguilar, and Wu (2017), which
examines the impact of mergers of upstream firms providing complementary products.
Finally, we have shown that A.SCDMC and A.LNEXT together ensure that the Nashin-Nash solution is the unique equilibrium outcome. In more general settings, particularly
with multiple upstream and downstream firms, these assumptions may be difficult to verify.
However, these assumptions will be satisfied in settings where a single downstream firm
negotiates with multiple upstream firms that are substitutes, and where upstream firm profits
do not depend on the set of agreements that have been formed. Many of the buyer power,
wage bargaining, and health care market papers noted above satisfy these assumptions.
In addition, Möllers, Normann, and Snyder (2016) explicitly verify that A.SCDMC and
A.LNEXT hold in their application.

5.2

Examples in Applied Literature

We now detail the use of Nash-in-Nash bargaining in two applied literatures, and describe
how our results can provide a foundation for this solution concept in certain settings. In
doing so, we show how one might verify when applied papers satisfy our assumptions.
First, Chipty and Snyder (1999) and a subsequent literature examine negotiations between a monopolist content supplier negotiating with multiple downstream cable distributors.
Such an environment has also been studied in other papers (e.g., Crawford and Yurukoglu,
2012; Crawford, Lee, Whinston, and Yurukoglu, 2015) and shares similarities to other content distribution and hardware-software industries (e.g., Lee, 2013). In Chipty and Snyder,
downstream distributors are local monopolists that do not compete with one another, and
negotiations are over both a quantity provided and a tariff. In their implementation of the
36
Some of these papers employ different contract spaces than ours. As noted above, when contracts
represent richer objects than lump-sum transfers, it will often be the case that profits depend on both the
set of agreements that have been formed and the terms of contracts that have been signed. In such cases,
our profit assumptions can be evaluated with respect to a given set of contracts.

28

Nash-in-Nash solution, they assume that bilateral negotiations between the supplier and each
distributor maximize joint surplus (resulting in the bilaterally efficient quantity being supplied) and use a lump-sum payment to equally split the bilateral gains-from-trade (computed
under the assumption that the efficient quantities supplied to other distributors are fixed).
Given the existence of bilateral gains from trade between the supplier and each distributor,
if the supplier’s profit function is concave in the quantity supplied, then A.SCDMC and
A.LNEXT hold.37 Furthermore, as long as the supplier’s profit function is not too convex,
A.FEAS holds for the supplier (and A.SCDMC continues to hold for the distributors). Thus,
under functional form assumptions regarding payoffs and the assumption that the quantities
supplied are fixed at efficient levels, their solution is supportable as an equilibrium (and in
certain cases the unique equilibrium) outcome of our non-cooperative extensive form.
Second, Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite (2003), together with Town and Vistnes
(2001), provide an “option demand market” foundation for much of the recent applied literature on insurer-provider negotiations in health care markets (e.g., Ho, 2009; Gowrisankaran,
Nevo, and Town, 2015; Ho and Lee, 2017). Although Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite do
not explicitly apply the Nash-in-Nash bargaining framework, they note that their reduced
form bargaining solution coincides with the cooperative, complete information Nash bargaining solution. Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite (2003) employ two key assumptions.
First, the objective that an insurer maximizes is proportional to the consumer welfare generated from its hospital network. Together with their demand system, this assumption implies
that A.SCDMC holds for each insurer.38 Second, each hospital’s total payoffs are a fixed
proportion of the incremental gains that it generates to an insurer, which is consistent with
hospitals being reimbursed at marginal costs and then bargaining over a lump-sum payment.
These assumptions together imply that A.SCDMC and A.LNEXT hold. Consequently, the
solution concept relied upon in Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite (2003) also emerges as
the unique equilibrium outcome of our non-cooperative extensive form.
37

As Chipty and Snyder note, if the upstream firm’s profit function is given by V (Q) ≡ R(Q) − C(Q)
where Q is the total quantity that it supplies and R(·) and C(·) are revenue and cost functions, this condition
holds if the supplier’s revenue function is concave and cost function is convex.
38
Capps, Dranove, and Satterthwaite (2003) assume that each insurer maximizes exante enrollee
 surP
P
plus. The surplus generated by a network H of hospitals can be expressed as i log
where
j∈H uij
uij is the exponentiated utility (net of an i.i.d. Type I extreme value error) that patient i receives
from visiting hospital j and the ‘i’ sum is over enrollees. The marginal contribution of some hospital k ∈
/ H to the
network—referred
or WTP—can be expressed as
 insurer’s
 P
P to as “willingness-to-pay,”

P
P
W T P = i log uik + j∈H uij − i log
j∈H uij . This term is decreasing as elements are added to
H, a property that holds more generally in random coefficients logit models (e.g., Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes, 1995).

29

6

Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we have provided a bargaining model that extends the Rubinstein (1982)
alternating offers game to bilateral oligopoly. We establish two sets of results. Our first
set of results proves that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium exists if (i) there are gains from
trade, (ii) a feasibility condition holds, and (iii) either a weak declining contribution condition
holds, or a stronger declining contribution holds for one side of the market only. We also
show that the feasibility condition is necessary for a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium to exist.
Our second set of results proves that the Nash-in-Nash outcome is unique for any no-delay
equilibrium. Under stronger conditions on profits, it is also unique for any common tiebreaking equilibrium.
Our results provide support for the Nash-in-Nash solution as a credible bargaining framework for use in certain areas of applied work. In addition to our assumptions on profits, we
restrict the contract space (i.e., lump-sum payments that do not affect firm profits and are
finalized upon agreement) and require a fixed network of potential agreements. We believe
that these assumptions and our extensive form—which allows firms to coordinate across
multiple negotiations unlike the prior literature that used delegated agents—reasonably capture aspects of firm competition and bargaining protocols in particular real-world industry
settings. Moreover, our analysis may serve as a useful framework to better understand conditions under which this solution might emerge in other environments and settings, such as
with richer contract spaces.

References
Beckert, W., H. Smith, and Y. Takahashi (2015): “Competitive price discrimination
in a spatially differentiated intermediate goods market,” Discussion paper, University of
London, London.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” 63(4), 841–890.
Binmore, K. (1987): “Nash Bargaining Theory (II),” in The Economics of Bargaining, ed.
by K. Binmore, and P. Dasgupta. Basil Blackwell, Cambridge.
Binmore, K., A. Rubinstein, and A. Wolinsky (1986): “The Nash Bargaining Solution
in Economic Modelling,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 17(2), 176–188.
Björnerstedt, J., and J. Stennek (2007): “Bilateral oligopoly – The efficiency of
30

intermediate goods markets,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25(5), 884–
907.
Bloch, F., and M. O. Jackson (2007): “The Formation of Networks with Transfers
Among Players,” Journal of Economic Theory, 133(1), 83–110.
Brügemann, B., P. Gautier, and G. Menzio (2015): “Intra Firm Bargaining and
Shapley Values,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Capps, C., D. Dranove, and M. Satterthwaite (2003): “Competition and Market
Power in Option Demand Markets,” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4), 737–763.
Chae, S., and J. Yang (1994): “An N Person Pure Bargaining Game,” Journal of Economic Theory, 62(1), 86–102.
Chatterjee, K., B. Dutta, D. Ray, and K. Sengupta (1993): “A Noncooperative
Theory of Coalitional Bargaining,” The Review of Economic Studies, 60(2), 463–477.
Chen, Z. (2015): “Supplier Innovation in the Presence of Buyer Power,” Unpublished.
Chipty, T., and C. M. Snyder (1999): “The Role of Firm Size in Bilateral Bargaining:
A Study of the Cable Television Industry,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(2),
326–340.
Corominas-Bosch, M. (2004): “Bargaining in a Network of Buyers and Sellers,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 115(1), 35–77.
Crawford, G., and A. Yurukoglu (2012): “The Welfare Effects of Bundling in Multichannel Television Markets,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 643–85.
Crawford, G. S., R. S. Lee, M. D. Whinston, and A. Yurukoglu (2015): “The
Welfare Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets,” NBER Working Paper 21832.
Cremer, J., and M. H. Riordan (1987): “On Governing Multilateral Transactions with
Bilateral Contracts,” RAND Journal of Economics, 18(3), 436–451.
Davidson, C. (1988): “Multiunit Bargaining in Oligopolistic Industries,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 6(3), 397–422.
de Fontenay, C. C., and J. S. Gans (2005): “Vertical Integration in the Presence of
Upstream Competition,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 36(3), 544–572.
31

(2014): “Bilateral Bargaining with Externalities,” Journal of Industrial Economics,
62(4), 756–788.
Dobson, P. W. (1994): “Multifirm Unions and the Incentive to Adopt Pattern Bargaining
in Oligopoly,” European Economic Review, 38, 87–100.
Dobson, P. W., and M. Waterson (2007): “The Competition Effects of Industry-Wide
Vertical Price Fixing in Bilateral Oligopoly,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 25, 935–962.
Draganska, M., D. Klapper, and S. B. Villas-Boas (2010): “A Larger Slice or a
Larger Pie? An Empirical Investigation of Bargaining Power in the Distribution Channel,”
Marketing Science, 29(1), 57–74.
Easterbrook, K. F., G. Gowrisankaran, D. Older Aguilar, and Y. Wu (2017):
“Accounting for Complementarities in Hospital Mergers: Is a Substitute Needed for Current Approaches?,” Discussion paper, University of Arizona.
Elliott, M. (2015): “Inefficiencies in Networked Markets,” American Economics Journal:
Microeconomics, 7(4), 43–82.
Farrell, J., D. J. Balan, K. Brand, and B. W. Wendling (2011): “Economics at
the FTC: Hospital Mergers, Authorized Generic Drugs, and Consumer Credit Markets,”
Review of Industrial Organization, 39, 271–296.
Ghili, S. (2016): “Network Formation and Bargaining in Vertical Markets: The Case of
Narrow Networks in Health Insurance,” Discussion paper, Northwestern University.
Gomes, A. (2005): “Multilateral Contracting with Externalities,” Econometrica, 73(4),
1329–1350.
Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo, and R. Town (2015): “Mergers When Prices Are
Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry,” American Economic Review, 105(1),
172–203.
Grennan, M. (2013): “Price Discrimination and Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from
Medical Devices,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 147–177.
Hart, O., and J. Tirole (1990): “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1990, 205–286.

32

Hellmann, T. (2013): “On the Existence and Uniqueness of Pairwise Stable Networks,”
International Journal of Game Theory, 42(1), 211–237.
Herrero, M. J. (1989): “The Nash program: non-convex bargaining problems,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 49(2), 266–277.
Ho, K. (2009): “Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market,” American Economic Review, 99(1), 393–430.
Ho, K., and R. S. Lee (2016): “Equilibrium Provider Networks: Bargaining and Exclusion
in Health Care Markets,” Discussion paper, Harvard University.
Ho, K., and R. S. Lee (2017): “Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets,” Econometrica, 85(2), 379–417.
Horn, H., and A. Wolinsky (1988a): “Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger,”
The RAND Journal of Economics, 19(3), 408–419.
Horn, H., and A. Wolinsky (1988b): “Worker Substitutability and Patterns of Unionisation,” Economic Journal, 98, 484–497.
Inderst, R., and J. Montez (2014): “Buyer Power and Dependency in a Model of
Negotiations,” Working paper, London Business School.
Inderst, R., and T. M. Valletti (2011): “Buyer Poewr and the ‘Waterbed Effect’,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 54(1), 1–20.
Inderst, R., and C. Wey (2003): “Bargaining, Mergers, and Technology Choice in Bilaterally Oligopolistic Industries,” RAND Journal of Economics, 34(1), 1–19.
(2007): “Buyer Power and Supplier Incentives,” European Economic Review, 51(3),
647–667.
Iozzi, A., and T. Valletti (2014): “Vertical Bargaining and Countervailing Power,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 6(3), 106–135.
Jackson, M. O. (2004): “A Survey of Models of Network Formation: Stability and Efficiency,” in Group Formation in Economics; Networks, Clubs and Coalitions, ed. by G. Demange, and M. Wooders, chap. 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Jehiel, P., and B. Moldovanu (1995): “Negative Externalities May Cause Delay in
Negotiation,” Econometrica, 63(6), 1321–1335.
33

Jun, B. H. (1989): “Non-Cooperative Bargaining and Union Formation,” The Review of
Economic Studies, 56(1), 59–76.
Kranton, R. E., and D. F. Minehart (2001): “A Theory of Buyer-Seller Networks,”
American Economic Review, 91(3), 485–508.
Krishna, V., and R. Serrano (1996): “Multilateral Bargaining,” The Review of Economic Studies, 63(1), 61–80.
Lee, R. S. (2013): “Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets,” American Economic Review, 103(7), 2960–3000.
Lee, R. S., and K. Fong (2013): “Markov Perfect Network Formation: An Applied
Framework for Bilateral Oligopoly and Bargaining in Buyer-Seller Networks,” Discussion
Paper, Harvard University.
Liebman, E. (2016): “Bargaining in Markets with Exclusion: An Analysis of Health Insurance Networks,” Discussion paper, Duke University.
Manea, M. (2011): “Bargaining in Stationary Networks,” American Economic Review,
101(5), 2042–2080.
McAfee, R., and M. Schwartz (1994): “Opportunism in Multilateral Vertical Contracting: Nondiscrimination, Exclusivity, and Uniformity,” American Economic Review, 84(1),
210–230.
Merlo, A., and C. Wilson (1995): “A Stochastic Model of Sequential Bargaining with
Complete Information,” Econometrica, 63(2), 371–399.
Möllers, C., H.-T. Normann, and C. M. Snyder (2016): “Communication in Vertical
Markets: Experimental Evidence,” Working Paper 22219, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Muthoo, A. (1999): Bargaining Theory with Applications. Cambridge, Cambridge.
Nash, J. (1950): “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica, 18(2), 155–162.
Navarro, N., and A. Perea (2013): “A Simple Bargaining Procedure for the Myerson
Value,” The B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, 13(1), 20.
Noton, C., and A. Elberg (2017): “Are supermarkets squeezing small suppliers? Evidence from negotiated wholesale prices,” The Economic Journal.
34

O’Brien, D. P. (2014): “The Welfare Effects of Third-Degree Price Discrimination in
Intermediate Good Markets: The Case of Bargaining,” RAND Journal of Economics,
45(1), 92–115.
O’Brien, D. P., and G. Shaffer (1992): “Vertical Control with Bilateral Contracts,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 23, 299–308.
Polanski, A. (2007): “Bilateral Bargaining in Networks,” Journal of Economic Theory,
134(1), 557–565.
Prager, E. (2016): “Tiered Provider Networks In Health Insurance,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Raskovich, A. (2003): “Pivotal Buyers and Bargaining Position,” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 51(4), 405–426.
Ray, D., and R. Vohra (2015): “Coalition Formation,” in Handbook of Game Theory with
Economic Applications, ed. by H. P. Young, and S. Zamir, vol. 4, chap. 5, pp. 239–326.
Elsevier.
Rey, P., and T. Vergé (2004): “Bilateral Control with Vertical Contracts,” RAND Journal of Economics, 35(4), 728–746.
Rogerson, W. P. (2013): “Vertical Mergers in the Video Programming and Distribution
Industry: The Case of Comcast NBCU (2011),” in The Antitrust Revolution, 6th edition,
ed. by J. E. Kowka, and L. J. White. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Rubinstein, A. (1982): “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica, 50(1),
97–109.
Segal, I. (1999): “Contracting with Externalities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64(2),
337–388.
Serrano, R. (2005): “Fifty Years of the Nash Program, 1953–2003,” Investigaciones
Económicas, 24(2), 219–258.
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1984): “Involuntary Unemployment as a Perfect Equilibrium
in a Bargaining Model,” Econometrica, 52(6), 1351–64.
Stole, L. A., and J. Zwiebel (1996): “Intra-Firm Bargaining Under Non-Binding Contracts,” The Review of Economic Studies, 63(3), 375–410.

35

Town, R. J., and G. Vistnes (2001): “Hospital Competition in HMO Networks,” Journal
of Health Economics, 20, 733–753.
Villas-Boas, S. B. (2007): “Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers:
Inference with Limited Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 74(2), 625–652.
Westermark, A. (2003): “Bargaining, Binding Contracts, and Competitive Wages,”
Games and Economic Behavior, 43(2), 296–311.
Whinston, M. D. (2006): Lectures on Antitrust Economics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

36

A

Formal Results for the Delegated Agent Model

In this section, we present formal results for the delegated agent model, discussed in Section 2.3. The
extensive form for this representation involves separate bilateral negotiations between delegated agents, or
representatives, of each firm.39 We develop this model and show that this representation also admits the
Nash-in-Nash bargaining solution as an equilibrium outcome if A.GFT holds.
Our model is as follows. For every negotiation ij ∈ G, Ui and Dj send individual representatives,
denoted as U ij and Dij , who engage in the alternating-offers bargaining protocol of Binmore, Rubinstein,
and Wolinsky (1986), where negotiation breakdowns are independent across negotiations and profits are
realized once all negotiations have concluded or broken down. Each representative seeks to maximize her
firm’s total expected profits across all bargains. However, she does not know the outcome of any other
bilateral bargain until her own bargain has concluded or broken down. One interpretation is that each pair
of agents for a negotiation are sequestered in separate bargaining rooms, and no one outside the room knows
the status of the bargain until it has concluded or broken down.
Under these conditions, we show that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium exists:
Theorem A.1 Assume A.GFT and that every negotiation ij ∈ G is conducted by delegated agents from
Ui and Dj . Then there exists an equilibrium of the delegated agent model where all agreements ij ∈ G are
R
immediately formed at prices p̂ij = pR
ij,D (pij,U ) if t0 is odd (even).
Proof. Let the delegated agents employ the following candidate set of strategies: U ij offers pR
ij,U in even
ij
R
in
odd
periods,
and
in
odd
periods;
D
offers
p
periods and only accepts offers equal to or above pR
ij,D
ij,D
R
accepts offers equal to or below pij,U in even periods.
Given passive beliefs, when an agent sees an off-equilibrium action by one party, it still perceives that the
other parties are following their equilibrium actions.40 Thus, if a delegated agent—e.g., Dij —sees a deviation
from the above strategies by its rival—U ij in this case—then it perceives that all other negotiations (which
are all run by separate delegated agents) follow equilibrium strategies. Hence, both Dij and U ij assume that
all other agreements immediately form regardless of what occurs in their respective bargain. By Binmore,
Rubinstein, and Wolinsky (1986), the above strategies then comprise the unique equilibrium for each ij
negotiation.

Note that this does not necessarily imply that there is a unique equilibrium for the delegated agent model.
Indeed, consider our three supplier counterexample from Section 3.1. In this setting, if every negotiation
is conducted by delegated agents by the downstream manufacturer, and each agent believes that all other
agreements will form at Rubinstein prices (i.e., at prices δ/(1 + δ) it t0 odd), then their agreement will also
form at this price. However, there exists another equilibrium in which no agreements are ever formed: e.g.,
if each delegated agent for the downstream manufacturer believes that no other agreements will form, then
upstream suppliers always demanding pi1,U > 0 in each even period (and the manufacturer rejecting any
offer greater than 0), and the manufacturer offering a price of pi1,D < 0 in each odd period (and suppliers
rejecting any offer less than 0) comprise equilibrium strategies.
While we do not prove that there exists a unique equilibrium of the delegated agent model, the proof of
Theorem A.1 nevertheless implies that conditional on all agreements in G forming, the equilibrium outcome
of agreements all forming at Rubinstein prices is unique. This result is the analog of Theorem 4.2.

B

Proofs of Lemmas from Main Text

Proof of Lemma 2.1 Using l’Hospital’s rule:
e−ri,U Λ (1 − e−rj,D Λ )
rj,D
δi,U (1 − δj,D )
= lim
=
,
Λ→0 1 − e−(ri,U +rj,D )Λ
Λ→0 1 − δi,U δj,D
ri,U + rj,D
lim

39

Chipty and Snyder (1999) (see footnote 10) provides a sketch of this argument in the context of a single
supplier negotiating with multiple buyers; see also Björnerstedt and Stennek (2007).
40
This property holds for sequential equilibria (without public signals), and not just for perfect Bayesian
equilibria with passive beliefs.

37

and

1 − δj,D
1 − e−rj,D Λ
rj,D
= lim
=
.
Λ→0 1 − δi,U δj,D
Λ→0 1 − e−(ri,U +rj,D )Λ
ri,U + rj,D
lim

Similarly,
lim

Λ→0

δj,D (1 − δi,U )
(1 − δi,U )
ri,U
= lim
=
,
Λ→0 1 − δi,U δj,D
1 − δi,U δj,D
ri,U + rj,D

which proves the lemma.



Proof of Lemma 2.2 Assume A.GFT. For any ij ∈ G, since 0 < δi,U < 1 and 0 < δj,D < 1, note:
(∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − pR
ij,D ) =

(1 − δi,U )
(∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + ∆πi,U (G, {ij})) .
(1 − δi,U δj,D ) |
{z
}
|
{z
}
>0 by A.GFT
>0

Thus ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) > pR
ij,D . Also, note:
(∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + pR
ij,U ) =

(1 − δj,D )
(∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + ∆πi,U (G, {ij})) .
(1 − δi,U δj,D ) |
{z
}
{z
}
|
>0 by A.GFT
>0

Thus ∆πi,U (G, {ij}) > −pR
ij,U >. Adding the previous two inequalities and rearranging, we obtain:


 (1 − δ )
(1 − δj,D )
i,U
R
+
−1
pR
ij,U − pij,D = ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + ∆πi,U (G, {ij})
(1 − δi,U δj,D ) (1 − δi,U δj,D )



1
=
∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + ∆πi,U (G, {ij}) 1 − δi,U − δj,D + δj,D δi,U .
1 − δi,U δj,D
R
Again, all three terms on the second line are positive; thus pR
ij,U > pij,D . Finally, substituting in the definition
R
of δi,U and δj,D into the definition of pij,D , it is straightforward to show ∂pR
ij,D (Λ)/∂Λ < 0 ∀ Λ > 0; thus, as
N ash
N ash
R
limΛ→0 pR
=
p
by
Lemma
2.1,
it
follows
that
p
>
p
.
A
similar
approach can be used to show
ij
ij
ij,D
ij,D
N ash
R

that pij
< pij,U .

Proof of Lemma 3.3 Assume A.GFT. We prove the lemma using the following four claims:
1. A.SCDMC ⇒ A.WCDMC
We prove A.SCDMC(b) (for downstream firms) implies A.WCDMC holds for downstream firms;
the proof that A.SCDMC(a) (for upstream firms) implies A.WCDMC holds for upstream firms is
symmetric and omitted.
A.SCDMC(b) states: πj,D (A ∪ B ∪ {ij}) − πj,D (A0 ∪ B) ≥ ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) for all ij ∈ G, B ⊆ G−i,U ,
and A, A0 ⊆ Gi,U \ {ij}. For the case where A = A0 , A.SCDMC implies:
∆πj,D (A ∪ B, {ij}) ≥ ∆πj,D (G, {ij})

∀ ij ∈ G, B ⊆ G−i,U , A ⊆ Gi,U \ {ij} .

(5)

Index agreements in A from k = 1, · · · , |A|, and let ak represent the kth agreement in A. This allows
us to create a sequence of sets of agreements, starting at B ≡ G \A, in which we add in each agreement
one at a time, given by D0 ≡ B, and Dk = Dk−1 ∪ {ak } for k = 1, · · · , |A|. Then, note that for any
A ⊆ Gj,D :
∆πj,D (G, A) = ∆πj,D (A ∪ B, A) =

|A|
X

∆πj,D (Dk , {ak })

k=1

≥

|A|
X

∆πj,D (G, {ak }) =

k=1

X
kj∈A

38

∆πj,D (G, {kj}),

where the last equality on the first line follows from the index for agreements for A, and the inequality
on the second line follows from (5). This coincides with the statement of A.WCDMC for downstream
firms.
2. A.WCDMC ⇒ A.FEAS
For all ij ∈ G and A ⊆ Gj,D :
∆πj,D (G, A) −

X
ij∈A

X 
bi,U ∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − bj,D ∆πi,U (G, {ij}) 
∆πj,D (G, {ij}) −
bi,U + bj,D
kj∈A
!

X 
bj,D
∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + ∆πi,U (G, {ij})
>0,
=
bi,U + bj,D

ash
pN
≥
ij

kj∈A

ash
,
where the first inequality follows from A.WCDMC (for downstream firms) and the definition of pN
ij
P
N ash
and the second line is positive by A.GFT. Thus ∆πj,D (G, A) > ij∈A pij , and A.FEAS holds. The
proof for upstream firms is symmetric and omitted.

3. A.WCDMC 6⇒ A.SCDMC
Consider a single downstream firm and three upstream suppliers. Suppose that the downstream firm
profits are: 0 without any supplier, 0.25 with one supplier, 0.7 with two suppliers, and 1 with all three
suppliers; assume supplier profits are always 0. This example violates A.SCDMC(b) given by (5)
because the surplus to the downstream firm from having one supplier (0.25) is less than the surplus
from adding the third supplier (0.3). But, it does not violate A.WCDMC, because removing two or
three suppliers both result in a greater loss than the sum of the marginal values (0.75 versus 0.6 when
removing two suppliers, and 1 versus 0.9 when removing all three).
4. A.FEAS 6⇒ A.WCDMC
The two automobile supplier example in the paper discussed in Section 3.1 satisfies A.FEAS but not
A.WCDMC when 0 ≤ a < 0.5.


C
C.1

Proof of Theorems on Existence
Proof of Theorem 3.2

We proceed by contradiction: assume that a Nash-in-Nash limit equilibrium exists where all agreements
form immediately,
does not hold, so that for some Dj , there exists A ⊆ Gj,D such that
P but A.FEAS
ash
∆πj,D (G, A) < ij∈A pN
;
the
proof if A.FEAS is violated for some Ui is symmetric and omitted. Let
ij
P

1
N ash
ε = |A| ( ij∈A pij ) − ∆πj,D (G, A) , which is positive by assumption. By the contradictory assumption,
for any t0 , there exists Λ̄ > 0 such that for all Λ ∈ (0, Λ̄], there is an equilibrium where all agreements in
ash
G form at t0 at prices {p∗ij }ij∈G , where |p∗ij − pN
| < ε for all ij ∈ G. Assume that t0 is even, and
ij
fix Λ ∈ (0, Λ̄]. Consider the following multi-period deviation: Dj rejects offers ij ∈ A at t0 and every
subsequent even period and proposes offers that are sufficiently low that they will be rejected in odd periods.
By assumption, in this equilibrium, all agreements in G \ A will still form at t0 . Thus, this deviation (where
agreements in A never form) will increase Dj ’s payoffs by:
X

X

ash
p∗ij − ∆πj,D (G, A) >
(pN
− ε) − ∆πj,D (G, A)
ij
ij∈A

ij∈A

 X

ash
pN
)
−
∆π
(G,
A)
− |A| × ε
= (
j,D
ij
ij∈A

 X
  X

ash
ash
= (
pN
) − ∆πj,D (G, A) − (
pN
) − ∆πj,D (G, A) = 0
ij
ij
ij∈A

ij∈A

39

where the inequality on the first line follows from the definition of p∗ij , the second line rearranges terms, and
the third line follows from substituting in the definition of ε. Thus, this deviation is profitable, yielding a
contradiction.


C.2

Proof of Theorem 3.1 (Sufficiency Only) and Theorem 3.4

Assume A.GFT and either (i) A.WCDMC or (ii) A.FEAS and either A.SCDMC(a) or A.SCDMC(b). For
condition set (ii), we detail the proof where A.SCDMC(a) (for upstream firms) holds; the proof when
A.SCDMC(b) holds is symmetric and omitted.
We first detail our candidate equilibrium strategies:
• In every odd period, each Dj makes offers pR
ij,D to all firms Ui with which it has not already formed
an agreement. If all price offers that it receives are equal to pR
ij,D , Ui accepts all offers. If Ui receives
exactly one non-equilibrium offer from some Dj , it accepts all other offers and rejects Dj ’s offer if and
only if the offer is lower than pR
ij,D . Finally, if Ui receives multiple non-equilibrium offers, it plays an
arbitrary best response in its acceptance decision, respecting passive beliefs.
• In every even period with open agreements given by C, each Ui makes offers pij,U (C) (defined below)
to all firms Dj ∈ Ci,U . If all price offers that it receives are equal to pij,U (C), Dj accepts all offers.
If Dj receives exactly one non-equilibrium offer from some Ui and that offer is lower than pij,U (C),
then Dj still accepts all offers. If Dj receives exactly one non-equilibrium offer from some Ui and that
offer is higher than pij,U (C), then: (i) under A.WCDMC, Dj rejects Ui ’s offer and accepts all other
offers; (ii) under A.FEAS and A.SCDMC, Dj rejects Ui ’s offer and plays an arbitrary best response
in its acceptance decision with other offers (respecting passive beliefs). If Dj receives multiple nonequilibrium offers, it plays an arbitrary best response in its acceptance decision, respecting passive
beliefs.
The prescribed strategy profile dictates that every firm makes proposals that are Rubinstein prices in odd
periods, and may differ from Rubinstein prices in even periods. On the equilibrium path, all offers are
accepted regardless of whether the period is odd or even.
Note that our candidate equilibrium strategies do not completely specify a receiving firm’s best response
upon receiving multiple non-equilibrium offers; indeed, at certain nodes, there may be multiple actions that
satisfy our equilibrium construction. Generally, determining a receiving firm’s best response upon receiving
multiple non-equilibrium offers may depend on actions taken in a subsequent subgame when another firm
receives multiple non-equilibrium offers; in such circumstances, best responses may not be straightforward to
determine or even well defined. However, this is not an issue in our setting: given our candidate equilibrium
strategies, a receiving firm’s value from accepting any set of offers (regardless of whether any offers are
non-equilibrium offers) in any period t does not depend on future actions taken at nodes with multiple
non-equilibrium offers. The reason for this is that a receiving firm anticipates that all agreements that are
not formed in period t (including any offers that it rejects) will be formed at candidate equilibrium prices
in the next period t + 1. Hence, regardless of the receiving firm’s actions in a given period, it will never
expect to reach another subgame where any firm receives multiple non-equilibrium offers. Consequently, our
candidate equilibrium strategies are well defined; furthermore, in our proof below, we explicitly characterize
a firm’s best response to receiving multiple non-equilibrium offers at any history of play.

Construction of Even Period (pij,U (C)) Prices. We now define candidate even-period equilibrium pricing strategies pij,U (C) iteratively as follows. For each set of open agreements C ⊆ G, consider the
constraints:
X
X
pR
∀j s.t. Cj,D 6= ∅, ∀B ⊆ Cj,D .
(6)
pij,U (C) ≤ (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, B) + δj,D
ij,D
ij∈B

ij∈B

|

{z

LS

}

|

{z

}

RS

where the constraint ensures that each downstream firm Dj with open agreements in C wishes to accept prices
pij,U (C) for any subset of agreements B ⊆ Cj,D at an even period as opposed to forming those agreements in
the next period at Rubinstein prices pR
ij,D .

40

Step 1. Initialize pij,U (C) = pR
ij,D , ∀ij. At these values, the constraints specified by (6) are strictly satisfied:
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, B) + δj,D

X

pR
ij,D ≥ (1 − δj,D )

ash
pN
+ δj,D
ij

ij∈B

ij∈B

{z

|

X

X

pR
ij,D

ij∈B

}

RS

> (1 − δj,D )

X

pR
ij,D + δj,D

ij∈B

X

pR
ij,D ,

ij∈B

{z

|

}

=LS

where the inequality on the first line follows from A.FEAS, and the second line from Lemma 2.2.
Step 2. Now, for each set of open agreements C, fix an arbitrary ordering over agreements within that set.
Start with the first open agreement ij ∈ C, and increase pij,U (C) until (at least) one of the constraints
given by (6) binds. Move on to the second open agreement, and do the same. Continue through
all the open agreements in C. Define the candidate set of equilibrium offers pij,U (C) to be the offers
resulting from this process. For these prices, all constraints (6) still hold. Moreover, by construction,
at these prices each open agreement ij ∈ C has at least one constraint (6) that binds.
Next, we prove the following supporting Lemma.
Lemma C.1 Candidate equilibrium prices satisfy the following properties:
1. pij,U (C) ≥ pR
ij,D , ∀ij ∈ C, C ⊆ G.
2. pij,U (C) ≤ pR
ij,U , ∀ij ∈ C, C ⊆ G.
3. pij,U ({ij}) = pR
ij,U , ∀ij ∈ G.
4. Assume A.WCDMC. Then pij,U (C) = pR
ij,U , ∀ij ∈ C, ∀C ⊆ G.
5. All candidate equilibrium prices converge to Nash-in-Nash prices as Λ → 0.
Proof. We prove that each property holds in turn.
1. This follows directly from the iterative procedure: we start with pR
ij,D and then weakly increase prices
to arrive at pij,U (C).
R
2. By (6), pij,U (C) ≤ (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, ij) + δj,D pR
ij,D = pij,U .
R
3. By construction, pij,U ({ij}) = (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + δj,D pR
ij,D = pij,U , with the equality following
again from (6).

4. Suppose, by contradiction, that A.WCDMC holds but ∃C ⊆ G and lm ∈ C such that plm,U (C) < pR
lm,U
(Claim 2 rules out the inequality in the other direction). Then, by the construction of plm,U (C)
there must exist B ⊆ C, lm ∈ B for which the constraint in (6) binds. Using this B, we arrive at a
contradiction:
X
X
pR
pij,U (C)
ij,U >
ij∈B

ij∈B

= (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, B) + δj,D

X

pR
ij,D

ij∈B

≥ (1 − δj,D )

X

∆πj,D (G, ij) + δj,D

ij∈B

X
ij∈B

pR
ij,D =

X

pR
ij,U ,

ij∈B

where the first line follows from Claim 2 and the contradictory assumption, the second line from our
choice of B, the third line inequality from A.WCDMC, and the final equality from (1).

41

5. In odd periods, offers are pR
ij,D which converge to Nash-in-Nash prices as Λ → 0 by Lemma 2.1. In
R
even periods, offers satisfy pR
ij,D ≤ pij,U (C) ≤ pij,U . Since the offers lie between two sets of offers
that converge to Nash-in-Nash prices, by the sandwich theorem, they also converge to Nash-in-Nash
prices.

We now prove the main result.
Lemma C.2 The candidate strategies described above comprise an equilibrium.
Proof. We now prove that no unilateral deviation is profitable on the part of any firm. Consider any period
t where there are C ⊆ G open agreements.
Upstream firm, t odd. Consider first an upstream firm Ui ’s decision of which offers to accept at an odd
period t given it receives offers {p̃ij }ij∈Ci,U . If Ui engages in a one-shot deviation by rejecting a subset
K ⊆ Ci,U of its open agreements, Ui expects that: (i) all other upstream firms will accept all of their open
agreements at period t; and (ii) all non-accepted agreements K will form at period t + 1 at prices pij,U (K)
(as we only consider one-shot deviations, and play is expected to follow the prescribed equilibrium strategies
from t+1 onwards). We define the increase in Ui ’s payoffs from rejecting agreements K ⊆ Ci,U (and following
equilibrium strategies thereafter) as:


X
F (K) ≡ − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, K) +
[p̃ij − δi,U pij,U (K)] ,
(7)
ij∈K

where we omit the fact that F is implicitly a function of the firm Ui , the set of open agreements C, the set of
candidate equilibrium strategies employed by other firms, and the set of prices that Ui receives. Ui chooses
to reject agreements K̂ = arg maxK⊆Ci,U F (K), as this set of rejections maximizes its payoffs.
Consider first the case where Ui receives candidate equilibrium offers {pR
ij,D }ij∈Ci,U . Substituting these
prices into (7), we obtain:


X


F (K) = − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, K) +
pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U (K)
ij∈K




X

R

≤ − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, K) +
pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U
ij∈K




X

R
=0,
≤ −
(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U

(8)

ij∈K

where the second line uses Lemma C.1(2) (pij,U (K) ≤ pR
ij,U ), the third line inequality follows from A.WCDMC
or A.SCDMC (a), and the third line equality uses (2). Since F (∅) = 0, F (K) is maximized for K = ∅. This
implies that at equilibrium prices, Ui maximizes surplus by rejecting no offer, or equivalently, accepting all
offers. Thus, in this case, Ui cannot gain by deviating from its candidate equilibrium strategy.
Consider next the case where Ui receives exactly one non-equilibrium offer, p̃ij 6= pR
ij,D . In this case, the
increase in Ui ’s payoffs from rejecting agreements K ⊆ Ci,U can be expressed as:


X 

 +1K ({ij})(pR
F (K) = − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, K) +
pR
ij,D − p̃ij )
kj,D − δk,U pkj,U (K)
kj∈K

|

{z

}

≤0 by (8)

≤ 1K ({ij})(pR
ij,D − p̃ij ) ,

42

where 1K ({ij}) is an indicator function for ij ∈ K. Note that the increase in Ui ’s profits from rejecting only
agreement ij can be expressed as:
h
i
F ({ij}) = − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + p̃ij − δi,U pij,U ({ij})
i
h
R
R
= − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + pR
−
δ
p
i,U
ij,D
ij,U +(pij,D − p̃ij )
{z
}
|
=0 by (2)

=

(pR
ij,D

− p̃ij ) ,

where the second line follows from an application of Lemma C.1(3) (pij,U ({ij}) = pR
ij,U ) and a re-arranging
of terms. Thus, if p̃ij ≥ pR
,
F
(K)
is
again
maximized
for
K
=
∅
(accept
all
offers);
if p̃ij < pR
ij,D
ij,D , F (K) is
maximized for K = {ij} (reject only Dj ’s offer). Hence, upon receiving one non-equilibrium offer, Ui does
not have a profitable deviation from its prescribed equilibrium strategy.
Finally, in cases with multiple off-equilibrium offers, the strategy profile specified above states that Ui
picks an arbitrary K̂ that maximizes F (K). By definition then, this is a best response and no unilateral
deviation is profitable. Note that receiving multiple off-equilibrium offers is unreachable from candidate
equilibrium play by any unilateral deviation.
Downstream firm, t even. Next consider a downstream firm Dj ’s decision of which offers to accept at
an even period t given it receives offers {p̃ij }ij∈Cj,D . If Dj engages in a one-shot deviation by rejecting a
subset K ⊆ Cj,D of its open agreements, Dj expects that: (i) all other downstream firms will accept all of
their open agreements at period t; and (ii) all non-accepted offers K will form agreement at period t + 1
at Rubinstein prices pR
ij,D . We define the increase in Dj ’s payoffs from rejecting agreements K ⊆ Cj,D (and
following equilibrium strategies thereafter) as:


X

,
F (K) ≡ − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K) +
−p̃ij + δj,D pR
(9)
ij,D
ij∈K

where we omit the fact that F is implicitly a function of the firm Dj , the set of open agreements C, the set of
candidate equilibrium strategies employed by other firms, and the set of prices that Dj receives. Dj chooses
to reject agreements K̂ = arg maxK⊆Cj,D F (K), as this set of rejections maximizes its payoffs.
Consider first the case where Dj receives candidate equilibrium offers {pij,U (C)}ij∈Cj,D . Substituting
these prices into (9) and then applying (6), we obtain:


X

 ≤ 0.
F (K) = − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K) +
−pij,U (C) + δj,D pR
(10)
ij,D
ij∈K

Since F (∅) = 0, F (K) is maximized for K = ∅. This implies that at equilibrium prices, Dj maximizes surplus
by rejecting no offer, or equivalently, accepting all offers. Thus, in this case, Dj cannot gain by deviating
from its candidate equilibrium strategy.
Consider next the case where Dj receives exactly one non-equilibrium offer, p̃ij 6= pij,U (C). In this case,
the increase in Dj ’s payoffs from rejecting agreements K ⊆ Cj,D can be expressed as:
"
#
X

R
(11)
F (K) = − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K) +
−pik,U (C) + δj,D pik,D +1K ({ij})(−pij,U (C) + p̃ij )
ik∈K

|

{z

}

≤0 by (10)

≤ 1K ({ij})(−pij,U (C) + p̃ij ) .
From (11), if p̃ij < pij,U (C), then there is no profitable deviation from the candidate equilibrium strategy of
accepting all offers (as F (K) is maximized at K = ∅). If p̃ij ≥ pij,U (C), there are two cases to consider:
1. Under A.WCDMC, by Lemma C.1(4), pij,U (C) = pR
ij,U . By substituting this in to (11) and then

43

applying (2), the inequality can be shown to be an equality for K = {ij}; thus, F (K) is maximized
for K = {ij} (reject only Ui ’s offer).
2. Otherwise, note first that if Dj rejects some set of offers K that does not include ij, then F (K) ≤ 0
from (11); if Dj rejects no offers, F (∅) = 0. By rejecting a set of offers K that includes ij and all other
offers which are included in some constraint from (6) that binds, F (K) = pij,U (C) − p̃ij > 0. Thus,
Dj ’s best response must include rejecting Ui ’s offer, and potentially includes rejecting other offers.
Again, there are no profitable deviations from prescribed strategies.
Finally, in cases with multiple off-equilibrium offers, the strategy profile specified above states that Dj
picks an arbitrary K̂ that maximizes F (K). By definition, this is a best response and no unilateral deviation
is profitable.
Upstream firm, t even. Next, we consider the decision for an upstream firm Ui of what offers to propose
at an even period t. Consider the possibility that Ui deviates from the candidate equilibrium strategies and
offers prices p̃ij 6= pij,U (C) for all ij in some K ⊆ Ci,U . By passive beliefs, each firm Dj receiving p̃ij perceives
that it is the only one to have received an off-equilibrium offer. Given the above discussion regarding D’s
strategies in this case, if p̃ij < pij,U (C), then it will be accepted, while if p̃ij > pij,U (C), then it will be
rejected, potentially along with some other offers kj. Clearly, Ui will never choose to offer p̃ij < pij,U (C),
since it can always offer pij,U (C) instead, without affecting the set of acceptances.
Thus, the only possible profitable deviation left is for Ui to offer p̃ij > pij,U (C) for all ij in K. Given
the candidate equilibrium strategies, these offers will be rejected at period t, and then accepted at t + 1
at prices pR
ij,D . Let a1 , . . . , a|K| denote the downstream firms with offers in K and let Ck denote the set of
offers rejected by Dak following its deviant offer from Ui . Given the downstream firms’ strategies, it will
be the case each downstream firm Dak will reject iak , and iak ∈ Ck . Note that under A.WCDMC, given
the prescribed equilibrium strategy profiles each downstream firm Dak will only reject iak , and Ck = {iak };
under A.FEAS, a downstream firm may also reject additional agreements.
Then, the decrease in Ui ’s surplus from raising the price on some set of offers K ⊆ Ci,U is:
X
[pij,U (C) − δi,U pR
(12)
ij,D ] + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, C1 ∪ . . . ∪ C|K| )
ij∈K

=

|K|
X
X

pij,U (C) − δi,U pR
+
(1
−
δ
)
∆πi,U (G \ (Ck+1 ∪ . . . ∪ C|K| ), Ck )
i,U
ij,D
ij∈K

≥

k=1

|K|
X
X

∆πi,U (G, {iak })
pij,U (C) − δi,U pR
ij,D + (1 − δi,U )
ij∈K

k=1

X

=
pij,U (C) − δi,U pR
ij,D + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, ij)
ij∈K

≥

X

R
pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, ij) = 0 ,
ij∈K

implying that such a deviation is not profitable. In (12), the second term of the second line splits the change
in surplus from the postponed agreements by downstream firms. The third line then either follows directly
from A.WCDMC (as Ck = {iak }), or applies A.SCDMC to each element of the second term, which can
be done since each element can be expressed as the difference in Ui ’s profits between when Dak accepts all
its offers and when it rejects both Ui ’s offer and the other offers in Ck , holding constant the fact that all
other agreements are formed except for Ck+1 ∪ . . . C|K| .41 The fourth line rearranges terms. The final line
inequality follows from Lemma C.1(1) and Lemma 2.2, and the last equality from (2).
Downstream firm, t odd. Finally, we consider the decision for a downstream firm Dj of what offers
to propose at an odd period t. Consider the possibility that Dj deviates from the candidate equilibrium
Let B ≡ G \ (Ck+1 ∪ . . . ∪ C|K| ), A ≡ Ck \ {iak }, and A0 ≡ ∅. As A and A0 only differ in agreements
formed by Dak , ∆πi,U (G \ (Ck+1 ∪ . . . ∪ C|K| ), Ck ) = πi,U (A ∪ B ∪ {iak }) − πi,U (A0 ∪ B) ≥ ∆πi,U (G, {iak }),
where the last inequality follows from A.SCDMC.
41

44

strategies and offers prices different from p̃ij 6= pR
ij,D for all ij in some K ⊆ Cj,D . By passive beliefs, each firm
Ui receiving p̃ij perceives that it is the only one to have received an off-equilibrium offer. Given candidate
R
equilibrium strategies, if p̃ij > pR
ij,D , then it will be accepted, while if p̃ij < pij,D , then it will be rejected,
with no other impact on the acceptance of offers not in K. Dj will not deviate and offer p̃ij > pR
ij,D to any
Ui , as it can always offer pR
instead
and
do
strictly
better
(as
no
other
agreements
are
affected).
The
ij,D
R
only possible profitable deviation for Dj is to offer p̃ij < pij,D for all ij in K. Again, given the candidate
equilibrium strategies, these offers will be rejected at period t, and then accepted at t + 1 at prices pij,U (K).
The decrease in Dj ’s payoffs from engaging in such a deviation is:
X

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K) −
pR
(13)
ij,D − δj,D pij,U (K)
ij∈K

≥

X

ash
(1 − δj,D )pN
− pR
ij
ij,D + δj,D pij,U (K)
ij∈K

>

X

R
(1 − δj,D )pR
ij,D − pij,D + δj,D pij,U (K)
ij∈K

= δj,D

X


pij,U (K) − pR
ij,D ≥ 0 ,

ij∈K

where the second line of (13) follows from A.FEAS (and implied by A.WCDMC), the third line from
Lemma 2.2, the final line equality from rearranging terms, and the final line inequality from Lemma C.1(2).
Thus, Dj has no profitable deviation.
Since there are no profitable one-shot deviations for any agent in both odd and even periods, the candidate
set of strategies comprise an equilibrium. By Lemma C.1(5), prices at this equilibrium converge to Nash-inNash prices.


C.3

Proof of Theorem 3.1 (Necessity)

We now prove that if A.WCDMC does not hold, there is no equilibrium where at every period t and history
R
ht all open agreements ij ∈ C(ht ) immediately form at prices pR
ij,D (pij,U ) if t is odd (even). We proceed by
contradiction: assume that such an equilibrium P
exists, and that there exists an upstream firm Ui and a set of
agreements K ⊆ Gi,U such that ∆πij,U (G, K) < ij∈K ∆πi,U (G, {ij}) (the proof is symmetric if A.WCDMC
is violated for some downstream firm Dj ). Consider again the gain in one-shot surplus from Ui rejecting all
ij ∈ K, denoted F (K), evaluated at period t0 = 1. From the candidate equilibrium, we know that Ui has
formed agreements at prices pR
ij,D for all ij ∈ Gi,U . F (K) is given by:



X

R

pR
F (K) ≡ − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, K) +
ij,D − δi,U pij,U
ij∈K


> −

X

(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) +

ij∈K

X



R
 = 0,
pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U

ij∈K

where the inequality follows from the assumption that A.WCDMC does not hold and the equality from (2).
Hence, it is a profitable deviation for Ui to reject the offers in K at period 1, implying a contradiction. 

D

Proof of Theorem 4.1 (Uniqueness for No-Delay Equilibria)

Consider any no-delay equilibrium. Theorem 4.1 follows from the following two claims.

45

Claim A: In every odd period t with history ht , each agreement ij ∈ C(ht ) has equilibrium price pij (ht ) ≥
t
t
t
R
pR
ij,D . In every even period with history h , each agreement ij ∈ C(h ) has equilibrium price pij (h ) ≤ pij,U .
Proof of Claim A. We prove the claim by contradiction. First, suppose that there is an odd period t with
history of play ht for which pij (ht ) < pR
ij,D . Then, Ui has a profitable one-shot deviation: reject ij and
accept all its other offers. In this case, at period t + 1, ij will be the only open agreement (as all other
agreements form at t in a no-delay equilibrium). Thus, following this deviation, ij will then form at price
pR
ij,U at period t + 1 by Rubinstein (1982). The gains to Ui from this deviant action will then be:
t
R
R
δi,U pR
ij,U − pij (h ) − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) > δi,U pij,U − pij,D − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) = 0,

where the inequality follows from the contradictory assumption and the equality follows from (2). Hence
this deviation is profitable. The even period proof is symmetric and omitted.
Claim B: Fix ε > 0. For any odd (even) period history of play ht , ∃ Λ̄ > 0 such that if Λ ≤ Λ̄, then the
ash
ash
equilibrium price pij (ht ) ≤ pN
+ ε (for even periods, pij (ht ) ≥ pN
− ε).
ij
ij
Proof of Claim B. Define Λ̄ as any positive number that is small enough so that: (a) when Λ ≤ Λ̄, the
maximum absolute value of profits to any firm for any subset of agreements over period length Λ is less
N ash
across all
than ε/2; and (b) the maximum of the absolute value of the difference between δpR
ij,U and pij
42
agreements in G is also less than ε/2.
We now prove our claim by contradiction. First, suppose that there is an odd period history of play ht
ash
for which, for some Λ ≤ Λ̄, there is an agreement ij that is formed where pij (ht ) > pN
+ ε. Consider the
ij
t
following deviation by Dj : at h , Dj makes a deviant offer p̃ij sufficiently low that it is sure to be rejected
by Ui . Dj will expect that, at period t, Ui will reject this deviant offer (and potentially some other offers),
and that all offers that do not involve Ui will be accepted. Let K denote the set of offers that Ui rejects
following this deviant offer from Dj . At period t + 1, given that ht+1 is the history following Dj ’s period t
deviant action, Ui will propose offers at equilibrium prices {pik (ht+1 )}∀ik∈K ; furthermore, Dj expects that
all agreements will be formed at the end of t + 1 (given no-delay equilibrium strategies). The gain to Dj
from this deviation is:
ash
+ ε − δj,D pR
pij (ht ) − δj,D pij (ht+1 ) − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K) > pN
ij
ij,U − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K)
{z
} |
{z
}
|
change in payments

change in flow profits

> ε − ε/2 − ε/2 = 0,
ash
where the first line inequality follows from the contradictory assumption (pij (ht ) > pN
+ ε) and Claim A
ij
ash
t
R
−
(pij (h ) ≤ pij,U ), and the second line follows from the assumption that Λ < Λ̄ (implying that |pN
ij
R
δj,D pij,U | < ε/2 and |(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, K)| < ε/2). Thus, this deviation is profitable for Dj , implying a
contradiction.
We have thus shown that, for any ε > 0, there is a Λ̄ such that for any Λ < Λ̄, equilibrium prices in odd
periods are bounded above by Nash-in-Nash prices plus ε. The even period proof is symmetric and omitted.


E

Proof of Theorem 4.2 (Uniqueness Without Assuming Immediate Agreement)

We prove Theorem 4.2 under two sets of conditions. The first set, as stated in the main text, comprises
A.GFT, A.SCDMC, A.LNEXT, and restricts consideration to common tie-breaking equilibria. We also prove
that our uniqueness result holds under A.GFT, A.SCDMC, and a “no-externalities” assumption (discussed informally in Section 4.2) without restricting attention to common tie-breaking equilibria. The no-externalities
assumption states that any firm’s profits only depend on agreements that directly involve that firm:
42

N ash
Such a Λ̄ exists, since profits are bounded and limΛ→0 pR
by Lemma 2.1.
ij,U = pij

46

Assumption E.1 (A.NEXT: No Externalities)
U
,
For upstream firms: for all i = 1, . . . , N , A ⊆ Gi,U , and B, B 0 ⊆ G−i
πi,U (A ∪ B) = πi,U (A ∪ B 0 ).
D
For downstream firms: for all j = 1, . . . , M , A ⊆ Gj,D , and B, B 0 ⊆ G−j
,

πj,D (A ∪ B) = πj,D (A ∪ B 0 ).
It is straightforward to prove that A.SCDMC and A.NEXT directly imply A.LNEXT.
Thus, in our subsequent proofs, we will assume that A.GFT, A.SCDMC, and A.LNEXT hold, and either
restrict attention to common tie-breaking equilibria or assume A.NEXT. For the proofs in this section, we
will use equilibrium to refer to common tie-breaking equilibrium when A.NEXT is not employed.

E.1

Inductive Structure and Base Case

For any history ht with open agreements C at the start of period t, let ΓC (ht ) be the subgame starting at
period t. We prove Theorem 4.2 by induction on the set of open agreements C in any subgame ΓC (ht ). The
base case is provided by analyzing ΓC (ht ) where |C| = 1: i.e., there is only one agreement that has not yet
been formed at period t.
Lemma E.2 (Base Case) Consider any subgame ΓC (ht ) for which |C| = 1. Then ΓC (ht ), where C ≡ {ij},
R
has a unique equilibrium involving immediate agreement at t at prices pR
ij,D if t is odd, and pij,U if t is even.
Proof. With only one open agreement ij ∈ C, Ui and Dj engage in a two-player Rubinstein alternating
offers bargaining game over joint surplus ∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + ∆πj,D (G, {ij}). The result directly follows from
Rubinstein (1982). (Note that Rubinstein (1982) only requires A.GFT.)

We now state the inductive hypothesis and inductive step used to prove Theorem 4.2.
Inductive Hypothesis. Consider any C ⊆ G. For any subgame ΓB (ht ) for which B ( C, every equilibrium
R
results in immediate agreement for all ij ∈ B at prices pR
ij,D if t is odd, and pij,U if t is even.
The inductive hypothesis is that any subgame of ΓC (ht ) that begins with fewer open agreements than |C|
results in immediate agreement at the Rubinstein prices.
Lemma E.3 (Inductive Step) Consider any subgame ΓC (ht ) for which |C| > 1. Given the inductive
hypothesis, every equilibrium of ΓC (ht ) has immediate agreement for all ij ∈ C at prices pR
ij,D if t is odd, and
R
pij,U if t is even.
The inductive step states that if the inductive hypothesis holds for ΓC (ht ), then ΓC (ht ) also results in
immediate agreement for all open agreements at Rubinstein prices. Note that Lemmas E.2 (Base Case) and
E.3 (Inductive Step) imply Theorem 4.2 by induction: as we have established that the theorem holds when
|C| = 1, the inductive step implies that the theorem will hold for any C ⊆ G and history of play ht .
To prove Lemma E.3 (and by consequence, Theorem 4.2), we first prove the simultaneity of agreements—
i.e., if any open agreements are formed in a period, all open agreements are formed—at Rubinstein prices.
We employ separate lemmas for two separate cases, depending on whether there are multiple receiving
firms (Lemma E.5) or a single receiving firm (Lemma E.6) in a given period. Our proofs of simultaneity
use A.SCDMC and restrict attention to common tie-breaking equilibria (or, alternatively, use A.NEXT).
We then prove immediacy of agreement—i.e., that all open agreements form in the current period without
delay—in Lemma E.7. This proof uses A.SCDMC and A.LNEXT. Establishing Lemmas E.5-E.7 proves our
result.
Before proceeding, we state and prove the following lemma that we will use in our proofs:

47

Lemma E.4 Assume A.GFT and A.LNEXT. Then ∀C ⊆ G, ∃ij ∈ C such that:
X
pR
and
∆πj,D (G, C) >
hj,U ,
hj∈Cj,D

∆πi,U (G, C) > −

X

pR
ik,D .

ik∈Ci,U

Proof. By A.LNEXT, ∀C ⊆ G, ∃ij ∈ C such that:
X
∆πj,D (G, {hj}),
∆πj,D (G, C) ≥

and

hj∈Cj,D

∆πi,U (G, C) ≥

X

∆πi,U (G, {ik}).

ik∈Ci,U
R
By A.GFT, ∆πj,D (G, {hj}) > pR
hj,U and ∆πi,U (G, {ik}) > −pik,D for all agreements hj, ik ∈ G (see
Lemma 2.2). The lemma immediately follows.


E.2

Simultaneity of Agreements

Lemma E.5 (Simultaneity of Agreements: Multiple Receiving Firms.) Assume that the inductive
hypothesis holds.
1. Suppose that ΓC (ht̃ ) is such that there are at least two upstream firms with open agreements in C. In
any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first open agreement in C is formed at an odd period t ≥ t̃, all
agreements ij ∈ C must form at t and at prices pR
ij,D .
2. Suppose that ΓC (ht̃ ) is such that there are at least two downstream firms with open agreements in C.
In any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first open agreement in C is formed at an even period t ≥ t̃,
all agreements ij ∈ C must form at t and at prices pR
ij,U .
Proof. We prove case 1 using two claims (A and B); the proof of case 2 is symmetric and omitted.
Claim A: In any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first set of open agreements B ⊆ C, B 6= ∅, are formed at
an odd period t ≥ t̃, then all open agreements in C also are formed at period t.
6 C so that
Proof of Claim A. By contradiction, assume that there is an equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where B =
a non-empty set of agreements does not form at period t. By the inductive hypothesis, all agreements
hk ∈ C \ B will form at period t + 1 at prices pR
hk,U . Consider some agreement ij that: (1) is formed at
period t + 1 following equilibrium play under ΓC (ht̃ ) and (2) ∃h 6= i such that Uh has an agreement which
forms at period t. Such an ij must exist since C includes agreements for more than one upstream firm and
(by the contradictory assumption) not all agreements form at period t.
Now consider the following deviation by Dj at period t: Dj offers p̃ij ≡ pR
ij,D + ε to Ui , where 0 < ε <
R
43
pij,U − pR
.
By
passive
beliefs,
U
expects
at
least
one
agreement
to
form
at period t (e.g., involving
i
ij,D
Uh ) upon receiving this deviant offer from Dj ; by the inductive hypothesis, Ui therefore expects that all
agreements that do not form at period t will form at period t + 1. Note that:
1. Such a deviant offer will be accepted by Ui .
By contradiction, suppose not, and Ui rejects Dj ’s deviant offer and instead accepted some (potentially
empty) set of offers A ⊆ (Ci,U \ ij) at period t. The gain to Ui from adding ij to A is strictly positive:
(1 − δi,U )(πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ B−i,U ∪ {ij}) − πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ B−i,U )) + p̃ij − δi,U pR
ij,U
R
= (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ B−i,U ∪ {ij}, {ij}) + pR
ij,D + ε − δi,U pij,U

≥ (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) +
43

pR
ij,D

R
By Lemma 2.2, pR
ij,U > pij,D , so ε > 0.

48

+ε−

δi,U pR
ij,U

= ε,

(14)

where the second line is definitional, the third line inequality follows from A.SCDMC, and the last
equality follows from (2). Hence, any best response to this deviant offer by Ui must include accepting
ij.
2. Such a deviation is profitable for Dj if accepted by Ui .
If Ui accepts the deviant offer in addition to some set of offers A ⊆ (Ci,U \ ij), Dj ’s gain from this
deviant offer is:
(1 − δj,D )[πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ B−i,U ∪ {ij}) − πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ Bi,U ∪ B−i,U )] − p̃ij + δj,D pR
ij,U
R
≥ (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − pR
ij,D − ε + δj,D pij,U
R
R
> (1 − δj,D )pR
ij,U − pij,D − ε + δj,D pij,U

(15)

R
= pR
ij,U − pij,D − ε > 0,

where the second line follows from A.SCDMC, the third line inequality follows from Lemma 2.2, the
last line equality follows from rearranging terms, and the final inequality follows from Lemma 2.2 and
the choice of ε.
This is a profitable deviation for Dj , yielding a contradiction. Thus, if the first agreement forms in odd
period t, all agreements must form at period t.
Claim B: In any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where all open agreements C are formed at an odd period t ≥ t̃, all
agreements ij ∈ C are formed at prices p̂ij = pR
ij,D .
Proof of Claim B. By contradiction, assume that all open agreements C are formed at period t, but p̂ij 6= pR
ij,D
for some ij ∈ C. Consider the following two cases:
1. Suppose p̂ij < pR
ij,D for some ij.
Consider the deviation where Ui rejects only this offer ij at t. Since all other agreements form at
period t, from the inductive hypothesis, Ui expects to form ij at t + 1 at price pR
ij,U . Ui ’s gain from
this deviation is positive:
R
R
δi,U pR
ij,U − p̂ij − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) > δi,U pij,U − pij,D − (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) = 0,

where the last equality follows from (2), implying a contradiction.
2. Suppose p̂ij > pR
ij,D for some ij.
Consider the deviation where Dj lowers its offer from p̂ij to some p̃ij ∈ (pR
ij,D , p̂ij ). We first show
that, under either action, every best response for Ui must include accepting offer p̃ij and forming
agreement ij at period t. Suppose, by contradiction, that a best response for Ui at t would be to form
only agreements A ⊆ Ci,U \ {ij}. Similar to the logic used to derive (14), the gain to Ui from also
forming ij in addition to A is strictly positive:

(1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G \ Ci,U ) ∪ A ∪ {ij}, {ij} + p̃ij − δi,U pR
ij,U
R
> (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U = 0,

where the last equality follows from (2), implying that forming only agreements in A was not a best
response. An analogous equation but with p̂ij replacing p̃ij (not shown) also holds, thus implying
that any best response for Ui at t given the candidate equilibrium strategies also must involve forming
agreement ij.
We now show that the set of best responses for Ui at t given candidate equilibrium prices coincides
to the set of best responses for Ui at t given the deviation by Dj . Consider any best response set of
acceptances to Dj ’s deviation at t. Accepting A ∪ {ij}, A ⊆ Ci,U \ {ij}, is a best response for Ui if and
only if the value to Ui of accepting this set is weakly greater than the maximum value of accepting

49

any set A0 ∪ {ij}, A0 ⊆ Ci,U \ {ij}. This condition can be written as:
X
 X
(1 − δi,U )π (G \ Ci,U ) ∪ A ∪ {ij} +
p̂ik + δi,U
pR
kj,U
ik∈Ci,U \(A∪{ij})

ik∈A



X

0
p̂ik + δi,U
≥ max
(1
−
δ
)π
(G
\
C
)
∪
A
∪
{ij}
+
i,U
i,U
A0 ⊆Ci,U 
0
ik∈A

X
ik∈Ci,U

\(A0 ∪{ij})

pR
kj,U




,



(where we omit the price paid for ij since we have shown that any best response to the deviant offer
requires this agreement to be formed at t). This condition is the same as the one determining whether
a set A ∪ {ij} is a best response for Ui at t under candidate equilibrium strategies (as we have shown
earlier in Claim B of the lemma that any best response for Ui under these strategies also must involve
agreement ij being formed), implying that the sets of best responses are the same. Because the sets
of best responses are the same and we restrict attention to a common tie-breaking equilibrium, Ui
must accept the same set of offers—i.e., all offers in Ci,U —upon receiving this deviant offer from Dj
as under the candidate equilibrium strategies. Thus, the deviant offer will increase profits to Dj by
p̂ij − p̃ij > 0, which leads to a contradiction.
If we assume A.NEXT instead of restricting attention to common tie-breaking equilibria, then having
shown that Ui accepts the deviant offer p̃ij is sufficient for Dj to have a profitable deviation, as under
A.NEXT, Dj ’s profits are unaffected by Ui ’s other acceptances.
Thus, p̂ij = pR
ij,D ∀ij ∈ C if the first open agreement in C forms at an odd period.



Lemma E.6 (Simultaneity of Agreements: Single Receiving Firm.) Assume that the inductive
hypothesis holds.
1. Suppose that ΓC (ht̃ ) is such that there is exactly one downstream firm, but more than one upstream
firm, with open agreements in C. In any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first agreement is formed at
an even period t ≥ t̃, all agreements ij ∈ C must form at t and at prices pR
ij,U .
2. Suppose that ΓC (ht̃ ) is such that there is exactly one upstream firm, but more than one downstream
firm, with open agreements in C. In any equilibrium of ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first agreement is formed at
an odd period t ≥ t̃, all agreements ij ∈ C must form at t and at prices pR
ij,D .
Proof. We prove case 1 of the lemma; the proof of case 2 is symmetric and omitted.
For this lemma, we cannot apply induction in the case where the single receiving firm rejects all of its
offers as the subgame beginning in the following period will have the same set of open agreements. Analyzing
this case is more involved and utilizes an argument similar to Rubinstein (1982) and Shaked and Sutton
(1984), where bounds on equilibrium prices are obtained by showing that the receiving firm cannot credibly
reject a sufficiently generous offer in any equilibrium without the expectation of an even more generous (and
infeasible) offer in a future subgame.
We start with two definitions. For any subgame ΓC (ht ) and equilibrium where all agreements in C are
t
eventually formed, let {pP
ij (ΓC (h ))}ij∈C be the equilibrium prices for this game (which need not all form at
R
t), and define φΓC (ht ) ≡ ij∈C [pij,D − pij (ΓC (ht ))] to be the total discount from prices pR
ij,D that Dj obtains
in this equilibrium of this subgame.
We prove the lemma with three claims.
Claim A: For any equilibrium and subgame ΓC (ht̃ ) where all agreements in C are eventually formed,
φΓC (ht̃ ) ≤ 0.
Proof of Claim A. By contradiction, assume that there is an equilibrium where in some subgame ΓC (ht̃ ), all
agreements in C are eventually formed, and the total discount is strictly positive: φΓC (ht̃ ) > 0. Without loss
of generality (since all agreements eventually form), assume that at least one open agreement forms at t̃ in
this equilibrium.
Now consider all subgames {ΓC (ht )} of ΓC (ht̃ ) (including ΓC (ht̃ ) itself) where t ≥ t̃, t is even, there are
C open agreements at t, ht is consistent with ht̃ (i.e., ht coincides with ht̃ for all periods t̃ and earlier), and

50

the first open agreement in C is formed at t given equilibrium strategies. Such subgames, if t > t̃, can be
reached from ΓC (ht̃ ) if all agreements in C are rejected in periods t̃, . . . , t − 1. In any such subgame ΓC (ht )
where at least one agreement is formed at t, by the inductive hypothesis all agreements will be formed at
latest by t + 1. Let φ denote the supremum of the total discount over all subgames of ΓC (ht̃ ) satisfying the
criteria above.44
Now choose subgame ΓC (ht ) with at least one agreement forming at t that has a total discount very
close to the supremum and strictly positive: i.e., for which δj,D φ < φΓC (ht ) and φΓC (ht ) ≥ φΓC (ht̃ ) > 0. At
this subgame, fix some Ui for which (1) agreement ij forms at period t and (2) p̂ij ≡ pij (ΓC (ht )) < pR
ij,D .
Such a Ui must exist by the fact that the agreements that do not form at period t form at period t + 1
at odd-period Rubinstein prices (which have no discount) by the inductive hypothesis. Finally, denote the
agreements that form at period t at this subgame as Â ∪ {ij}, Â ⊆ C \ {ij}.
Now consider the following deviation by Ui at period t: Ui offers p̃ij ≡ p̂ij + ε, where ε > 0 is sufficiently
small such that (1) the total discount realized by Dj if it still forms agreements Â ∪ {ij} is still strictly
positive and greater than δj,D φ and (2) p̂ij + ε < pR
ij,U . Thus, by (2.2),
pR
ij,U − p̃ij +

X

R
(pR
kj,U − p̂kj ) > pij,D − p̃ij +

kj∈Â

X

(pR
kj,D − p̂kj ) > δj,D φ̄ ,

(16)

kj∈Â

We now show that any best response by Dj at t must include accepting ij. Suppose, by contradiction, that
a best response for Dj involves accepting only offers A ⊆ C \ {ij} at t. We consider four potential cases of
equilibrium play following this candidate best response:
1. A = ∅, and no further agreements ever form (i.e., Dj rejects all offers in every subsequent even period,
and makes sufficiently low offers for all open agreements in every subsequent odd period that all of its
offers are rejected).
Consider an alternative action for Dj of accepting only agreement ij at price p̃ij at period t. If Dj
accepts only ij, then all other agreements will form at t + 1 by the inductive hypothesis. The gain
(in period t units) to Dj from accepting only ij as opposed to following the candidate action and
rejecting all offers at t is:


X

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G \ C) ∪ {ij}, {ij} − p̃ij + δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) −
pR
kj,D
kj∈C,k6=i

> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) −

pR
ij,U



+ δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) −

X
kj∈C,k6=i



= −δj,D pR
ij,D + δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) −

X

pR
kj,D



pR
kj,D


(17)

kj∈C,k6=i



= δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) −

X

pR
kj,D



> 0,

kj∈C

where the second line follows from A.SCDMC and the definition of the deviant action (p̃ij ≡ p̂ij + ε <
pR
ij,U ), the third line follows from (1), and the final line from Lemma 2.2 and A.FEAS. Thus, accepting
no offers at t is not a best response in this case.
2. A = ∅, and the first agreement ij ∈ C to form does so at an odd period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 1.
In this case, by Lemma E.5, all agreements must form at time t + t0 at Rubinstein prices pR
ij,D (as
there are multiple receiving (upstream) firms with open agreements). Consider an alternative action
for Dj of accepting Â ∪ {ij} at period t (i.e., original equilibrium acceptances at t). Note that the
gain from following this alternative action relative to forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at
44

Note that φ is finite since it cannot be greater than the sum of profits in the game.

51

odd-period Rubinstein prices is:
X

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G \ C) ∪ (Â ∪ {ij}), Â ∪ {ij} − p̃ij + δj,D pR
(p̂kj − δj,D pR
ij,D −
kj,D )
kj∈Â


≥ (1 − δj,D )

X


X
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) − p̃ij + δj,D pR
(p̂kj − δj,D pR
ij,D −
kj,D )

kj∈Â∪{ij}

≥



X

kj∈Â

(1 − δj,D ) ∆πj,D (G, {kj}) −

pR
kj,U

+

δj,D pR
kj,D



(pR
kj,U − p̂kj )

(18)

kj∈Â

kj∈Â∪{ij}

|

X

+pR
ij,U − p̃ij +

{z

}

=0 by (1)

> δj,D φ̄ > 0,
where the second line follows from A.SCDMC, the third line follows from rearranging terms, and the
last line follows from (16) and the assumption that φ̄ > 0. Thus, the alternative action yields Dj a
payoff that is strictly higher than the payoff of forming all agreements at period t + 1 at odd-period
Rubinstein prices.
Next, the gain to Dj from forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices
instead of forming all agreements in C in some odd period t + t0 , t0 > 1, in period t + 1 units, is:
X
X
t0 −1
t0 −1
(1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) −
pR
pR
kj,D + δj,D
kj,D
kj∈C

kj∈C
0

t −1
≥ (1 − δj,D
)

X

∆πj,D (G, {kj}) −

kj∈C
0

t −1
= (1 − δj,D
)

X

X

0

t −1
pR
kj,D + δj,D

kj∈C

X

pR
kj,D

(19)

kj∈C


∆πj,D (G, {kj}) − pR
kj,D > 0,

kj∈C

where the second line follows from A.WCDMC, the third line equality follows by rearranging terms,
and last inequality from Lemma 2.2. Thus, accepting no offers at t is not a best response in this case.
3. A = ∅, and the first agreement ij ∈ C to form does so at an even period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 2.
Let B denote the equilibrium set of agreements that forms at time t + t0 following Dj ’s rejection of
all offers at t. For any kj ∈ B, let p0kj denote the equilibrium price at which the agreement forms.
By the inductive hypothesis, the remaining agreements, C \ B form at t + t0 + 1 (odd) at odd-period
Rubinstein prices.
Consider an alternative action for Dj of accepting Â ∪ {ij} at period t. From (18), the gain to Dj
from following this alternative action as opposed to forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at
odd-period Rubinstein prices is strictly greater than δj,D φ.
The gain to Dj from forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices

52

relative to forming agreements B at t0 and C \ B at t0 + 1, is (in period t + 1 units):


X
X
X
0
0
t −1 
t −1
(1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) + δj,D
∆πj,D (G, C \ B) +
δj,D pR
p0kj  −
pR
kj,D +
kj,D
kj∈B

kj∈C\B

kj∈C


0

0

t −1
t −1 
≥ (1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) + δj,D


X
 X 0
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) + δj,D pR
pkj  −
pR
kj,D +
kj,D

X

kj∈B

kj∈C\B


0

t −1
≥ (1 − δj,D
)

X

0

t −1 
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) + δj,D

kj∈C

X

0

X
kj∈C

pR
kj,U +

0

t −1 
pR
kj,D + δj,D

X

p0kj  −

kj∈B

kj∈C\B

X

pR
kj,D

kj∈C




t −1
> (1 − δj,D
)

kj∈C



X

−
pR
kj,D − φ

X

pR
kj,D

kj∈C

kj∈C

> −φ,
where the second line follows from A.WCDMC, the third line follows from A.WCDMC and (1), the
fourth line follows from Lemma 2.2 and the definition of φ, and the final line follows from the fact that
t0 ≥ 2. Thus, the gain from the alternative action relative to the supposed equilibrium strategy—now
in period t units—is greater than (δj,D − δj,D )φ = 0. Thus, accepting no offers at t is not a best
response in this case.
4. A =
6 ∅, and Dj forms some agreements in C \ {ij} at t.
By assumption, ij ∈
/ A. By the inductive hypothesis, the remaining agreements C \ A form at time
t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices. In this case, the gain to Dj from adding ij to the agreements
in A instead of forming only agreements in A, in period t units, is:

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G \ C) ∪ A ∪ {ij}, {ij} − p̃ij + δj,D pR
ij,D
(20)
R
> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − pR
+
δ
p
j,D ij,D = 0,
ij,U
where the inequality follows from A.SCDMC and the definition of the deviant action (p̃ij ≡ p̂ij + ε <
/ A is not a best response in
pR
ij,U ), and the equality from (1). Thus, forming agreements A where ij ∈
this case.
Thus, any best response by Dj must include accepting agreement ij at price p̃ij .
Now consider any best response for Dj to the deviant offer by Ui . Accepting offers A ∪ {ij}, A ⊆ C \ {ij}
is a best response if and only if the value to Dj of accepting this set is weakly greater than the maximum
value of accepting any set A0 ∪ {ij}, A0 ⊆ C \ {ij}. This condition can be written as:
X
X
(1 − δj,D )π((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ {ij}) +
p̂ij + δj,D
pR
kj,D
kj∈A

kj∈C\(A∪{ij})



X
0
≥ max
(1
−
δ
)π((G
\
C)
∪
A
∪
{ij})
+
p̂ij + δj,D
j,D
A0 ⊆C 
0
kj∈A

X
kj∈C\(A0 ∪{ij})

pR
kj,D




,



where we excluded the price paid for ij since this agreement always forms at period t, and we apply the
inductive hypothesis to obtain period t + 1 prices. Using the same logic as in Lemma E.5, the condition is
the same as for a set being a best response under the candidate equilibrium offers implying that the sets of
best responses are the same.
Because the sets of best responses are the same and we consider a common tie-breaking equilibrium, Dj
accepts the same set of offers under the deviant offer from Ui . Moreover, in both cases, all other agreements
will form at period t + 1. Thus, the deviant offer will increase profits to Ui by p̃ij − p̂ij > 0, which leads to
a contradiction.

53

By the same arguments as in Lemma E.5, assuming A.NEXT instead of restricting attention to common
tie-breaking equilibrium also leads to a contradiction.
Claim B: For any equilibrium and subgame ΓC (ht̃ ) where the first agreement is formed at an even period
t ≥ t̃, all agreements ij ∈ C form at t.
Proof of Claim B. By contradiction, assume that Â ( C agreements form at period t, and Â 6= ∅. By the
inductive hypothesis, all agreements in C \ Â are formed at period t + 1 at prices pR
ij,D . Consider a deviation
R
R
where, at period t, some Ui , ij ∈ C \ Â, offers p̃ij , for pij,D < p̃ij < pij,U .
1. Such a deviant offer will be accepted by Dj .
By contradiction, suppose not, and a best response for Dj is to accept offers A ⊆ C \ {ij}. We again
consider four cases of equilibrium play following this candidate best response:
(a) A = ∅ and no further agreements form.
Consider an alternative action for Dj of forming only agreement ij at price p̃ij instead of
rejecting all offers at t; the gain (in period t units) from this alternative as opposed to the
candidate action is:
X

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G \ C) ∪ {ij}, {ij} − p̃ij + δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) − δj,D
pR
kj,D
kj∈C,k6=i

> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) −

pR
ij,U

+ δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) − δj,D

X

pR
kj,D > 0,

kj∈C,k6=i

where the logic is identical to (17). Thus, accepting no offers at t is not a best response in this
case.
(b) A = ∅, and the first agreement ij ∈ C to form does so at an odd period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 1.
In this case, by Lemma E.5, all agreements form at time t + t0 at Rubinstein prices, as there are
multiple upstream (receiving) firms in an odd period. Consider an alternative action for Dj of
forming only agreement ij at price p̃ij instead of rejecting all offers at t; the gain from following
this alternative action as opposed to forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period
Rubinstein prices is:

(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G \ C) ∪ {ij}, {ij} − p̃ij + δj,D pR
ij,D
(21)
R
> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − pR
+
δ
p
=
0,
j,D ij,D
ij,U
where the inequality follows from A.SCDMC and the definition of the deviant offer (p̃ij < pR
ij,U ),
and the equality from (1). By (19), the gain to Dj from forming all agreements in C at period
t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices as opposed to forming all agreements in any future odd
period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 1, is weakly positive. Thus, accepting no offers at t is not a best response in
this case.
(c) A = ∅ and the first agreement ij ∈ C to form does so at an even period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 2.
Let B denote the set of equilibrium agreements that form at time t + t0 following Dj ’s rejection
of all offers at t. For any kj ∈ B, let p0kj denote the equilibrium price at which the agreement
forms. By the inductive hypothesis, the remaining agreements, C \ B form at time t + t0 + 1
(odd) at odd-period Rubinstein prices.
Consider an alternative action for Dj of forming only agreement ij at price p̃ij instead of rejecting
all offers at t. From (21), the gain to Dj from choosing this alternative action as opposed to
forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices is strictly positive.
The gain to Dj from forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices

54

as opposed to forming agreements B at t0 and C \ B at t0 + 1, in period t + 1 units, is:


X
X
X
0
0
t −1 
t −1
(1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) + δj,D
∆πj,D (G, C \ B) +
δj,D pR
p0kj  −
pR
kj,D +
kj,D
kj∈B

kj∈C\B

kj∈C


0

0

t −1
t −1 
≥ (1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) + δj,D


X 
X
 X 0
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) + δj,D pR
pkj  −
pR
kj,D +
kj,D
kj∈B

kj∈C\B


0

t −1
≥ (1 − δj,D
)

X

0

t −1 
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) + δj,D

kj∈C
0

t −1
> (1 − δj,D
)

X
kj∈C

X

0

t −1 
pR
kj,D + δj,D

X

pR
kj,U +

kj∈C\B



kj∈C


p0kj  −

kj∈B

X

pR
kj,D

kj∈C


X

−
pR
kj,D

kj∈C

X

pR
kj,D = 0,

kj∈C

where the second line follows from A.WCDMC, the third line follows from A.WCDMC and (1),
the fourth line inequality follows from Lemma 2.2 and Claim A, and the final equality follows
by rearranging terms. Thus, accepting no offers at t is not a best response in this case.
(d) A =
6 ∅, and Dj forms some agreements in C \ {ij} at t.
By assumption, ij ∈
/ A. By the inductive hypothesis, the remaining agreements, C \ A form at
time t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices. In this case, the gain to Dj from accepting offers in
A ∪ {ij} instead of accepting only offers in A at t, in period t units, is:
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D ((G \ C) ∪ A ∪ {ij}, {ij}) − p̃ij + δj,D pR
ij,D
R
> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) − pR
ij,U + δj,D pij,D = 0,

(22)

where the logic is identical to (20). Thus, forming agreements A where ij ∈
/ A is not a best
response in this case.
Thus, any best response by Dj must include accepting the deviant offer p̃ij from Ui .
2. Such a deviation is profitable for Ui if accepted by Dj .
Suppose that, following this deviant offer, Dj accepts agreements A0 ∪ {ij} at period t, where A0 ⊆
C \{ij}. By the inductive hypothesis, all remaining agreements are formed at period t+1 at Rubinstein
prices.
The gain to Ui from this deviation is then:
(1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ A0 ∪ {ij}) − (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ Â) + p̃ij − δi,U pR
ij,D
≥ (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U ((G, {ij}) + p̃ij − δi,U pR
ij,D
R
> (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U ((G, {ij}) + pR
ij,D − δi,U pij,U = 0,

where the second line follows from A.SCDMC, the third line inequality follows from Lemma 2.2 and
the definition of the deviant action, and the last equality follows from (1). Hence, Ui will find it
profitable to make the deviation.
Thus Ui has a profitable deviation, yielding a contradiction.
Claim C: For any equilibrium and subgame ΓC (ht̃ ) where all agreements in C are formed at an even period
t ≥ t̃, they are formed at prices p̂ij = pR
ij,U for all ij ∈ C.
Proof of Claim C. By contradiction, assume that all agreements in C are formed at period t, but p̂ij 6= pR
ij,U
for some ij ∈ C.

55

1. Suppose that p̂ij > pR
ij,U for some ij.
Consider the deviation where Dj rejects only this offer. Since all other agreements form at period t,
by the inductive hypothesis, Dj forms this agreement at price pR
ij,D at t + 1. Applying (1), Dj ’s gain
from this action are:
R
R
−δj,D pR
ij,D + p̂ij − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) > −δj,D pij,D + pij,U − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) = 0,

implying a profitable deviation and hence a contradiction.
2. Suppose p̂ij < pR
ij,U for some ij.
Consider a deviation where Ui raises its offer from p̂ij to some p̃ij ∈ (p̂ij , pR
ij,U ). We now show that
any best response set of acceptances for Dj must include accepting ij. Suppose, by contradiction,
that Dj has a best response of accepting only agreements in A ⊆ C \ {ij} at t following this deviation.
We consider three cases for equilibrium play following this best response:
(a) A = ∅ and no further agreements form.
The gain to Dj from accepting only ij instead of choosing this action, in period t + 1 units, is:
X
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D ((G \ C) ∪ {ij}, {ij}) − p̃ij + δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) − δj,D
pR
ij,D
kj∈C,k6=i

> (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) −

pR
ij,U

X

+ δj,D ∆πj,D (G, C) − δj,D

pR
ij,D > 0,

kj∈C,k6=i

where the logic is identical to (17). Thus accepting no offers at t is not a best response in this
case.
(b) A = ∅ and the first agreement ij ∈ C to form does so at period t + t0 , t0 ≥ 1.
In this case, by Claim B, all agreements form at time t + t0 . For any kj ∈ C, let p0kj denote the
equilibrium price at which the agreement forms.
Consider the alternative action by Dj of accepting only ij instead of rejecting all offers at t.
First note that (21) applies and so the gain from following this deviant action as opposed to
forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices is strictly positive.
Next, note that the gain to Dj from forming all agreements in C at period t + 1 at odd-period
Rubinstein prices as opposed to forming all agreements in C at period t + t0 (t0 ≥ 1), in period
t + 1 units, is:
X
X
t0 −1
t0 −1
p0kj
(1 − δj,D
)∆πj,D (G, C) −
pR
kj,D + δj,D
kj∈C
0

t −1
≥ (1 − δj,D
)

X

kj∈C

∆πj,D (G, {kj}) −

kj∈C

X

0

t −1
pR
kj,D + δj,D

kj∈C

X

pR
kj,D

(23)

kj∈C

X

t0 −1
= (1 − δj,D
)
∆πj,D (G, {kj}) − pR
kj,D ≥ 0,
kj∈C

where the second line follows from A.WCDMC and Lemma E.5 (if t0 is odd) or Claim A (if
t0 is even), the third line equality follows by rearranging terms, and the last inequality from
Lemma 2.2. Thus accepting no offers at t is not a best response in this case.
(c) A =
6 ∅.
By assumption, ij ∈
/ A. By the inductive hypothesis, all remaining agreements C \ A form at
time t + 1 at odd-period Rubinstein prices. Applying (22), the gain to Dj from accepting offers
in A ∪ {ij} instead of accepting only offers in A at t is positive. Thus, forming agreements A
where ij ∈
/ A is not a best response in this case.
Thus, any best response by Dj must include accepting the deviant offer p̃ij from Ui . Now consider
any best response set of acceptances, A ∪ {ij}, to the deviant prices. As in Claim A, the condition

56

is the same as for a set being a best response under the candidate equilibrium agreements implying
that the sets of best responses are the same. Because the sets of best responses are the same and
we consider a common tie-breaking equilibrium, Dj accepts the same set of agreements—i.e., all
agreements in C—under the deviant offer from Ui . Thus, the deviant offer will increase profits to Ui
by p̃ij − p̂ij > 0, which leads to a contradiction. Furthermore, as in Claim A, A.NEXT can be used
instead of restricting attention to common tie-breaking equilibria in order to establish the claim.
Thus, p̂ij = pR
ij,U ∀ij ∈ C for agreements formed at any even period.
Claims A-C prove the lemma.

E.3



Immediacy of Agreements

Given the inductive hypothesis, Lemmas E.5–E.6 establish that in any equilibrium of any subgame Γt̃C where
any agreement ij ∈ C forms at period t ≥ t̃, all agreements in C form at t at Rubinstein prices. We now prove
that, given the inductive hypothesis, there cannot be any delay: i.e., in any equilibrium, all agreements in C
form immediately.
Lemma E.7 (Immediacy of all agreements.) Assume that the inductive hypothesis holds. Then, any
equilibrium of ΓtC results in all agreements ij ∈ C forming at period t.
Proof. We prove the case where t is odd; the proof of the case where t is even is symmetric and omitted.
By contradiction, consider a candidate equilibrium where no agreements are formed at period t (as, by
the previous results, if any agreement is formed at period t, all agreements are formed in that period). Let
agreement ij ∈ C satisfy the conditions of A.LNEXT. We consider a deviant action by Dj from this candidate
R
equilibrium and then verify that it is profitable for Dj . Suppose Dj offers p̃ij satisfying pR
ij,D < p̃ij < pij,U
to Ui . We first show that Ui will accept this offer and then show that it will increase Dj ’s surplus relative
to the candidate equilibrium.
Suppose that Ui accepts the offer p̃ij . Then, by passive beliefs, it believes that this is the only agreement
to be formed at period t and, by the inductive hypothesis, that the remaining agreements will form at period
t + 1. Hence, its payoffs—in period t units—from accepting the offer are:


X

pR
p̃ij + (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ {ij}) + δi,U πi,U (G) +
ik,U
{z
}
|
ik∈Ci,U \{ij}
Payoff at t
|
{z
}
Payoff from t+1 on




X

= p̃ij + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ {ij}, {ij}) + δi,U 

 + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C)
pR
ik,U + πi,U (G)

ik∈Ci,U \{ij}




X

πi,U (G) +
> pR
ij,D + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + δi,U

 + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C)
pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U \{ij}


= δi,U πi,U (G) +


X

 + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C),
pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U

where the second line adds and subtracts the (1−δi,U )πi,U (G \C) term, the third line follows from A.SCDMC
and the definition of p̃ij , and the final line uses (2) and then combines the pR
ij,U terms in the sum.
We next show that any best response for Ui must include accepting ij. Suppose, by contradiction, that
a best response for Ui involves accepting only offers B ⊆ Ci,U \ {ij} at t. We consider the following four cases
of equilibrium play following this candidate best response:
1. B = ∅, and no agreements in C are ever formed.

57

In this case, the payoffs to Ui are:
πi,U (G \ C) = δi,U πi,U (G \ C) + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C)


X
 + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C)
pR
< δi,U πi,U (G) +
ik,D
ik∈Ci,U




X

< δi,U πi,U (G) +

 + (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C),
pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U

where the second line follows from Lemma E.4 (which uses A.LNEXT) and the third line follows from
Lemma 2.2. Since the payoffs to Ui from rejection are less than from accepting Dj ’s deviant offer,
rejecting all offers is not a best response in this case.
2. B = ∅, and all agreements in C are formed in some even period t + t0 for t0 = 1, 3, 5, . . ..
If Ui accepts no other offers at period t (and by passive beliefs, Ui believes that no agreements in
C−i,U are formed at t), the payoffs to Ui are:


X
0
0
t
t 

(1 − δi,U
)πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U
πi,U (G) +
pR
ik,U
ik∈Ci,U


0



0

t
t 
= (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + (δi,U − δi,U
)πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U
πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U





0

t
< (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + (δi,U − δi,U
) πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U





0

t 
+ δi,U
πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U





= (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U πi,U (G) +

X

,
pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U

where the second and fourth lines follow by rearranging terms and the third line follows from Lemma E.4.
Since the payoffs to Ui from rejecting all offers at t are less than from accepting Dj ’s deviant offer,
rejecting all offers is not a best response in this case.
3. B = ∅, and all agreements in C are formed in some odd period t + t0 for t0 = 2, 4, 6, . . ..

58

In this case, the payoffs to Ui are:



0

0

X

t
t 
(1 − δi,U
)πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U
πi,U (G) +


pR
ik,D

ik∈Ci,U




0

0

t
t 
< (1 − δi,U
)πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U
πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U




0

0

t
t 
= (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + (δi,U − δi,U
)πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U
πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U




0

t
< (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + (δi,U − δi,U
) πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U




0

t 
+ δi,U
πi,U (G) +

X


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U





= (1 − δi,U )πi,U (G \ C) + δi,U πi,U (G) +

X

,
pR
ik,U

ik∈Ci,U

where the second line follows from Lemma 2.2 and the remaining logic is identical to case 2. Since
the payoffs to Ui from rejecting all offers at t are less than from accepting Dj ’s deviant offer, rejecting
all offers is not a best response in this case.
4. B 6= ∅, and Ui forms some agreements in Ci,U \ {ij} at t.
In this case, by the inductive hypothesis, all remaining agreements A ≡ C \ B form in the following
(even) period t + 1 at Rubinstein prices. Thus,
the payoff
h we can express
i to Ui from this action as
P
P
R
(1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) + ik∈B p̂ik + δi,U πi,U (G) + ik∈Ai,U pik,U , where p̂ik ∀ik ∈ B are the

59

period t candidate equilibrium prices offered to Ui . But,


X
X

pR
(1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) +
p̂ik + δi,U πi,U (G) +
ik,U
ik∈B

ik∈Ai,U


= (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) +

X



p̂ik + δi,U πi,U (G) + pR
ij,U +

= (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) +


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ai,U \{ij}

ik∈B

X

X

p̂ik

ik∈B




X


+ pR
ij,D + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + δi,U πi,U (G) +


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ai,U \{ij}


< (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) +

X



p̂ik + p̃ij + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U (G, {ij}) + δi,U πi,U (G) +

ik∈Ai,U \{ij}

ik∈B

≤ (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B) +

X

X

p̂ik + p̃ij + (1 − δi,U )∆πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B ∪ {ij}, {ij})

ik∈B




X

+ δi,U πi,U (G) +


pR
ik,U

ik∈Ai,U \{ij}


= (1 − δi,U )πi,U ((G \ C) ∪ B ∪ {ij}) +

X

p̂ik + p̃ij + δi,U πi,U (G) +


X


pR
ik,U ,

ik∈Ai,U \{ij}

ik∈B

where the second and sixth lines follow by rearranging terms, the third line follows from (2), the fourth
line follows from the the definition of the deviant offer, and the fifth line follows from A.SCDMC.
Since the final line is the value of accepting Dj ’s deviant offer and all agreements in B, the payoff to
Ui from accepting Dj ’s deviant offer and all agreements in B is higher than the payoff from accepting
just the offers in B. Thus, forming agreements B, where ij ∈
/ B is not a best response in this case.
Thus, any best response by Ui must include accepting the deviant offer p̃ij from Dj . Note that we have
not ruled out the possibility that Ui may also choose to accept additional offers in Ci,U at period t upon
accepting deviant offer p̃ij ; we return to this below.
Having verified that the p̃ij offer will be accepted by Ui , we now check that the acceptance of this deviant
offer will be profitable for Dj . Dj knows that Ui is the only firm that will form agreement(s) at period t
and, by the inductive hypothesis, that the remaining agreements will form at period t + 1. However, it is
possible that upon receiving the deviant offer, Ui will also accept some other offers B ⊆ Ci,U \ {ij}. Hence,

60


pR
ik,U

Dj ’s payoff—in period t units—from making the deviant offer satisfies:


X

pR
−p̃ij + (1 − δj,D )πj,D ((G \ C) ∪ B ∪ {ij}) + δj,D πj,D (G) −
kj,U
{z
}
|
kj∈Cj,D \{ij}
Payoff at t
|
{z
}
Payoff from t+1 on




X

≥ −p̃ij + (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D ((G, {ij}) + δj,D πj,D (G) −

 + (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C)
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D \{ij}




X

πj,D (G) −
> −pR
ij,U + (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {ij}) + δj,D

 + (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C)
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D \{ij}





πj,D (G) −
= −δj,D pR
ij,D + δj,D

X

 + (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C)
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D \{ij}


> (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D πj,D (G) −


X

,
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D

where the second line applies A.SCDMC, the third line follows from the definition of p̃ij , the fourth line uses
(1), and the final line uses Lemma 2.2 and then combines the pR
kj,U terms in the sum.
Next, we show that the lower bound on payoffs from this deviant offer being accepted (given by the last
line of the previous set of equations) is higher than the payoff from equilibrium play under the candidate
equilibrium. If Dj does not deviate from equilibrium play with the deviation p̃ij , there are three possibilities
for subsequent equilibrium play with no agreements formed at t:
1. No further agreements are formed.
In this case, the payoffs to Dj from the candidate equilibrium are:
πj,D (G \ C) = δj,D πj,D (G \ C) + (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C)


X
,
< (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D πj,D (G) −
pR
kj,U
kj∈Cj,D

where the inequality follows from Lemma E.4. Thus, the payoffs to Dj from the candidate equilibrium
are less than from accepting Ui ’s deviant offer in this case.
2. All open agreements are formed in some even period t + t0 , for t0 = 1, 3, 5, . . ..

61

In this case, the payoffs to Dj from the candidate equilibrium are:


X
0
0
t
t
πj,D (G) −

pR
(1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
kj,U
kj∈Cj,D




0

0

t
t
πj,D (G) −
= (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + (δj,D − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D




0

t
< (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + (δj,D − δj,D
) πj,D (G) −

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D




0

t
πj,D (G) −
+ δj,D

X


pR
ik,U

kj∈Ci,U





= (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D πj,D (G) −

X

,
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D

where the second and fourth lines follow by rearranging terms and the third line follows from Lemma E.4.
Thus, the payoffs to Dj from the candidate equilibrium are less than from making the deviant offer
in this case.
3. All open agreements are formed in some odd period t + t0 , for t0 = 2, 4, 6, . . ..

62

In this case, the payoffs to Dj from the candidate equilibrium are:


X
0
0
t
t
πj,D (G) −

pR
(1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
kj,D
kj∈Cj,D


0



0

X

t −1
t −1 
= (1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
(1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D πj,D (G) − δj,D


pR
kj,D

kj∈Cj,D


0



0

t −1
t −1 
= (1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
πj,D (G) − (1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, C) − δj,D

X


pR
kj,D

kj∈Cj,D


X 

t −1
t −1 

< (1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
πj,D (G) −
(1 − δj,D )∆πj,D (G, {kj}) + δj,D pR
kj,D


0

0

kj∈Cj,D


0



0

t −1
t −1 
= (1 − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
πj,D (G) −

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D


0



0

t −1
t −1 
= (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + (δj,D − δj,D
)πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D
πj,D (G) −

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D





0

t −1 
< (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + (δj,D − δj,D
) πj,D (G) −

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D





0

t −1 
+ δj,D
πj,D (G) −

X


pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D




X

= (1 − δj,D )πj,D (G \ C) + δj,D πj,D (G) −

,
pR
kj,U

kj∈Cj,D

where the second, third, and sixth lines follow by rearranging terms, the fourth line follows from
A.WCDMC, the fifth line from (1), the seventh line from Lemma E.4, and the final line also by
rearranging terms. Thus, the payoffs to Dj from the deviant offer are greater than its equilibrium
payoffs in this case.
Thus Dj has a profitable deviation, leading to a contradiction. Hence, any equilibrium involves immediate
agreement for all ij ∈ C at t.


63

