NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GROWTH EXPECTATIONS, DIVIDEND YIELDS, AND FUTURE STOCK RETURNS
Zhi Da
Ravi Jagannathan
Jianfeng Shen
Working Paper 20651
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20651

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2014

We thank Binying Liu for excellent research assistance and valuable comments. We also thank Ben
Golez, Shane Johnson, Hwagyun Kim, Qinghao Mao, Yu Yuan, and seminar participants at Erasmus
University, Indian School of Business, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance (SAIF), Texas A&M
University, and University of Notre Dame. We are grateful to Ken French, Amit Goyal, Robert Shiller,
Bhaskaran Swaminathan, and Hao Zhou for sharing their data with us. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Zhi Da, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jianfeng Shen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Growth Expectations, Dividend Yields, and Future Stock Returns
Zhi Da, Ravi Jagannathan, and Jianfeng Shen
NBER Working Paper No. 20651
October 2014
JEL No. G0,G1,G10,G11,G12,G17
ABSTRACT
According to the dynamic version of the Gordon growth model, the long-run expected return on stocks,
stock yield, is the sum of the dividend yield on stocks plus some weighted average of expected future
growth rates in dividends. We construct a measure of stock yield based on sell-side analysts' near-term
earnings forecasts that predicts US stock index returns well, with an out-of-sample R-squared that
is consistently above 2% at monthly frequency over our sample period. Stock yield also predicts future
stock index returns in the US and other G7 countries and returns of US stock portfolios formed by
sorting stocks based on firm characteristics, at various horizons. The findings are consistent with a
single dominant factor driving expected returns on stocks over different holding periods. That single
factor extracted from the cross section of stock yields using the Kelly and Pruitt (2013) partial regressions
method predicts stock index returns better. The performance of the Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)
latent factor model for forecasting stock returns improves significantly when stock yield is included
as an imperfect observation of expected return on stocks. Consistent with folk wisdom, stock returns
are more predictable coming out of a recession. Our measure performs as well in predicting stock returns
as the implied cost of capital, another common stock yield measure that uses additional information.

Zhi Da
University of Notre Dame
239 Mendoza College of Business
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
zda@nd.edu
Ravi Jagannathan
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Jianfeng Shen
School of Banking and Finance
University of New South Wales
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
jianfeng.shen@unsw.edu.au

1

Introduction

The predictability of stock market returns is of wide interest to both investors and academics. The
common practice is to predict stock returns with various valuation ratios such as dividend to price
and earnings to price ratios. When all else remains the same, a higher valuation ratio indicates a
higher discount rate, that is, a higher expected return.1
In general, all else does not remain the same. Economy-wide events that affect expected future
returns on stocks may also affect their expected future cash flows. To see this confounding effect,
consider the constant growth model in Gordon (1962): P = D/(R − G), where P is the current
price; D is the expected one-period-ahead dividend expected to grow at a constant rate of G; and R
is the stock yield, defined as the discount rate investors use to compute the present value of expected
future dividends, i.e., the long run expected return to buying and holding stocks. Rearranging the
equation gives R = D/P + G. When G changes across different economic regimes, D/P + G will be
a better predictor of R than just the dividend yield D/P . This intuition in a stationary economy is
made precise by Campbell and Shiller (1988) who derive a dynamic version of the Gordon growth
model. In the dynamic case, stock yield is an affine function of the dividend yield and a weighted
average of expected future growth rates in dividends.2 If the dynamics of the term structure of
expected stock returns can be explained to a large extent by a single dominant factor, stock yield
will help forecast future stock returns at all horizons.3
While it is well recognized that combining dividend yield with a proxy of expected cash flow
growth will help in predicting stock returns, what that proxy should be has been the subject of
debate. Campbell and Shiller (1988), Bansal and Lundblad (2002), Bakshi and Chen (2005), Lettau
and Ludvigson (2005), Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), and Lacerda and Santa-Clara (2010) all use
time series models and historical dividend and earnings data to estimate expected future dividend
growth rates. More recently, Golez (2014) uses direct dividend growth rate proxies implied in the
derivative markets.
In this paper we combine a time series model for earnings growth that uses analysts’ near1

See Basu (1983), Fama and Schwert (1977), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988) among many
others. See also Ball (1978) for a general discussion of yield proxies as predictors of future stock returns.
2
See Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000) for an alternative derivation of the continuously compounded
analogue of this dynamic version of the Gordon growth Model.
3
See Bakshi and Chen (2005). As an illustration, we derive the equity term structure in Appendix A for the
one-factor case.

2

term forecasts with the dynamic Gordon growth model in Campbell and Shiller (1988) to develop
a measure of stock yield. We focus on expected earnings growth rather than expected dividend
growth because earnings better reflect the cash flow prospects of a firm than short-term dividends,
which are subject to smoothing and other forms of corporate payout policies. In their seminal work,
Miller and Modigliani (1961) argue forcefully that dividend policy is irrelevant: stock prices should
be driven by “real” behavior – the earnings power of corporate assets and investment policy – and,
crucially, not by how the earnings power is distributed. Similarly, Campbell and Shiller (1988)
support the use of earnings “since earnings are constructed by accountants with the objective of
helping people to evaluate the fundamental worth of a company.” In addition, using direct analyst
earnings forecasts avoids several econometric issues associated with modeling dividend growth rates
that have become highly persistent since the World War II.
Specifically, we compute the expected earnings growth rate as the ratio between analysts’ forecasted earnings in the coming calendar year and the realized earnings in the most recent fiscal year.
We focus on analysts’ short-term earnings forecasts since a large finance and accounting literature
has found equity analysts’ value to mostly come from their short-term earnings forecasts rather
than their long-term growth forecasts (see Chan, Karceski, and Lakonishok (2003) and Ivkovic and
Jegadeesh (2004) among many others). The stock yield, defined as an affine function of the current
log dividend-to-price ratio and our log expected earnings growth rate, does a very good job in
predicting future stock returns during our sample period 1977 – 2012 in the U.S., both in-sample
and out-of-sample, at both the market level and the portfolio level, and even internationally among
the other G7 countries.
Our work is closely related to the literature on implied cost of equity capital (ICC), another
common measure of stock yield (see Claus and Thomas (2001), Pastor, Sinha, and Swaminathan
(2008), and Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), among others). The ICC is computed as the discount
rate that equates the present value of future cash flows from holding a stock to the stock’s price.
The stream of future cash flows is forecasted using a combination of short-term analyst earnings
forecasts, long-term growth rate forecasts, and historical payout ratios, and other auxiliary assumptions. In contrast, we use only analysts’ forecasts of near-term earnings in conjunction with a time
series model for earnings. The ICC and our stock yield measure are imperfectly correlated with a
correlation coefficient of 0.70 at the monthly frequency.
3

Empirically, our stock yield measure performs as well as the ICC in predicting future stock
market returns. This finding suggests that additional assumptions about long-run cash flows embedded in the ICC appear not critical if the only objective is to forecast future stock returns
at the aggregate level. The relevant return-predicting signal in the ICC comes largely from the
current dividend-to-price ratio and the expected short-term earnings growth rate, information succinctly summarized in our stock yield measure. Conceptually, when there is more than one factor
driving the equity term structure 4 , both stock yield and the ICC can be viewed as a first-order
approximation of the much richer expected return dynamics.
In our sample period 1977–2012, our stock yield predicts future stock market returns with an
adjusted R-squared of 13% at the one-year horizon and up to 54% at the four-year horizon. These
R2 s compare favorably with other common stock return predictors proposed in the literature.
Welch and Goyal (2008) show that many popular return predictors in the literature do not
consistently outperform a simple historical average in predicting next-month market return outof-sample. They and Campbell and Thompson (2008) propose an out-of-sample R2 statistic to
gauge such relative out-of-sample performance. We consider a wide range of in-sample / out-ofsample cutoff points, and find that stock yield produces an out-of-sample R2 consistently above
2.0% for monthly forecasts. According to the calculation in Campbell and Thompson (2008), an
out-of-sample R2 of 2% translates to return enhancement of 8% per year for a market timer with a
risk aversion of 3 who allocates her investment optimally between the stock market and a risk-free
asset. In contrast, the dividend-to-price ratio, by itself, has an out-of-sample R2 averaged below
1% and it often drops below zero. Stock yield also predicts one-year-ahead returns well, with an
out-of-sample R2 of almost 10%.
Interestingly, we find that the forecasting ability of the stock yield is concentrated during bad
times when investors’ fears are high as measured by the Chicago Fed National Activity Index.
This is true both in-sample and out-of-sample, which explains the stock yield’s high R2 during
our out-of-sample period with two major recessions. This should not be surprising. When the
economy is not doing well, the risk premium tends to be high going forward. At the same time,
current dividends are depressed and imply higher future growth expectation. This higher growth
4

See Ai, Croce, Diercks, and Li (2013), Kim (2013), Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2014), Belo, CollinDufresne, and Goldstein (2014)

4

expectation shows up in our stock yield and enables it to capture the increased expected return.
We also find the stock yield to predict a downward-sloping equity term structure during bad times,
as documented by Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012) and Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and
Vrugt (2013).
Suppose that the temporal evolution of the term structure of expected returns on stocks is
determined to a large extent by a single unobserved dynamic factor. Then that unobserved single
factor can be extracted from the cross section of stock yields on a collection of stock portfolios
using sophisticated econometric techniques. We consider two such econometric techniques. The
first technique is the three-stage partial least squares regression approach developed by Kelly and
Pruitt (2013) in which the single market return predicting factor is extracted from the cross section
of portfolio-level valuation ratios. Extracting the forecasting factor from the cross section of stock
yields delivers even better performance. The out-of-sample R2 s are 2.71% and 19.49%, respectively,
for predicting monthly and annual returns by the forecasting factor extracted from the cross section
of stock yields on 25 size- and stock yield-sorted portfolios. These R2 s are better than those from
using just the market-level stock yield, confirming that the Kelly and Pruitt (2013) technique
is indeed valuable in extracting useful information from the cross-section. In contrast, when we
extract the return forecasting factor from the cross section of book-to-market ratios on 25 size- and
BM-sorted portfolios, we find it to predict stock market returns with a slightly lower out-of-sample
R2 of 1.47% when predicting next-month returns and 14.11% when predicting next-year returns.
The second technique is the Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) Kalman filter approach in which
the expected return on stocks and the expected growth rates on dividends are modeled as latent
variables. When stock yield is used as an additional noisy observation of the conditional expected
return on stocks, the model’s ability to forecast future stock returns in real time improves significantly. The out-of-sample R2 for predicting next-month return increases from 2.1% to 4.2%.
Similarly, the out-of-sample R2 for predicting next-year return increases from 19.50% to 25.66%.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we derive the expression for stock
yield using a dynamic version of the Gordon growth model. In section 3 we describe the data.
We compare the forecasting performance of the stock yield with other popular return predictors in
section 4, both in-sample and out-of-sample. Section 5 then applies the Kelly and Pruitt (2013)
three-stage regression approach to the cross section of stock yields, and section 6 adds the stock
5

yield to the present-value predictive regression model of Binsbergen and Koijen (2010). We conclude
in section 7.

2

Stock Yield

When both expected return and dividend growth rate are time-varying, the static Gordon growth
model no longer applies. According to the Campbell and Shiller (1988) return decomposition, a
dynamic version can be written as:

dt − pt = −

∞

∞

j=0

j=0

X
X
κ
−
ρj Et (∆dt+1+j ) +
ρj Et (rt+1+j ),
1−ρ

(1)

where ρ and κ are loglinear constants (ρ is often chosen to be 0.95 at annual horizon and κ =
−log(ρ) − (1 − ρ)log(1/ρ − 1) = 0.2).
Rearrange the equation, take expectations, and define the expected stock yield (sy) as:

syt = (1 − ρ)(

∞
X

j

ρ Et (rt+1+j )) = κ + (1 − ρ)(dt − pt +

j=0

∞
X

ρj Et (∆dt+1+j )).

(2)

j=0

Equation (2) suggests that the current log dividend-to-price ratio, combined with expected dividend growth forecasts, drives expected stock yield, which algebraically measures expected future
expected returns. Jagannathan, McGrattan, and Scherbina (2000) derive a similar equation without loglinearization, and they also show that current dividend-to-price ratio plus weighted-average
future expected dividend growth rates measures future expected returns.
In what follows, we focus on earnings growth rates:

syt = κ + (1 − ρ)(dt − pt +

∞
X

j

ρ Et (∆et+1+j )) +

j=0

∞
X

ρj Et (∆det+1+j )),

(3)

j=0

where de denotes log cash dividend payout ratio. Miller and Modigliani (1961, p.426) summarize
the benefit of using earnings as the meaningful measure of cash flows: “We can follow the standard
practice of the security analyst and think in terms of price per share, dividends per share, and the
rate of growth of dividends per share; or we can think in terms of the total value of the enterprise,
total earnings, and the rate of growth of total earnings. Our own preference happens to be for the
6

second approach primarily because certain additional variables of interest – such as dividend policy,
leverage, and size of firm – can be incorporated more easily and meaningfully into test equations
in which the growth term is the growth of total earnings.”
Over the long run, dividend growth should carry similar information as earnings growth for
valuation since dividends have to be paid out from earnings eventually. In the short term, however,dividends can be delinked from earnings due to smoothing and other forms of corporate payout
policies. In that case, focusing on earnings growth could better capture long-term cash flow growth
prospects of a firm which are what matter for valuation. Algebraically, the difference between the
two growth rates reflects the discounted sum of future payout adjustments, or:
∞
X

ρj Et (∆det+1+j ).

(4)

j=0

Using data on the S&P500 index and assuming an AR(1) process on the payout rate (de), unreported simulation evidence suggests that the discounted sum of future payout adjustments tends
to be stable and contributes little to the time-variation in sy.5 Not surprisingly, our subsequent
empirical results suggest that despite omitting this payout adjustment term, sy still does a good
job in predicting future stock returns.

2.1

Time-varying earnings growth

Equation (3) involves the discounted sum of expected future earnings growth rate. The expression for the discounted sum can be simplified under a reasonable assumption that the conditional
expected earnings growth, gt ≡ Et (∆et+1 ), follows a stationary AR(1) process with the AR(1)
coefficient β:

gt+1 = α + βgt + ut+1 , 0 < β < 1, ut+1 ∼ N (0, σu2 ).

(5)

Similar assumptions are made by Pastor, Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008), Binsbergen and Koijen
(2010), Lacerda and Santa-Clara (2010), and Golez (2014), among others. Taking the expected
values of future earnings growth rates based on equation (5), and ignoring long-run payout adjust5

The discounted sum of future payout adjustments has a standard deviation of less than 0.05, much lower than
that of dp which is 0.34.

7

ments, the stock yield (sy) in equation (3) could be simplified as:

syt = κ +

gt
αρ
+ (1 − ρ)(dpt +
).
1 − ρβ
1 − ρβ

(6)

Equation (6) shows that conditional expected earnings growth (gt ) is a sufficient statistic for measuring all future expected earnings growth rates.6 In addition, the dynamics in stock yield are
completely driven by the dividend-to-price ratio augmented by a scaled expected earnings growth
rate (dpt +

gt
1−ρβ ).

We compute gt as log[Et (Earnt+1 )/Earnt ], where Et (Earnt+1 ) is analysts’ forecasted earnings
for the next 12 months, and Earnt is the realized earnings in the most recent fiscal year.7 The
annual autocorrelation in gt , β, is about 0.3 over our sample period. With a ρ of 0.95, the augmented
gt
) becomes dpt +1.4gt . Our predictive regression results are driven
dividend-to-price ratio (dpt + 1−ρβ

by this augmented dividend-to-price ratio. While we estimate β using the full sample period, given
the short length of the period (1977 to 2012), the exact value of β is not crucial for our results.
When we repeat the analysis for a wide range of β from 0.1 to 0.7, we find very similar predictive
results. We confirm that g does a good job of predicting future earnings growth rates at both
short horizons (next one year) and long horizons (next five years). While it does not predict the
next-year dividend growth rate well, possibly due to dividend smoothing, it does predict long-run
dividend growth rates well.
Figure 1 plots the log dividend-to-price ratio (dp) against this augmented dividend-to-price ratio
in our sample period 1977 – 2012. The difference between two series is due to the expected growth
rate (1.4gt ), which is considerable and varies a lot over time.
We focus henceforth on the stock yield (syt ), defined as an affine transformation of the augmented dividend-to-price ratio: sy = 0.29 + 0.05(dpt + 1.4gt ). The stock yield has the benefit that
it can be interpreted directly as a weighted average long-term expected return as in equation (6).
The loglinear constant κ is 0.2. In the calculation of α, we use the average realized earnings growth
rate to alleviate the optimism bias associated with analyst forecasts. Note that these constant
6

In the static case with constant payout ratio, dpt = d − p, gt = g, rt = r, and β = 1. Equation (6), with the
constant added back, reduces to dp + κ/(1 − ρ) + g/(1 − ρ) = r/(1 − ρ). After algebra manipulation and noting the
fact ρ = 1/(1 + D/P ), it is easy to show that log(1 + D/P ) + g = r, consistent with the Gordon Growth Model.
7
Implicitly, we are ignoring a convexity adjustment term since gt = Et [log(Earnt+1 /Earnt )] =
log[Et (Earnt+1 )/Earnt ] − 0.5V art [Earnt+1 /Earnt ]. Incorporating the convexity adjustment term by measuring
the variance in a rolling window hardly changes our results.

8

parameter choices do not affect our predictive regression results at all.
Figure 2 plots the stock yield (sy) against the implied cost of capital (ICC) of Li, Ng, and
Swaminathan (2013). The ICC is computed as the discount rate that , when plugged into a
present-value model, equates the present value of a stock to its current price. The present value
model considers the firm’s expected future cash flows from next year up to infinity, and these
expected cash flows are in turn estimated using a combination of analysts’ short-term earnings
forecasts, long-term growth rate forecasts, and historical payout ratios, under various assumptions.
While the details will be provided later, the ICC can be viewed as a more sophisticated version of
the stock yield that incorporates more inputs in the present value model. The figure shows that
sy and the ICC are indeed highly correlated (with a correlation coefficient of 0.70). sy, however,
seems more volatile, especially following the two recent recessions. The high correlation with the
ICC is comforting as Chen, Da, and Zhao (2013) show that the ICC measures long-run discount
rates and drives almost 65% of return variation at an annual horizon.

2.2

Equity term structure

Our stock yield (sy) and the implied cost of capital (ICC) are similar to the yield on a bond with
an infinite maturity. They are conceptually different from the expected next-period return. In
our empirical analysis, however, we will use sy to predict stock return in the next one year, two
years, and so on. In Appendix A, we work out the algebra for the equity term structure assuming
that the next-period expected return follows a stationary AR(1) process (see Pastor, Sinha, and
Swaminathan (2008)). In this simple case, the equity term structure is driven by a single factor
(the next-period expected return), and the stock yield is sufficient for predicting all finite-period
expected returns.
More generally, the equity term structure can be driven by multiple factors as discussed in
Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2013) and Kim (2013). Stock yield should still be informative about future finite-period expected returns as it can be viewed as a weighted average of
these finite-period expected returns.

9

3

Data and Variable Descriptions

We obtain stock market data such as share price, share outstanding, and return data from the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP), accounting data such as common dividends, net
income, and book value for common equity from COMPUSTAT, and analysts’ earnings forecasts
from Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (I/B/E/S).
We measure aggregate market returns by CRSP NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-weighted returns including dividends (V W RET D). Our inferences regarding forecasting performance remain
unchanged if we use returns on the S&P 500 index as an alternative market return measure. To
compare the forecasting performance of our proposed stock yield measure (sy), we also consider
various market return predictors proposed in the literature. We first consider the two component variables in the construction of sy, dividend-to-price ratio (dp) and expected earnings growth
(g). We then include other traditional valuation ratios, including book-to-market ratio (BM ),
earnings-to-price ratio (EP ), and Shiller’s cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio (CAP E), and
commonly used business cycle variables, including term spread (T erm), default spread (Def ault),
Treasury bill rate (T − bill), and Treasury bond yield (T − bond). Finally, we also compare the
predictive performance of sy with another closely related predictor, implied cost of capital (ICC)
in Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013).

3.1

Stock yield, valuation ratios, and business cycle variables

Dividend-to-price ratio (DP ) is the value-weighted average of firm-level DP s of all firms in the
CRSP-COMPUSTAT combined sample. We calculate a firm’s DP at the end of month t by
dividing the total common dividends (DV C, data item 21) in the most recent fiscal year (ending at
least three months prior) by market capitalization at month-end. We take the natural log of DP
to get dp.8
Earnings-to-price ratio (EP ) is the value-weighted average of firm-level EP s of all firms in the
CRSP-COMPUSTAT combined sample. We calculate a firm’s EP at the end of month t as dividing
8

An alternative way of computing annual dividends is to use the difference between cum-dividend return (ret) and
ex-dividend return (retx) from CRSP. We have confirmed that the dividend series computed from the two methods
are highly correlated with a correlation of 0.985. We follow Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) and use dividends
from CRSP-COMPUSTAT combined sample as they align with the fiscal year and therefore earnings. In subsequent
section where monthly dividends are needed, we use the difference between ret and retx.

10

the income before extraordinary items (adjusted for common stock equivalents, IBADJ, data item
20) in the most recent fiscal year (ending at least three months prior) by market capitalization at
month-end. Following da Silva and Jagannathan (2001) and Abarbanell and Lehavy (2007), we do
not use the actual earnings from I/B/E/S. According to da Silva and Jagannathan (2001), “the
definition of these actual earnings is not uniform across firms or even across time and the coverage
of actual earnings is not so wide.” We take the natural log of EP .
Forecasted earnings growth (g) is estimated using the forecasted earnings-to-price ratio (F EP )
and the most recent realized earnings-to-price ratio (EP ) of the aggregate market portfolio. To
measure a firm’s F EP at the end of month t, we divide the IBES consensus earnings-per-share
(EP S) forecast for the next 12-month period by the share price at month-end.9 We then measure
the F EP of the aggregate market portfolio as the value-weighted average of firm-level F EP s.10 g
is calculated as the natural log of the ratio of F EP to EP . Stock yield (sy), as defined previously,
is calculated as dp plus 1.4 times g.
Book-to-market ratio (BM ) is the value-weighted average of firm-level BM s of all firms in
the CRSP-COMPUSTAT combined sample. We calculate a firm’s BM at the end of month t by
dividing the book equity value, calculated following Daniel and Titman (2006), at the end of the
most recent fiscal year (ending at least three months prior) by market capitalization at month-end.
We take the natural log of BM .
Shiller’s cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio (CAP E) is defined as price divided by the
average of ten years of earnings, adjusted for inflation, and is obtained from Robert Shiller’s website.11
Term spread (T erm) is the AAA-rated corporate bond yield minus the one-month T-bill yield,
and default spread (Def ault) is the difference between BAA- and AAA-rated corporate bond
yields. The one-month T-bill yield is the average yield on the one-month Treasury bill obtained
from WRDS, and the yields of both AAA-rated and BAA-rated corporate bonds are obtained from
Amit Goyal’s website.12
9

We follow Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) to forecast EP S for the next 12-month period, from month t+1 to
t+12, as the weighted average of IBES consensus EP S forecasts for the next two fiscal years ending after month t,
where the weight of each fiscal year is its fraction in this 12-month period.
10
We do not use the stock recommendation data from IBES which are subject to forward-looking bias as documented in Ljungqvist, Malloy, and Marston (2009).
11
http://aida.wss.yale.edu/ shiller/data.htm.
12
http://www.hec.unil.ch/agoyal/.

11

T-bill rate (T − bill) is the one-month T-bill rate obtained from Kenneth French’s website.13
And the treasury bond yield (T −bond) is the yield on 30-year Treasury bond obtained from WRDS.

3.2

Stock yield for U.S. portfolios and other G7 countries

Besides the aggregate portfolio of U.S. stocks, we also check the predictive power of our stock yield
measure for returns of other portfolios.
In our first set of additional portfolio analyses, we consider portfolios of U.S. stocks formed
on firm characteristics such as book-to-market ratio (BM ), firm size, and industry affiliation.
Similar to Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), each month we classify stocks into three BM groups
according to NYSE percentile values of individual stocks’ BM . The growth portfolio contains
stocks with BM below the 30 percentile value, the value portfolio contains stocks with BM above
the 70 percentile value, and the remaining stocks are grouped into the middle portfolio. Three
size portfolios (small, medium, and large) are formed similarly each month according to individual
stocks’ market capitalization at the end of month and corresponding NYSE percentile values.
We further consider industry portfolios formed according to four-digit SIC codes and the fiveindustry classification scheme in Fama and French (1997).14 After classifying stocks into various
groups, value-weighted portfolios are formed and rebalanced every month. For a portfolio i at the
end month t, we calculate stock yield from its dividend-to-price-ratio and forecasted earnings growth
rate, following the exact approach for the market portfolio. We then run a predictive regression
linking the portfolio’s stock yield to its average continuously compounded monthly returns in the
future which are calculated from the time series of portfolio returns, as in the case of the market
portfolio.15
In our second set of additional portfolio analyses, we extend the in-sample analysis at the
aggregate level to the other G7 countries, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United
Kingdom. Following the exact approach in our U.S. aggregate market level analysis, we construct
13

http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data library.html.
Following their approach, we use Compustat SIC codes (for the most recent fiscal year ending at least three
months ago) whenever available, and CRSP SIC codes as of month-end otherwise. We thank Kenneth French for
providing industry classification codes online.
15
We also consider an alternative approach to calculate a portfolio’s future returns by value-weighting the buyand-hold returns of individual stocks in the portfolio. If a stock was delisted in the return measurement period, we
assume the reinvestment of delisting proceeds in the surviving stocks of the portfolio to calculate its return over the
full return measurement period. The results are qualitatively similar and available upon request.
14

12

monthly stock yield for the value-weighted portfolio of all stocks in each country, and check its
predictive power for future returns of the portfolio. For a stock to be included in the sample of a
country, it must satisfy the following conditions: 1) being a common stock; b) listed on the major
exchange(s) of the country; 3) indicated as the primary listing of the company; and 4) quoted in the
official currency of the listed country.

16

For all sample stocks, we obtain accounting data, such as

annual earnings, dividends and book equity values, from the annual fundamental file in Compustat
North America (for Canadian stocks) and Compustat Global (for stocks listed in other countries)
respectively. We obtain data on monthly stock returns, share prices, and shares outstanding from
the monthly security file in the Compustat North America database for Canadian stocks, and
construct the corresponding data from the daily security file in the Compustat Global database for
other countries.17 Finally, we obtain analyst earnings forecasts from IBES. All values are converted
into USD.
To calculate valuation ratios such as dividend-to-price ratio, we require accounting information
to precede the price data by at least six months to ensure the availability of accounting information.
To reduce errors in prices for international stocks, we follow the screening procedure for monthly
returns as suggested by Ince and Porter (2003) and Hou, Karolyi, and Kho (2011). First, any return
above 300% and reversed within one month is set to missing. Specifically, if Rt or Rt−1 is greater
than 300%, and (1 + Rt )(1 + Rt−1 ) ≤ 50%, then both Rt and Rt−1 are set to missing. Second, in
order to exclude remaining return outliers that are likely due to data error, we further set monthly
returns to missing if they fall in the most extreme 0.1 percentile in either tail in each country.
Similar to our analysis of U.S. aggregate stock portfolio, we calculate the monthly stock yield
of the aggregate stock portfolio for each country from the dividend-to-price ratio and the expected
earnings growth rate of the value-weighted portfolio of all sample stocks in the country. Every
month we also calculate future returns over horizons ranging from one year to four years based on
the time series of monthly returns of the aggregate portfolio of each country. To ensure meaningful
measurements of stock yield and returns of the aggregate stock portfolios, we require a minimum
16

The major exchanges are: Toronto Stock Exchange and TSX Ventures Exchange for Canada, Euronext Paris for
France, Deutsche Borse (Frankfurt Stock Exchange) for Germany, Borsa Italiana (Italian Stock Exchange) for Italy,
Osaka Stock Exchange, Tokyo Stock Exchange, and JASDAQ for Japan, and London Stock Exchange for the United
Kingdom.
17
Monthly issue-level shares outstanding data are available for Canadian stocks only since April 1998. For periods
before then, we obtain shares outstanding data from the annual fundamental file in the Compustat North America
database, using the number from the most recent fiscal year ending in past 12-month period.

13

of 50 stocks to be included in the calculation of any input variable. Hence the sample periods start
differently across countries, but all end in December 2012.

3.3

Implied cost of capital in Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013)

Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) (LNS hereafter) first estimate firm-level ICCs by solving the
following finite-horizon dividend discount model:
T
X
F E t+T +1
F E t+k × (1 − bt+k )
+
).
Pt =
(
k
ICC × (1 + ICC)T
(1 + ICC)
k=1

(7)

where Pt is the stock price at the end of month t, F Et+k and bt+k are the forecasts of earnings per
share and plowback rate for the year t+k, and F Et+k × (1 − bt+k ) is the free cash flow in year t+k.
Equation (7) equates the stock price to the present value of future free cash flows up to a terminal
period t+T as captured by the first item on the right-hand side of the equation plus the present
value of free cash flows beyond the terminal period as measured by the second item. LNS assume
a 15-year terminal horizon (T = 15) to estimate equation (7).
To forecast future earnings, LNS first forecast earnings in year t+1 (F E1 ) and earnings growth
rate in year t+2 (g2 ) based on consensus analyst earnings forecasts for the next two fiscal years
in I/B/E/S. They then extrapolate earnings growth rates from year t+3 to t+T+1 by assuming
that earnings growth rate mean-reverts exponentially from g2 in year t+2 to a steady growth rate
in year t+T+2 which is assumed as the average value of annual nominal GDP growth rate in the
rolling window since 1930. Finally, they forecast earnings from year t+2 to t+T+1 on the basis of
the earnings in year t+1 and forecasted earnings growth rates. To forecast future plowback rates,
LNS first explicitly forecast the plowback rate for year t+1 as one minus the dividend payout ratio
in the most recent fiscal year, and then extrapolate plowback rates from year t+2 to t+T+1 by
assuming that plowback rate reverts linearly from year t+1 to a steady value in year t+T+1. The
plowback rate in the steady stage since year t+T+1 is computed as the ratio of the steady earnings
growth rate to the ICC, which is implied by the sustainable growth rate formula.
Firm-level ICCs could be estimated from stock prices and forecasts of future earnings and
plowback rates by solving equation (7). The ICC for the aggregate market portfolio in a month is

14

calculated as the value-weighted average of firm-level ICCs in that month.18

3.4

Summary statistics

Table 1 provides the summary statistics of for our main predictive variables. Panel A reports the
means, standard deviations, and autocorrelations from one-year to four-year horizons. Panel B
reports correlations among the variables.
The expected next-year earnings growth based on analysts’ earnings forecasts (g) has a mean
of 24%, which is clearly higher than the actual average earnings growth rate, confirming the wellknown optimism bias in analyst forecasts. In other words, the analyst-based growth forecast is likely
a biased estimator of the true expected cash flow growth rate. However, such a bias is unlikely
to predict future market returns. g varies a lot from one month to another, with a standard
deviation of 24%, which could indicate useful information for predicting future stock returns. The
autocorrelation in g is about 0.3 at an annual frequency, resulting in a scaling factor of 1.4 in the
definition of the augmented dividend-to-price ratio. The autocorrelations become negative beyond
one year, consistent with mean-reversion.
The stock yield variable, sy, has a mean of 12.85% and a standard deviation of 2.35%. As g is
not persistent, neither is sy. Indeed, the autocorrelation in sy is 0.55 at the one-year horizon, and
drops to below 0.20 beyond one year.
The correlation between g and the log dividend-to-price ratio (dp) is low (-0.045). As a result,
the stock yield, is not perfectly correlated with dp (correlation = 0.693). Among other predictive
variables, sy is also highly correlated with the ICC (correlation = 0.704) and BM (correlation =
0.678).
18
See Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) for more details on forecasting future earnings and plowback rates and
estimating ICCs at firm-level. LNS measure monthly ICCs of the aggregate market portfolio based on S&P 500
firms, and indicate that the aggregate ICCs based on all firms in the CRSP-COMPUSTAT-IBES combined sample
are very similar. Though we use the aggregate ICCs provided by LNS, we also estimate monthly aggregate ICCs
by an alternative approach, first forecasting future earnings and plowback rates for the aggregate portfolio of all
firms, and then solving equation (7) by equating the aggregate market capitalization to the present value of the
aggregate future free cash flows. Over our sample period, the correlation coefficient between the LNS measure and
this alternative ICC measure is 0.97 if constructed from S&P 500 firms and 0.95 if constructed from the all-firm
sample.

15

3.5

Cash-flow predictive power of g

The validity of our stock yield measures relies on the analyst-forecast-implied growth rate g being
a good proxy for future cash-flow growth expectations. We examine the cash-flow predictive power
of g directly in Table 2. When we use g to predict future earnings growth rates, we find strong
predictive power at all horizons. While g does not predict next-year dividend growth rate well,
possibly due to dividend smoothing, it does predict long-run dividend growth rates well.

4

Return Predictive Power of Stock Yield

We first examine the return predictive power of the stock yield in itself, both in-sample and outof-sample. We also conduct extensive robustness checks to make sure that the predictive power of
sy is robust and extends to both U.S. stock portfolios formed on firm characteristics and aggregate
stock portfolios in other G7 countries.

4.1

In-sample tests

Following Fama and French (1988) and Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), we run multiperiod
predictive regressions of the following form:

K
X
rt+k
k=1

K

= a + b × Xt + ut+K,t ,

(8)

where rt+k is the continuously compounded monthly return. K is the forecasting horizon which we
choose at 12, 24, 36, and 48 months. In other words, we run monthly predictive regressions for
average monthly stock returns for the next 1 year, 2 years, and up to 4 years. Xt is a vector of
predictive variables, and u is the error term.
Given the overlapping nature of the above regression, we first report Newey-West (1987) corrected t-values where the number of lags is equal to K − 1. Most predictive variables in X are
persistent, which, combined with a small sample, can potentially lead to overestimated t-values. To
address all three statistical issues (persistent regressors, small sample, and overlapping regressions)
simultaneously, we follow Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) closely and also report p-values from

16

simulation exercises. Appendix B describes the simulation exercises. The adjusted R2 s are from
the OLS regressions.
We first consider univariate regressions with one predictor at a time, and report the results in
Table 3. Consistent with findings in earlier literature, the dividend-to-price ratio does a reasonable
job of forecasting future returns in our sample period. The adjusted R-squared ranges from 11.1%
at the one-year horizon to 39% at the four-year horizon. The regression coefficients are also highly
significant according to the Newey-West corrected t-values. Once its persistence in a small sample
is accounted for, however, dp ceases to be significant, according to our p-values that all 0.16 and
higher.
The analyst-based expected earnings growth g, in itself, is not a strong return predictor, judging
from the adjusted R2 s. Even at the four-year horizon, it is only 14.3%. Its return predictive power,
while moderate, does seem to be statistically significant at the 10% confidence level beyond two
years, according to the simulated p-values.
While neither dp nor g is a strong and significant return predictor, sy, a simple linear combination of the two, does a striking job in forecasting stock market returns. The adjusted R2 is as high
as 13.0% at the one-year horizon, and increases to 53.5% at the four-year horizon. The regression
coefficients are highly significant at all horizons according to either Newey-West corrected t-values
or simulated p-values. Interestingly, the p-value declines with the forecasting horizon, suggesting
that sy is a stronger predictor of long-horizon returns as in equation (2)
We consider three other valuation ratios: BM , EP , and CAP E. EP is the weakest return
predictor of the three, with low adjusted R2 s below 10% and insignificant regression coefficients
at all horizons. CAP E is associated with high adjusted R2 s from 9.3% at the one-year horizon
to 46.2% at the four-year horizon. As it is highly persistent, its regression coefficients are not
significant, judging from the simulated p-values. Finally, BM is probably the best of the three,
with reasonable adjusted R2 s from 10.5% at the one-year horizon to 37.2% at the four-year horizon.
Its regression coefficients are marginally significant, according to the simulated p-values. Overall,
stock yield outperforms all the valuation ratios by a clear margin.
We also consider four macroeconomic variables: term spread, default spread, the T-bill rate,
and the T-bond rate. In general, they perform poorly in predicting future stock market returns,
consistent with the findings in the literature. Their R2 s are low. Their regression coefficients are
17

not significant, with the exception of the T-bond rate whose coefficients are marginally significant
for horizons beyond one year.
Finally, we consider a closely related return predictor, the implied cost of capital (ICC) of Li,
Ng, and Swaminathan (2013). As we have shown in sections 3.1, ICC can be viewed as a more
sophisticated version of stock yield that incorporates more inputs in the present value model.
Empirically, however, ICC does a slightly weaker job in predicting future stock market returns
than our stock yield measure. While ICC has reasonably high adjusted R2 s from 6.9% at one-year
horizon to 40.8% at four-year horizon, its regression coefficients are insignificant or only marginally
significant. We should note that Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) consider a slightly different
predictive regression specification that forecasts future market excess returns (over the risk-free
rate) using excess ICC (over yields of T-bills or T-bonds). We reproduce their results that excess
ICC significantly predicts future excess market returns. We do not consider excess expected stock
yield for the benchmark case because sy needs to be scaled properly before the T-bill or T-bond
yield can be subtracted, but untabulated results confirm that sy does a comparable job predicting
returns in-sample relative to ICC even if excess returns are used everywhere.

19

Figure 3 provides a visual representation of the results, plotting both ICC and sy against
average annual realized stock market returns in the next four years. It seems that stock yield does
a better job than ICC in predicting the high stock returns following the two recent recessions.
The finding that sy can outperform a more complicated ICC is consistent with a large finance
and accounting literature documenting that the value of equity analysts’ forecasts comes mostly
from their short-term earnings forecasts rather than their long-term growth forecasts. Furthermore, the steady-state cash flow growth rate tends to be very slow-moving. Indeed, Li, Ng, and
Swaminathan (2013) proxy it with the average historical GDP growth rate. The information signal
in the time-varying ICC from month to month largely comes from the current dividend-to-price
ratio and the expected short-term earnings growth rate, information succinctly summarized in our
stock yield.
Given the strong correlation between sy and other return predictors, it is informative to examine
the incremental predictive power of sy. We do this by conducting bivariate regressions with both sy
19

The in-sample adjusted R2 s of excess sy are 7.7%, 15.6%, 21.5%, and 20.1% for one- to four-year horizons
respectively, while the corresponding numbers are 6.1%, 17.5%, 28.6%, and 29.0% for excess ICC. And both excess
sy and excess ICC outperform other predictors.

18

and another predictor simultaneously in equation (8). Overall, we find sy continues to be significant
even with the presence of any other return predictor. The p-value of the average slope coefficient
on sy is almost always below 10%. It is only slightly above 10% when EP or CAP E is included.
Other predictors are never significant alongside sy. These results are not tabulated to save space,
but available upon requests.

4.1.1

Robustness checks

In Table 4, we demonstrate the robustness of our stock yield, sy. From now on, we report only
the simulated p-values associated with the slope coefficients to save space. Panel A reports results
from in-sample predictive regressions under various alternative definitions of sy.
So far we have defined sy as 0.29 + 0.05(dp + 1.4g), with the scaling factor 1.4 determined by
the empirical autocorrelation in g in the full sample, so we are subject to a criticism of potential
forward-looking bias. To ensure that our results are not driven by this particular choice of the
scaling factor, we also consider defining sy as 0.29 + 0.05(dp + 1.1g) or 0.29 + 0.05(dp + 3.0g),
corresponding to an autocorrelation in g of 0.1 or 0.7, respectively. We find these two alternative
sys to produce very similar results. The adjusted R2 s are high and the regression coefficients are
always highly significant, according to the simulated p-values. In fact, there seems to be a trade-off
– while the lower scaling factor of 1.1 results in higher adjusted R2 s, the higher scaling factor of
3.0 actually produces more significant regression coefficients.
In the benchmark definition of sy, we use earnings forecasts on all stocks covered by analysts
in IBES, so the resulting expected earnings growth forecast better proxies the cash flow growth
prospects of the overall stock market whose returns we are predicting. One potential concern is
that analysts’ forecasts on small stocks could be highly biased, and thus contaminate the overall
g measure. As one alternative definition, we also consider calculating sy using dp and g of the
S&P500 stocks only. This alternative stock yield measure, sysp , indeed produces slightly better
forecasting results. For instance, the adjusted R2 is 58.4% at the four-year horizon.
Another potential concern about our calculation of g is that we are matching actual GAAP
realized earnings (before extraordinary items) with IBES forecasted earnings, while the accounting
definitions of these two earnings are slightly different. IBES compiles forecasted and reported
earnings using its proprietary procedures and definitions, with the aim to exclude from the GAAP19

based reported earnings certain nonrecurring items (such as one-time charges or gains associated
with acquisitions), other special items, and nonoperating items.20
To address this concern of a mismatch between expected future earnings and realized past
earnings, we consider an alternative definition of sy that uses g computed based on realized and
forecasted earnings, both obtained from IBES. This alternative sy, labeled as syibes , produces qualitatively similar results as our benchmark one, although both the adjusted R2 s and the significance
levels associated with the regression coefficients are lower.
One important concern with using analyst forecasts is that they are likely to be biased on
average. While it is generally believed that the biases associated with short-term earnings forecasts
are small, they may still affect our analysis. It is important to note, however, that since we are
running predictive regressions, the level of the bias is less relevant. These biases, as long as they
persist from one month to another, should not have a strong impact on our monthly predictive
regressions. To confirm this, we define two alternative sys in which we compute g not using the
consensus earnings forecasts but rather the lowest or the highest forecasts across different analysts.
We label them as sylow and syhigh , respectively. If analyst bias has any significant impact on our
analysis, we would expect sylow and syhigh to produce very different results. We actually find the
opposite – the results of regression using sylow and syhigh are very similar, and are in fact also
similar to those using our benchmark sy.
We also consider two alternative ways to define g using analyst forecasts. First, we compute the
expected earnings growth rate as the one implied by analysts’ forecasts of earnings for the two fiscal
years ending in the next two years. We call the resulting growth rate g2 . Second, we simply use
analysts’ median long-term growth (LT G) forecasts (available from 1982). Of the two alternative
definitions, g2 still produces significant forecasting results, but LT G does not. We find that sy
defined using these two alternative definitions of g performs more poorly than our benchmark sy
defined using g, consistent with the notion that equity analysts are best at forecasting near-term
earnings.
Finally, recall that gt is computed as log[Et (Earnt+1 )/Earnt ], where Et (Earnt+1 ) is analyst20

There are many studies in the accounting literature examining the difference between GAAP-based earnings
and “street” earnings produced by commercial forecast data providers and the consequent implications for earningsrelated analyses. See Bradshaw and Sloan (2002) and Abarbanell and Lehavy (2007), among others, for related
discussions.

20

forecasted earnings for the next 12 months, and Earnt is realized earnings for the most recent
fiscal year. One might be concerned that it is the backward-looking realized earnings (Earnt ) that
drive the return predictive power in gt . We argue that this is unlikely for two reasons. First, g2
computed using only forward-looking forecasts still produces significant forecasting results. Second, we decompose g = log[Et (Earnt+1 )/Earnt ] into two parts: g = log[Et (Earnt+1 )/Earn10
t ]+
10
log[Et (Earn10
t )/Earnt ], where Earnt measures average earnings in the past 10 years. Untabu-

lated results confirm that the predictive power in g is due mostly to the variation in forecasted
earnings in the first term, rather than that in realized earnings in the second term.
One may question whether the expected cash flow growth rate g is correlated with the aggregate
uncertainty in the economy. If that is the case, the incremental predictive power in sy may reflect
the variance risk premium (vrp) as documented in Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009) and
Drechsler and Yaron (2011). More recently, Andersen, Fusari, and Todorov (2013) find a tail factor
extracted from equity index option prices to have strong predictive power for market excess returns
up to a year.
In Panel B of Table 4, we compare sy to vrp, where vrp is computed as the difference between
the VIX and realized volatility (Details about vrp construction can be found in Bollerslev, Tauchen,
and Zhou (2009)). Since vrp starts in 1990, the analysis in this panel covers a shorter sample period,
from 1990 to 2012. We first find that sy performs as well in this shorter sample period as in our
full sample. vrp is also highly significant in predicting future returns for the next one year and two
years, but it does not predict future returns over horizons beyond two years. When put together
in bivariate regressions, vrp clearly does not take away the explanatory power of sy. Furthermore,
when comparing the adjusted R2 s from bivariate regressions to those from univariate regressions
with only sy, we do not see major improvements.

4.1.2

Portfolio results

Panel A of Table 5 reports results from in-sample predictive regressions using stock yield, sy, for
various portfolios. We consider three book-to-market-sorted portfolios,three size-sorted portfolios,
and five industry portfolios formed according to Fama and French (1997) industry classification
scheme: consumer products, manufacturing, high-tech, health care, and others.
Stock yield, sy, is computed for each portfolio. To deal with negative earnings and earnings
21

forecasts at the portfolio level, we first calculate the raw expected earnings growth rate Gt as
[Et (Earnt+1 ) − Earnt ]/abs(Earnt ) and winsorize it at −50% and 200% to alleviate the impact of
outliers. We then define gt as log(1 + Gt ). Finally, as before, we compute sy as 0.29 + 0.05(dt −
pt + 1.4gt ). In untabulated analysis, we also let the scaling factor on gt vary according to the actual
AR(1) coefficient on gt s of individual portfolios. The resulting scaling factors range from 1 and 2
across the 11 portfolios and produce very similar results as those reported.
The results in Panel A of Table 5 show that sy perform very well at the portfolio level. The
p-values are uniformly significant across all 11 portfolios and at all horizons. sy does particularly
well for growth and large stocks and in the consumer products and health care industries. It
performs worst for small stocks, possibly due to the frequent occurrence of negative earnings. In
addition, when we compute the average forecast dispersion at the portfolio level, we find the forecast
dispersion to be lower in growth stocks than in value stocks (0.063 vs. 0.190), in large stocks than
in small stocks (0.079 vs. 0.261), and lower in consumer products and health care industries.21 In
other words, the portfolio-level results confirm the notion that sy has stronger predictive power,
precisely among stocks with less uncertain earnings expectations.

4.1.3

International results

We also extend the in-sample regression analysis to other G7 countries: Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. Panel B of Table 5 reports these results. As before, we
compute sy as 0.29 + 0.05(dt − pt + 1.4gt ).
Because of the narrower IBES coverage of international stocks, the sample is much shorter for
the other G7 countries. It starts in 1985 for Canada, in 1988 for France, Germany, and Japan,
and in 1990 for Italy and UK. As a result, sy tends to have weaker predictive power than in
the U.S. Nevertheless, sy does a reasonably good job in predicting future stock market returns
even outside the U.S. Across all six countries, the predictive regression coefficient on sy is always
significant (at the 10% confidence level) at the four-year horizon according to our simulations. The
average coefficient (from one-year to four-year horizons) is significant at the 5% level for the UK
21

Forecast dispersion for each stock is computed as the ratio between the standard deviation in the earning
forecasts across analysts and the absolute value of their consensus forecast, following Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina
(2002). The dispersion measures are then value-weighted across stocks at the portfolio level. Equal-weighing gives
very similar results.

22

and Germany, at the 10% level for Canada, and just marginally insignificant for France, Italy, and
Japan with simulated p-values of 11%, 12%, and 11% respectively.

4.2

Out-of-sample tests

Often the predictability of stock returns is taken out-of-sample. Welch and Goyal (2008) show in an
out-of-sample experiment that many well-known predicting variables do not consistently outperform
the historical mean. We generate our out-of-sample forecast with a sequence of expanding samples.
Specifically, we use information up to month m and estimate the following equation:

rt = α + βxt−1 + ut , ∀t <= m

(9)

where rt is continuously compounded return in month t, xt−1 is a predictive variable at month
t − 1, ut is the residual, and α and β are coefficients. The coefficients, combined with xm , are then
used to estimate the expected return in month-m + 1.
We follow this process, adding to the sample by one month each time, thereby generating a
series of out-of-sample next-month expected return forecasts, r̂m+1 , r̂m+2 , ..., r̂T . The out-of-sample
R2 then compares the mean-squared errors for a specific predicting variable to those when using
historical means:
PT −1
(ri+1 − r̂i+1 )2
,
OOS − R2 = 1 − PTi=m
−1
2
(r
−
r̄
)
i+1
i+1
i=m

(10)

where r̄i+1 is the historical mean of returns up to time i. Month m + 1 is the starting month of the
out-of-sample period, and OOS-R2 therefore measures the performance of a particular predictor
relative to the historical mean during that out-of-sample period.
A positive OOS-R2 means that this predictor outperforms historical mean. In that case, a
market timer optimally allocating her assets between the stock market and a risk-free asset can
enhance returns by using this predictor (rather than the historical average) to forecast next-month
expected stock return. Campbell and Thompson (2008) show that this return enhancement is
approximately OOS-R2 /γ where γ measures relative risk aversion. In other words, if an investor’s
relative risk aversion coefficient is 3, then the return to her market timing portfolio can be improved

23

by OOS-R2 per quarter. Of course, such a return improvement can come from taking more risk, so
we also compute the implied utility gain for a mean-variance investor with a relative risk aversion
coefficient of 3.
Equation (2) suggests that stock yield, sy, is a predictor of long-horizon future returns, and
in-sample prediction results also indicate a higher predictive power of sy for longer-horizon returns.
Hence it is helpful to include predictors from the past, or sy at different lags, to predict the next
month’s return. Appendix C details the out-of-sample R2 s of sy at different lags. We follow Li,
Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) to use a two-year backward moving average of sy and ICC, which
indeed helps improve predictive power. Consistent with their results, applying such an average to
other predictors does not help improve predictive power much.22
For the benchmark case, we choose January 1999 as the start of the out-of-sample period. This
allows a minimum of 20 years in the in-sample period.

23

Welch and Goyal (2008) show that

well-known return predictors perform poorly starting in the late 1990s, so an out-of-sample period
starting in 1999 is of particular relevance to examine.
The results are presented in Panel A of Table 6. Consistent with the prior literature, many
predictors such as EP and macroeconomic variables have negative out-of-sample R2 s, thus underperforming the simple average historical return. dp, sy, CAP E, and ICC are the only four
predictors with significant positive out-of-sample R2 s. Among these four predictors, sy has the
highest R2 of 2.1%. sy is also associated with the highest utility gain among all the predictors,
8.38%, indicating that a risk-averse investor is willing to pay more than 8% in fees per year for
access to the information embedded in sy.
We also consider a wide range of alternative starting dates for the out-of-sample period from
1999 to 2007. Figure 4 plots the out-of-sample R2 for sy and dp. It is clear from the plot that the
high out-of-sample R2 for sy is not particular to the 1999 starting point in the benchmark case. In
fact, the R2 for sy is almost always higher than 2% and can be as high as 3.3%. As a comparison,
the R2 for dp is consistently lower and becomes negative for out-of-sample periods starting after
2002. It is interesting that while neither dp nor g does a great job in forecasting next-month stock
market returns, when properly combined into sy, they become very informative about expected
22

For this reason, the backward moving average calculation is only applied to sy and ICC, and only for predicting
next-month returns out-of-sample.
23
Because of the moving average, the in-sample period for sy and ICC is 1979 – 1998.

24

future stock market returns.
To gauge whether sy has incremental predictive power that is not present in other predictors,
we conduct Harvey, Leybourne, and Newbold (1998) forecast encompassing test. A forecast encompassing test of predictor i against predictor j tests the null hypothesis that the forecast based on
predictor i encompasses the forecast based on predictor j, against the one-sided alternative that the
forecast based on predictor i does not encompass the forecast based on predictor j. Untabulated
results show that, in the tests of sy against other predictors, the p-values are always higher than
0.3, so we cannot reject the null that sy encompasses other predictors. On the other hand, in the
tests of other predictors against sy, the p-values are always lower than 0.1, so we can reject the null
that sy is encompassed by other predictors. Overall the results suggest that sy is more informative
than other predictors in predicting future stock returns.
We also run similar out-of-sample tests to predict next one-year return. Panel B of Table 6
reports the out-of-sample R2 and associated p-values computed using Newey-West (1985) correction
with the number of lags of 11 (the number of overlapping observations in this exercise). We find
that stock yield continues to do a good job. Its out-of-sample R2 is 9.83% with a p-value of 0.02,
compared to 5.17% for the ICC with a p-value of 0.06.
Finally, we also check the out-of-sample predictive power of sy and other predictors for market
excess returns (in excess of risk-free rates). For consistency, we subtract the yield on T-bills from
sy and ICC for this exercise. Confirming the results in Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013), ICC
does the best job when predicting next one-month excess market returns with a OOS-R2 of 1.43%.
sy comes in second with a OOS-R2 of 1.17%. All other predictors have either negative OOS-R2 s
or small positive OOS-R2 s that are insignificant. When predicting next one-year excess returns, sy
has the highest OOS-R2 of 8.96%, followed by ICC with an OOS-R2 of 6.87%.
To conclude, when the forecasting power is tested out-of-sample, only sy and ICC have consistently positive and significant OOS-R2 s in various specifications.

4.3

Understanding the return predictability of stock yield

What is the source of the return predictability in stock yield? A quick look at Figure 3 seems to
suggest that stock yield does a particularly good job in predicting the high stock returns following
recessions.
25

We confirm this observation more formally by conducting our main analysis separately for
“good times” and “bad times” categorized according to the Chicago Fed National Activity Index
(CFNAI), which measures overall economic activity.We assign all calendar months in our sample
period into one of two groups based on the CFNAI in that month: “good times” are those with
above-median CFNAIs, and “bad times” are those with below-median CFNAIs.24
Figure 5 shows the results from in-sample tests that use stock yield to predict next-year stock
returns in good times and bad times separately. We plot realized stock returns against the predicted
stock returns for the two groups. It is clear that the predictive power of stock yield is concentrated
during bad times when investors’ fears are high as measured by a low CFNAI index. During bad
times, stock yield has an in-sample R2 of 26%, much higher than during good times.
This is true for out-of-sample predictions as well. During bad times, the out-of-sample R2
associated with stock yield is 3.52%, much higher than during good times. This is not surprising,
as our out-of-sample period 1999 – 2012 includes two major recessions. Intuitively, when the
economy is not doing well, the risk premium tends to be high looking ahead. At the same time,
current dividends are depressed and imply higher future growth expectations. Such higher growth
expectations show up in our stock yield and enables it to capture the increased expected returns.
In addition, while analysts’ earnings forecasts tend to be optimistic on average, the optimism bias
is alleviated during bad times, making the forecasted growth more accurate.25
Our finding is also consistent with the intuition in Boyd, Hu, and Jagannathan (2005), who
argue that information about future corporate dividends dominates during contraction, and such
information needs to be accounted for when predicting future stock returns. The fact that stock
yield has stronger predictive power in bad times is also consistent with the recent finding in Kacperczyk, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) that skillful mutual fund managers are able to time
the market during recessions.
Predicting stock market returns at different future horizons using stock yield in “good” and
“bad” times separately also reveals interesting features about the term structure of expected equity
returns. When we use stock yield to predict the average monthly returns in the next one year,
24
We obtain similar results when we use the real-time recession probability as developed by Guan and Parker
(2014) to classify “good” and “bad” times.
25
The correlation between the absolute forecast error in g and CFNAI is 0.28, suggesting forecasted growth is
more accurate in bad times.

26

two years, and up to four years in “good” times, we find increasing coefficients from 1.24 to 2.97.
In sharp contrast, in “bad” times these coefficients decline with the forecasting horizons — from
4.40 at the one-year horizon to 1.69 at the four-year horizon, consistent with a downward-sloping
term structure of equity returns as documented by Binsbergen, Brandt, and Koijen (2012) and
Binsbergen, Hueskes, Koijen, and Vrugt (2013).
To conclude this section, we find that the stock yield measure does a good job predicting stock
returns by itself. Its out-of-sample R2 s are consistently above 2% when predicting monthly returns
over various out-of-sample periods. It also predicts next one-year market returns, both raw and
excess ones, very well out of sample. In-sample, stock yield predicts future stock market returns
with an adjusted R2 of 13% at the one-year horizon, up to 54% at the four-year horizon in the U.S.
It also performs well in predicting the returns on aggregate stock markets in other G7 countries
and portfolios of U.S. stocks formed on firm characteristics such as book-to-market ratio, size, and
industry. Overall, the performance of stock yield is comparable, if not slightly better than some of
the best return predictive variables documented so far in the literature.
In the next two sections, we further show that the stock yield can be easily combined with
sophisticated econometric techniques recently developed by Kelly and Pruitt (2013) and Binsbergen
and Koijen (2010) to achieve even better return predictive power. For these analyses, we focus on
the out-of-sample prediction.

5

Extracting Factor from the Cross-Section of Stock Yields

Kelly and Pruitt (2013) propose a three-stage regression approach to extract a single market return
predictor from the cross-section of portfolio-level predictive variables, such as the book-to-market
ratios of 25 Fama-French portfolios. Denoting rt,h the h-period market return after period t and
xj,t the predictive variable at period t for the portfolio j, the first step runs a time-series regression
of the predictive variable, xj,t on the future market return to forecast, rt,h , for each portfolio j
separately:

xj,t = φ̂j,0 + φ̂j rt,h + ej,t .

(11)

The second step runs a cross-sectional regression of all portfolios’ predictive variables on their
27

loadings on the market return estimated in the first-stage regression, for each period t:

xj,t = ĉt + F̂t φ̂j + uj,t .

(12)

The regression coefficient, F̂t , is the predictive factor for the future market return at period t. To
generate predicted future market returns, the third step regresses future market returns on the
lagged predictive factor estimated in the second-stage regression:

rt,h = β̂0 + β̂ F̂t + εt .

(13)

to generate predicted future market returns. Specifically, to generate the out-of-sample prediction
for rt,h , the h-period market return over the period t+1 to t+h, we first run the regression in
equation (13) with data up to period t, i.e., the last h-period market return entering the regression
ends in period t, and the corresponding predictor is in period t − h, F̂t−h . Then the out-of-sample
predicted market return is the product of the regression coefficient, β̂, and the predictor in period
t, F̂t .
We adopt this three-stage regression approach to extract a single market return predictor from
the cross-section of portfolio-level stock yields, sy. To ensure sufficient variation in sy, we form
size-sy portfolios based on a two-way conditional sort of stocks, first by market capitalization and
then by sy. More specifically, to form 6 (25) size-sy portfolios, in each month t we first sort stocks
into 2 (5) equally sized groups based on market capitalization at the end of month t, and within
each market capitalization group, we further sort stocks into 3 (5) equally sized groups based on
sy. We use only stocks with non missing market capitalization and sy. We then calculate the
portfolio-level sy and run the three-stage regressions above to generate market return predictor
(KP -sy).

26

For comparison, we apply a similar procedure to form size-DP portfolios based on the two-way
conditional sort on market capitalization and log dividend-to-price ratio, DP , and extract a single
market return predictor (KP -DP ) from the DP s of these portfolios. We also replicate the original
Kelly and Pruitt (2013) prediction, which uses log book-to-market ratios of Fama-French portfolios
26

For one-month market return predictions, as in the univariate prediction, we use a two-year backward moving
average of sy to form portfolios and calculate portfolio-level sy as the value-weighted average of stock-level sy.

28

since 1930 to extract a single return predictor (KP -BM ).

27

The out-of-sample forecasting performance of these cross-sectionally extracted factors is presented in Table 7. We find that the factor extracted from the cross-section of sy (KP -sy) performs
better than the market-level sy. For example, when predicting the next-one-month stock return, the
out-of-sample R2 is 2.70% for KP -sy extracted from 6 portfolios and 2.71% for KP -sy extracted
from 25 portfolios. Both R2 s are higher than the 2.10% from using market-level sy (reproduced
from Panel A of Table 6). Similarly, when predicting the next-one-year stock return, KP -sy extracted from 6 portfolios has an out-of-sample R2 of 11.66%, higher than the 9.83% from using
market-level sy. Performance improves even further with 25 portfolios in the cross-section. KP -sy
now has an out-of-sample R2 of 19.49%. Likewise, we find KP -DP and KP -BM extracted from
the cross-section to outperform the market-level DP and BM , respectively. These results confirm
the intuition in Kelly and Pruitt (2013) that information from the cross-section can enhance return
predictability.
We also find KP -sy does better than KP -DP . When predicting the next-one-month stock
return, KP -DP has an out-of-sample R2 of 1.41% using 6 portfolios and 1.47% using 25 portfolios.
The corresponding numbers increase to 5.06% and 9.57% when predicting the next-one-year stock
return. These R2 s are all lower than their counterparts from using KP -sy.
Finally, we show that KP -sy compares favorably against KP -BM . For example, extracted
from 25 portfolios, KP -BM has an out-of-sample R2 of 1.47% when predicting next-one-month
return and an out-of-sample R2 of 14.11% when predicting next-one-year return.
Overall, these results suggest that the three-stage regression approach developed by Kelly and
Pruitt (2013) can be applied to the cross-section of stock yields to produce an even stronger stock
return predictor.

6

Extending the Present Value Approach with Stock Yield

Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) consider a time-series model that satisfies the present value relation
in which conditional expected returns and expected dividend growth rates are modeled as latent
27

We also try to use log book-to-market ratios of Fama-French portfolios from 1977, the starting point of our
sample period, to extract a single return predictor. The predictive performance is actually worse. To maintain
consistency with the original KP prediction, we use the data from 1930 for this prediction.

29

variables. They show that this approach significantly improves the predictability of both future
return and dividend growth. Specifically, they assume AR(1) processes for the two latent state
variables: the expected return (µ) and the expected dividend growth (g):
µt+1 = δ0 + δ1 (µt − δ0 ) + µt+1
gt+1 = γ0 + γ1 (gt − γ0 ) + gt+1 .

(14)

The de-meaned state variables are:

µ̂t = µt − δ0
ĝt = gt − γ0 .

Using the parameters in the above AR(1) processes, equation (1) can be written as:

dpt = −

γ 0 − δ0
µ t − δ0
κ
gt − γ0
−
+
−
1−ρ
1−ρ
1 − ρδ1 1 − ργ1

= A + B1 · µ̂t − B2 · ĝt

(15)

The baseline state-space representation, used by Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), is defined by
two measurement equations:
dpt = A + B1 · µ̂t − B2 · ĝt ,
∆dt+1 = γ0 + ĝt + dt+1 .
The two transition equations are:
µ̂t+1 = δ1 · µ̂t + µt+1 ,
ĝt+1 = γ1 · ĝt + gt+1 .
We have shown the stock yield (sy) to be a good measure of expected stock return, which allows
us to add another measurement equation:

syt = a + b · µ̂t .

30

We then evaluate the out-of-sample performance of the original Binsbergen and Koijen (2010)
model (original BK) and its extension that includes sy (extended BK) using monthly data.
We use non-overlapping monthly return, dividend growth and dividend-to-price ratio. Monthly
dividends are computed from CRSP returns using the difference between the total monthly return
and the monthly return without dividends. The dividend-to-price ratio for month t is computed as
the ratio between the dividend in that month and the price at the end of the month. We do not
apply seasonal adjustment to the monthly dividend data so the present value relation holds every
month. sy is computed as the two-year backward moving average as before. To be consistent with
our earlier out-of-sample analysis, we start our out-of-sample period in January 1999. Specifically,
we use data before 1999 to estimate both models, and compute expected returns for January 1999.
Next, we re-estimate both models using data up to January 1999 and compute expected returns for
February 1999. We then repeat this process going forward. This procedure allows us to generate a
time series of monthly expected returns under both models from January 1999 through December
2012. We compare them to the realized returns and compute the out-of-sample R2 as before.
Parallel to Figure 4, we also consider a wide range of starting dates for the out-of-sample period
from 1999 through 2007, and plot the out-of-sample R2 s for both models in Figure 6.
The original BK model generates an out-of-sample R2 of 2.71% when we start the out-of-sample
period in 1999, even better than the performance of sy as reported in Panel A of Table 6 (2.10%).
More interestingly, incorporating stock yield (sy) in the extended BK model improves the out-ofsample R2 further to 4.22%! Indeed, the extend BK model outperforms the original BK model for
a wide range of out-of-sample cutoff points.
Similarly, when predicting next-one year returns, the original BK model generates an out-ofsample R2 of 19.50% for the out-of-sample period starting in 1999. Incorporating stock yield (sy)
in the extended BK model improves the out-of-sample R2 further to 25.66%!28
28

To predict next-one year returns, we continue to use non-overlapping monthly return, dividend growth and
dividend-to-price ratio so the present value relation holds. We use the raw monthly sy here rather than its two-year
backward moving average. The resulting next-one-month return forecasts, after simple annualization, become our
next-one-year return forecasts.

31

7

Conclusion

According to the Gordon growth model, the long horizon expected return on stock (stock yield)
is the sum of the dividend yield and some weighted average of expected future growth rates in
dividends. We show how to construct a measure of the weighted average of expected future growth
rate in dividends based on sell side analysts’ near term earnings forecasts. During 1977-2012,
the stock yield measure constructed in this manner predicts future stock returns as well as other
variables that have been proposed in the literature for predicting stock returns. The forecasts
perform better during times when investors’ recession fears are high.
Our work links the insights from earlier literature (Campbell and Shiller (1988), among others)
with more recent studies that examine the implied cost of equity capital, ICC (e.g., Li, Ng, and
Swaminathan (2013)). Confirming the insight in Campbell and Shiller (1988), we find augmenting the valuation ratio with a measure of growth expectation significantly improves stock return
predictability. Consistent with the literature on the ICC, we find that forward-looking growth expectations embedded in analysts’ forecasts, especially their near-term earnings forecasts, are useful
in predicting stock returns. The additional assumptions in the ICC models, such as those regarding
payout ratios, the time for the growth rate to reach a steady-state one, and the way the growth
rate fades, appear not critical if the objective is to forecast future stock returns.
Finally, when combined with recently developed econometric techniques, stock yield improves
their performance in predicting future stock returns. We give two examples in the paper: (1) the
three-stage regression approach of Kelly and Pruitt (2013), and (2) the present-value model of
Binsbergen and Koijen (2010).

32

References
Abarbanell, J., and R. Lehavy. 2007. Letting the “Tail Wag the Dog”: The Debate over GAAP
versus Street Earnings Revisited. Contemporary Accounting Research 24:675–723.
Ai, H., M. Croce, A. Diercks, and K. Li. 2013. Production-Based Term Structure of Equity
Returns. Working Paper, UNC Chapel Hill.
Andersen, T., N. Fusari, and V. Todorov. 2013. The Risk Premia Embedded in Index Options.
Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Bakshi, G., and Z. Chen. 2005. Stock Valuation in Dynamic Economies. Journal of Financial
Markets 8:111–151.
Ball, R. 1978. Anomalies in Relationships between Securities’ Yields and Yield-surrogates. Journal
of Financial Economics 6:103–126.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, I. Shaliastovich, and A. Yaron. 2014. Volatility, the Macroeconomy, and
Asset Prices. Journal of Finance Forthcoming.
Bansal, R., and C. Lundblad. 2002. Market Efficiency, Asset Returns, and the Size of the Risk
Premium in Global Equity Markets. Journal of Econometrics 109:195–237.
Basu, S. 1983. The Relationship between Earnings’ Yield, Market Value and Return for NYSE
Common Stocks: Further Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 12:129–156.
Belo, F., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. Goldstein. 2014. Dividend Dynamics and the Term Structure
of Dividend Strips. Journal of Finance Forthcoming.
Binsbergen, J.V., M. W. Brandt, and R. Koijen. 2012. On the Timing and Pricing of Dividends.
American Economic Review 102:1596–1618.
Binsbergen, J.V., W. Hueskes, R. Koijen, and E. Vrugt. 2013. Equity Yields. Journal of Financial
Economics 110:503–519.
Binsbergen, J.V., and R. Koijen. 2010. Predictive Regressions: A Present-Value Approach.
Journal of Finance 65:1439–71.
33

Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou. 2009. Expected Stock Returns and Variance Risk
Premia. Review of Financial Studies 22:4463–4492.
Boyd, J., J. Hu, and R. Jagannathan. 2005. The Stock Market’s Reaction to Unemployment
News: Why Bad News Is Usually Good for Stocks. Journal of Finance 60:649–672.
Bradshaw, M., and R. Sloan. 2002. GAAP versus the Street: An Empirical Assessment of Two
Alternative Definitions of Earnings. Journal of Accounting Research 40:41–66.
Campbell, J., and R. Shiller. 1988. The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dividends and Discount Factors. Review of Financial Studies 1:195–228.
Campbell, J., and S. Thompson. 2008. Predicting Excess Stock Returns Out of Sample: Can
Anything Beat the Historical Average? Review of Financial Studies 21:1509–1531.
Chan, L., J. Karceski, and J. Lakonishok. 2003. The Level and Persistence of Growth Rates.
Journal of Finance 58:643–684.
Chen, L., Z. Da, and X. Zhao. 2013. What Drives Stock Price Movement? Review of Financial
Studies 26:841–876.
Clark, T., and K. West. 2007. Approximately Normal Tests for Equal Predictive Accuracy in
Nested Models. Journal of Econometrics 138:291–311.
Claus, J., and J. Thomas. 2001. Equity Premia as Low as Three Percent? Evidence from Analysts’ Earnings Forecasts for Domestic and International Stock Markets. Journal of Finance
56:1629–1666.
da Silva, A., and R. Jagannathan. 2001. Forecasting Earnings and Dividends on Benchmark
Stock Portfolios. Working paper, Northwestern University.
Daniel, K., and S. Titman. 2006. Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible Information.
Journal of Finance 61:1605–1643.
Diether, K., C. Malloy, and A. Scherbina. 2002. Differences of Opinion and the Cross Section of
Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 57:2113–2141.

34

Drechsler, I., and A. Yaron. 2011. What’s Vol Got to Do with It. Review of Financial Studies
24:1–45.
Fama, E., and K. French. 1988. Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 22:3–25.
Fama, E., and K. French. 1997. Industry Costs of Equity. Journal of Financial Economics
43:153–193.
Fama, E., and G. Schwert. 1977. Asset Returns and Inflation. Journal of Financial Economics
5:115–146.
Golez, B. 2014. Expected Returns and Dividend Growth Rates Implied by Derivative Markets.
Review of Financial Studies 27:790–822.
Gordon, M. 1962. The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the Corporation (Homewood, IL:
R. D. Irwin).
Guan, J., and J. Parker. 2014. Predicting the Equity Premium using Macroeconomic Data.
Working Paper, Georgia State University.
Harvey, D.I., S.J. Leybourne, and P. Newbold. 1998. Tests for Forecast Encompassing. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics 16:254–259.
Hou, K., G. Karolyi, and B. Kho. 2011. What Factors Drive Global Stock Returns? Review of
Financial Studies 24:2527–2574.
Ince, O., and R.Porter. 2006. Individual Equity Return Data From Thomson Datastream: Handle
with Care! Journal of Financial Research 29:463–479.
Ivkovic, Z., and N. Jegadeesh. 2004. The Timing and Value of Forecast and Recommendation
Revisions Journal of Financial Economics 73:433–463.
Jagannathan, R., E. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina. 2000. The Declining U.S. Equity Premium.
Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 24:3–19.
Kacperczyk M., S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and L. Veldkamp. 2014. Time-Varying Fund Manager
Skill. Journal of Finance 69:1455–1484.
35

Kelly, B., and S. Pruitt. 2013. Market Expectations in the Cross-Section of Present Values.
Journal of Finance 68:1721–1756.
Kim, S. 2013. Asset Prices in Turbulent Markets with Rare Disasters. Working Paper, Georgia
Institute of Technology.
Lacerda, F., and P. Santa-Clara. 2010. Forecasting Dividend Growth to Better Predict Returns.
Working Paper, University of Chicago and Universidade Nova de Lisboa.
Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson. 2005. Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth? Journal
of Financial Economics 76:583–626.
Li, Y., D. Ng, and B. Swaminathan. 2013. Predicting Market Returns Using Aggregate Implied
Cost of Capital, Journal of Financial Economics 110:419–436.
Ljungqvist, A., C. Malloy, and F. Marston. 2009. Rewriting History. Journal of Finance 64:1935–
1960.
Miller, M., and F. Modigliani. 1961. Dividend Policy, Growth, and the Valuation of Shares.
Journal of Business 34:411–433.
Newey, W., and K. West. 1987. A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econometrica 55:703–708.
Pastor, L., M. Sinha, and B. Swaminathan. 2008. Estimating the Intertemporal Risk-Return
Tradeoff Using the Implied Cost of Capital. Journal of Finance 63:2859–2897.
Welch. I., and A. Goyal. 2008. A Comprehensive Look at the Empirical Performance of Equity
Premium Prediction. Review of Financial Studies 21:1455–1508.

36

Appendix A: Term structure of equity returns
Following Pastor, Sinha, and Swaminathan (2008), we assume that the conditional expected
return, µt ≡ Et (rt+1 ), follows a stationary AR(1) process:

µt+1 = a + bµt + ut+1 , 0 < b < 1, ut+1 ∼ N (0, σu2 ).
From equation (2), it is easy to show that:


1
a
a
syt =
+ µt −
.
(1 − b)(1 − ρ)
1 − b 1 − ρb
In other words, sy is an affine transformation of the next-period expected return, µt . µ turns out
to be the one factor that drives the entire equity term structure in this simple case. For example,
the next-two-period expected return per period is:

er2 =
=
=

Et (rt+1 + rt+2 )
2
µt + Et (µt+1 )
2
a + (1 + b)µt
.
2

In general, the n-period expected return per period is:
a
1 1 − bn
ern =
+
1−b n 1−b
When n → ∞, ern →

a
1−b ,



a
µt −
1−b


.

or the unconditional expected return. Importantly, these future expected

returns are all functions of µ and can therefore be predicted by sy.

Appendix B: Simulated p-values
We illustrate our simulation procedure using a bivariate regression where the predictive variables
are sy and BM .
Define a 3 × 1 column vector Zt = [rt , syt , BMt ]0 . We first estimate a first-order VAR: Zt+1 =
A0 + A1 Zt + ut+1 . We impose the null hypothesis of no return predictability by setting the slope
37

coefficients of the rt equation to zero and the intercept of the equation to the empirical mean of rt .
The fitted VAR is then used to generate T observations of the simulated variables [rt , syt , BMt ]0 .
The initial observations are drawn from a multivariate normal distribution of the three variables
with mean and covariance matrix set to their empirical counterparts. Once the initial observations
are chosen, the subsequent T-1 simulated observations are generated from the fitted VAR with
the shocks bootstrapped from the actual VAR residuals (sampling without replacement). These
simulated data are then used to run a bivariate return predictive regression to produce regression
coefficients.
We repeat the process 50,000 times to obtain the empirical distribution of the regression coefficients (under the null of no predictability), which in turn produce the p-values associated with our
actual estimated coefficients.

Appendix C: Return predictability of stock yield (sy) at different lags
We investigate the out-of-sample return predictability of sy at different lags. Specifically, we
report below the OOS-R2 associated with predicting the next-one-month stock market return using
sy lagged by 1 month, 2 months, ..., and up to 24 months. The out-of-sample period ranges from
1999 through 2012. *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

Lag

OOS-R2

Lag

OOS-R2

Lag

OOS-R2

Lag

OOS-R2

1

-0.10

7

2.24**

13

4.01***

19

-0.59

2

0.44

8

2.92***

14

2.78**

20

-0.70

3

-0.13

9

2.76***

15

2.48**

21

-0.40

4

0.48

10

3.22***

16

2.36**

22

-1.52

5

0.91*

11

3.90***

17

1.35*

23

-1.59

6

1.13*

12

4.45***

18

0.57

24

-2.02

We see a hump-shaped relation between the out-of-sample R2 and the number of lags in sy.
Initially, the OOS-R2 s is low and negative until lag 5 when it becomes positive and significant
(0.91%). It is positive and significant for all lags between 5 and 17. Interestingly, it peaks at a lag
equal to exactly one year with a value as high as 4.45%! After lag 18, OOS-R2 becomes negative
again. Overall, sy does the best job when predicting future monthly stock returns centering around
one year.
38

It is not too surprising that sy does not the beat historical average in predicting stock returns
far into the future (beyond 18 months). It is somewhat puzzling that sy also underperforms in
predicting returns in the near future. Such an underperformance could arise from the strong shortterm momentum in the market return. After a recent rise in the stock market, valuation ratios
including sy would go down. Short-term momentum, however, would predict a higher return in the
near future, offsetting the usual positive relation between the current valuation ratio and future
stock returns, and reducing the return predictive power.
Rather than arbitrarily choosing a particular lag in sy for the out-of-sample test, we follow Li,
Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) and use a two-year backward moving average of sy. The results in
this appendix suggest that as long as the length of the rolling window covers at least one year, the
resulting moving average sy should do a good job in the out-of-sample tests.

39

Figure 1: Dividend-to-Price Ratio (dp) vs. Augmented Dividend-to-Price Ratio (dp +
1.4g)
The figure plots the log dividend-to-price ratio (dp) against the augmented ratio (dp + 1.4g) at the market level,
where g is the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate. The sample period is January 1977 through December
2012.
‐1

‐1.5

‐2

‐2.5

‐3

dp
aug dp

‐3.5

‐4

‐4.5

40

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

‐5

Figure 2: Implied Cost of Capital (ICC) vs. Stock Yield (sy)
The figure plots the implied cost of capital (ICC) against the stock yield (sy) at the market level. sy is the stock
yield measure, calculated as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g), where dp is the log value of the dividend-to-price ratio, and g is
the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate. ICC is the continuously compounded implied cost of capital. The
sample period is January 1977 through December 2012.
25

20

15

ICC (%)
sy (%)
10

5

41

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

0

Figure 3: Implied Cost of Capital (ICC), Stock Yield (sy), and Average Return in the
Next Four Years
The figure plots the implied cost of capital (ICC), the stock yield (sy), and the average monthly continuously
compounded return in the next four years at the market level.

sy is the stock yield measure, calculated as

0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g), where dp is the log value of the dividend-to-price ratio, and g is the log value of forecasted
earnings growth rate. ICC is the continuously compounded implied cost of capital. The sample period is January
1977 through December 2012.
25

20

15

10
RET (%)
ICC (%)
5

sy (%)

0

‐5

‐10

42

Figure 4: Out-of-sample R2 s: Dividend-to-Price Ratio (dp) vs. Stock Yield (sy)
The figure plots the out-of-sample R2 s of predicting next one-month returns by the log dividend-to-price ratio (dp)
and the stock yield (sy) at the market level for different starting points of the out-of-sample period. sy is calculated
as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g), where g is the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate. For a specific out-of-sample
starting point month t, the in-sample period is January 1977 through month t-1, and the out-of-sample period is
month t through December 2012.
0.04

0.03

0.02

dp

0.01

sy
0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

‐0.01

‐0.02

Out‐of‐sample starting year

43

2005

2006

2007

Figure 5: In-Sample Predictions: Good Times vs. Bad Times
The figure plots realized one-year returns against predicted one-year returns by stock yield for “good times” and “bad
times” separately. “Good times” and “bad times” are categorized according to the Chicago Fed National Activity
Index (CFNAI), which measures overall economic activity. Each calendar month in the sample period is placed in
one of two groups based on the CFNAI in that month: “good times” are those with above-median CFNAIs, and “bad
times” are those with below-median CFNAIs.

Low‐CFNAI Months
60

Realized 1‐year return

40
20
0
‐15

‐5

5

15

25

35

45

‐20
‐40
R² = 0.2609

‐60
‐80

Predicted 1‐year return

High‐CFNAI months
45

Realized 1‐year return

35
25
15
5
‐5 8
‐15

9

10

11

12

13

‐25

15

R² = 0.011

‐35
‐45

14

Predicted 1‐year return

44

16

Figure 6: Out-of-Sample R2 s: Original BK and Extended BK
The figure plots the out-of-sample R2 s of predicting monthly market returns according to the original Binsbergen and
Koijen (2010) model (Original BK) and its extension with stock yield (Extended BK). We vary the starting points
(month t) of the out-of-sample period from January 1999 to December 2007, using the period January 1977 to month
t-1 as the in-sample period and the period month t to December 2012 as the out-of-sample period.

0.05
0.045
0.04
0.035
0.03
Extended BK

0.025

Original BK
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

45

2005

2006

2007

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Market Return Predictors
This table reports summary statistics of the main predictive variables used in this paper. dp is the log value of the
dividend-to-price ratio; g is the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate; sy is the stock yield measure, calculated
as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g); BM is the log value of the book-to-market ratio; EP is the log value of the earnings-toprice ratio; CAP E is Shiller’s cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio; T erm is the term spread, calculated as
the difference between the AAA-rated corporate bond yield and the one-month T-bill yield; Def ault is the default
spread, calculated as the difference between yields of BAA-rated and AAA-rated corporate bonds; T -Bill is the
continuously compounded one-month Treasury bill rate; T -Bond is the continuously compounded yield on 30-year
Treasury bonds; ICC is the continuously compounded implied cost of capital of the value-weighted market portfolio.
All return, spread, and yield variables are expressed in annualized percentages. The sample period is January 1977
– December 2012. We report mean, standard deviation, and autocorrelations of predictive variables in Panel A, and
correlations between predictive variables in Panel B.
Panel A: Mean, standard deviation, and autocorrelation

dp
g
sy(%)
BM
EP
CAPE
Term (%)
Default (%)
T-Bill (%)
T-Bond (%)
ICC (%)

Mean

Std

AR(1), 1y

AR(1), 2y

AR(1), 3y

AR(1), 4y

-3.57
0.24
12.85
-0.45
-2.80
20.20
3.08
1.11
5.07
6.85
11.38

0.34
0.24
2.35
0.27
0.43
9.11
1.61
0.48
3.38
2.46
2.87

0.848
0.294
0.546
0.799
0.718
0.921
0.453
0.471
0.820
0.903
0.905

0.725
-0.180
0.175
0.670
0.528
0.806
0.105
0.291
0.639
0.830
0.790

0.656
-0.158
0.161
0.558
0.489
0.694
-0.282
0.210
0.500
0.781
0.672

0.560
-0.186
0.154
0.455
0.393
0.599
-0.425
0.095
0.424
0.705
0.586

Panel B: Correlations

g
sy
BM
EP
CAPE
Term
Default
T-Bill
T-Bond
ICC

dp

g

sy

BM

EP

CAPE

Term

Default

T-Bill

T-Bond

-0.045
0.693
0.927
0.760
-0.944
-0.010
0.558
0.450
0.587
0.799

0.689
0.007
-0.593
-0.086
0.346
-0.027
-0.067
0.143
0.172

0.678
0.123
-0.747
0.242
0.386
0.278
0.529
0.704

0.717
-0.926
0.091
0.611
0.304
0.460
0.729

-0.712
-0.340
0.416
0.530
0.491
0.584

-0.009
-0.531
-0.484
-0.660
-0.859

0.199
-0.582
-0.234
0.007

0.237
0.334
0.550

0.882
0.678

0.870

46

Table 2: Cash Flow Predictive Power of Analyst-Forecast-Implied Growth Rate (g)
This table examines the predictive power of the analyst-forecast-implied growth rate, g, for log annual earnings
growth rates and log dividend growth rates over the next one-, three-, and five-year horizons. The sample period is
January 1977 – December 2012. All regressions use overlapping monthly observations. For each regression, we report
the slope coefficient, p-value, and adjusted R2 . The p-values of individual regression coefficients and the average
coefficient are obtained by comparing the test statistics with their empirical distribution generated under the null of
no predictability from five 5,000 trials of a Monte Carlo simulation as described in the Appendix.

Earnings Growth
1-Year
3-Year
5-Year

Dividend Growth
2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R

1.17
0.45
0.26

0.00
0.00
0.00

80.2%
73.5%
75.0%

47

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

0.07
0.10
0.07

0.16
0.05
0.03

5.0%
22.2%
19.6%

48

with their empirical distribution generated under the null of no predictability from five thousand trials of a Monte Carlo simulation as described in the Appendix.

across four horizons and its p-value. The p-values of individual regression coefficients and the average coefficient are obtained by comparing the test statistics

For each regression, we report the slope coefficient, Newey-West HAC t-value, p-value, and adjusted R2 . We also report the average value of regression coefficients

variables are expressed in annualized percentages. The sample period is January 1977 – December 2012. All regressions use overlapping monthly observations.

yield on 30-year Treasury bonds; ICC is the continuously compounded implied cost of capital of the value-weighted market portfolio. All return, spread, and yield

of BAA-rated and AAA-rated corporate bonds; T -Bill is the continuously compounded one-month Treasury bill rate; T -Bond is the continuously compounded

difference between the AAA-rated corporate bond yield and the one-month T-bill yield; Def ault is the default spread, calculated as the difference between yields

ratio; EP is the log value of the earnings-to-price ratio; CAP E is Shiller’s cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio; T erm is the term spread, calculated as the

is the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate; sy is the stock yield measure, calculated as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g); BM is the log value of the book-to-market

average continuously compounded market return in the future, ranging from one-year to four-year horizons. dp is the log value of the dividend-to-price ratio; g

This table reports results of in-sample univariate regressions of market returns on stock yield and other predictive variables. The dependent variable is the

Table 3: In-Sample Regression of Market Returns on Stock Yield and Other Predictors

49

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

NW-t

Coeff
1.51
2.43
3.00
3.94

0.74
1.16
1.62
1.34

1.5
1.7
1.7
1.8
1.7

p-value

0.13
0.12
0.10
0.09
0.11
Term

p-value

BM

0.17
0.18
0.18
0.16
0.16

p-value

dp

0.12
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.09

p-value

0.32
0.19
0.12
0.16
0.18
T-Bond

NW-t

0.8
1.2
1.4
1.1
1.1

Coeff

2.57
2.50
3.14
4.65

NW-t

Coeff

20.3
19.1
18.3
17.2
18.7

2.79
2.70
3.44
5.85

NW-t

16.4
15.1
14.0
13.8
14.8

Coeff

1.6
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.6

Coeff

Adj R2
4.4%
11.5%
18.0%
29.2%

5.3
4.0
3.9
4.4
4.4

Coeff

Adj R2
0.4%
2.8%
6.2%
4.9%

7.0
6.4
5.8
5.2
6.1

Coeff

11.3
11.1
11.2
12.3
11.5

Coeff

10.5%
20.8%
30.6%
37.2%

Adj R

2

11.1%
21.1%
29.1%
39.0%

Adj R2

1.92
2.46
3.06
4.17

NW-t

1.35
1.27
1.29
1.36

NW-t

1.41
1.45
1.44
1.49

NW-t

1.29
1.61
1.95
2.32

NW-t

0.18
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.13

p-value

0.22
0.28
0.27
0.21
0.23
ICC

p-value

0.27
0.29
0.30
0.32
0.29
Default

p-value

EP

0.12
0.11
0.08
0.05
0.08

p-value

g

6.9%
17.7%
28.4%
40.8%

Adj R2

2.1%
2.6%
4.1%
6.5%

Adj R2

3.0%
5.7%
7.6%
8.5%

Adj R2

2.4%
5.4%
8.7%
14.3%

Adj R2

0.6
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.6

Coeff

-0.6
-0.6
-0.6
-0.6
-0.6

Coeff

2.6
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.5

Coeff

0.92
1.74
1.88
2.45

NW-t

-2.30
-2.83
-4.20
-7.11

NW-t

2.87
2.78
3.90
6.07

NW-t

0.21
0.25
0.23
0.13
0.19

p-value

0.53
0.56
0.57
0.55
0.55
T-bill

p-value

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02
CAPE

p-value

sy

1.3%
1.9%
2.9%
8.6%

Adj R2

9.3%
23.8%
37.2%
46.2%

Adj R2

13.0%
25.9%
37.8%
53.5%

Adj R2

Table 4: In-Sample Regression of Market Returns on Stock Yield: Robustness Checks
This table reports results of robustness checks of in-sample regressions of market returns on stock yield and other
predictive variables. The dependent variable is the average continuously compounded market return in the future,
ranging from one-year to four-year horizons. The stock yield measure, sy, is calculated as 0.29+0.05(dp + beta × g),
where dp is the log value of the dividend-to-price ratio, g is the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate and
beta is a constant. In the baseline measurement of sy, we take the beta value of 1.4, measure dp and g from the
value-weighted all-firm portfolio, and calculate g based on IBES median forecasts for the next one-year period and
most recent realized EPS from Compustat. In Panel A, we define sy in various alternative ways by: 1) changing
the value of beta; 2) measuring dp and g from the S&P500 portfolio; 3) using the most recent realized EPS from
IBES to calculate g; 4) using IBES highest or lowest EPS forecasts to calculate g; 5) using earnings forecasts for
the current fiscal year and next fiscal year to compute g, labeled as g2 ; 6) using analysts’ median long-term growth
(LTG) forecasts (available since 1982) for g. In Panel B, we compare the performances of sy and variance risk
premium measure in Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009) in predicting market returns in-sample, in both univariate
and bivariate regressions. The sample period is January 1977 – December 2012. All regressions use overlapping
monthly observations. For each regression, we report the slope coefficients, p-values and the adjusted R2 . We also
report the average regression coefficients across four horizons and their p-values. The p-values of individual regression
coefficients and the average coefficients are obtained by comparing the test statistics with their empirical distribution
generated under the null of no predictability from five thousand trials of a Monte Carlo simulation as described in
the Appendix.
Panel A: Various definitions of sy

dp+1.1g
1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

dp+3g

Coeff

p-value

Adj R

3.0
2.8
2.7
2.7
2.8

0.05
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.03

Coeff
3.4
3.1
3
2.9
3.1

2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

8.6%
17.7%
26.6%
39.2%

2.8
2.9
2.8
2.8
2.8

0.05
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02

11.7%
28.0%
40.7%
58.4%

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02

13.3%
26.4%
38.0%
53.5%

2.5
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.4

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.03

12.5%
25.3%
37.0%
52.8%

Coeff

p-value

Adj R

13.9%
27.4%
39.6%
55.5%

1.3
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.02

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

0.11
0.11
0.09
0.08
0.09

11.2%
21.1%
31.6%
43.4%

2.7
2.5
2.4
2.4
2.5

sy ibes
1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

sy low

dp+1.4g2
1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

sy sp
2

sy high

dp+1.4LTG (1982–2012)
2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R

3.1
3.0
2.8
2.9
3.0

0.07
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.04

9.6%
20.3%
28.3%
39.9%

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

3.9
3.4
3.1
3.2
3.4

0.20
0.23
0.22
0.18
0.20

12.6%
20.2%
27.7%
37.9%

50

Panel B: Variance risk premium

sy

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

vrp
2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

0.2
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.00
0.01
0.15
0.87
0.03

3.0%
2.0%
0.1%
0.0%

Coeff

p-value

Adj R

2.6
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.5

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.03

12.7%
22.1%
32.0%
47.7%

sy

p-value

vrp

p-value

Adj R2

2.5
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.4

0.08
0.06
0.05
0.03
0.04

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.01
0.02
0.21
0.83
0.04

15.2%
23.6%
32.0%
47.8%

51

Table 5: In-Sample Regression of Market Returns on Stock Yield: U.S. Portfolio-Level
and International Results
Panel A reports results of in-sample univariate regressions of portfolio return on stock yield for various portfolios
of U.S. stocks formed on book-to-market ratio, size, and industry basis. We form three book-to-market ratio (size)
portfolios based on NYSE 30 and 70 percentile values of book-to-market ratio (market capitalization). We form five
industry portfolios following the industry classification scheme in Fama and French (1997). The dependent variable
is the average continuously compounded portfolio return in the future, ranging from one-year to four-year horizons.
The stock yield measure, sy, is calculated as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g), where dp and g are the log values of the dividendto-price ratio and forecasted earnings growth rate, respectively, for the corresponding portfolio. The sample period
is January 1977 – December 2012. All regressions use overlapping monthly observations. For each regression, we
report the slope coefficient, p-value, and the adjusted R2 . We also report the average regression coefficient across
four horizons and its p-values.
Panel B reports results of in-sample univariate regressions of aggregate stock portfolio return on stock yield for the six
other G7 countries. The dependent variable is the average continuously compounded monthly return in the future,
ranging from one-year to four-year horizons, for the aggregate stock market of a country. The stock yield measure, sy,
is calculated as 0.29+0.05(dp+1.4g), where dp and g are the log values of the dividend-to-price ratio and forecasted
earnings growth rate respectively for the corresponding country aggregate stock portfolio. To ensure meaningful
measurements, we require a minimum of 50 stocks included in the calculation of every variable for aggregate stock
portfolio. The sample period starts in January 1985 for Canada, January 1988 for France and Germany, July 1990
for Italy, September 1988 for Japan, and June 1990 for the United Kingdom, and ends in December 2012 for all
countries. All regressions use overlapping monthly observations. For each regression, we report the slope coefficient,
p-value, and the adjusted R2 . We also report the average regression coefficient across four horizons and its p-values.
The p-values of individual regression coefficients and the average coefficient are obtained by comparing the test
statistics with their empirical distribution generated under the null of no predictability from 5,000 trials of a Monte
Carlo simulation as described in the Appendix.

52

Panel A: Portfolio-level results

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

1-year
2-year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

5.1
4.4
3.8
3.6
4.2

Growth
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02

20.1%
34.5%
39.2%
52.1%

2.6
2.4
2.5
2.9
2.6

Middle
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01

10.2%
18.0%
30.8%
48.3%

2.1
1.8
1.6
1.7
1.8

Value
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01

10.3%
19.1%
29.3%
45.8%

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1.1
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.1

Small
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.04

4.2%
12.4%
17.5%
21.4%

2.2
1.6
1.4
1.6
1.7

Medium
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.02

16.2%
23.6%
28.6%
44.8%

2.8
2.8
2.7
2.7
2.8

Large
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.03

13.1%
27.7%
40.3%
56.2%

2.1
2.4
2.4
2.6
2.4

Consumer
0.11
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.04

1.7
1.5
1.4
1.5
1.5

Manuf
0.11
0.13
0.13
0.09
0.10

6.2%
12.1%
19.5%
33.0%

2.9
2.8
2.5
2.6
2.7

HiTec
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.02

11.4%
21.5%
27.9%
43.7%

4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.5

Hlth
0.08
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.03

2.6
1.8
1.9
2.7
2.2

Other
0.02
0.06
0.04
0.00
0.01

11.0%
12.4%
20.9%
39.0%

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

9.5%
29.3%
45.3%
65.3%

12.6%
25.8%
39.3%
52.9%

53

Panel B: International results

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

Coeff

p-value

Adj R2

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

1.2
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.0

Canada
0.11
0.17
0.11
0.10
0.10

4.8%
7.8%
19.6%
25.9%

1.1
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.7

France
0.31
0.14
0.05
0.09
0.11

1.1%
8.0%
23.4%
18.8%

2.6
2.3
2.3
1.5
2.2

Germany
0.07
0.06
0.03
0.09
0.04

7.0%
13.3%
23.6%
15.0%

1-Year
2-Year
3-Year
4-Year
Avg

0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8

Italy
0.23
0.17
0.12
0.09
0.12

1.3%
3.1%
5.8%
7.5%

0.8
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.7

Japan
0.14
0.30
0.12
0.05
0.11

3.6%
1.3%
7.6%
22.0%

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.7

UK
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.02

8.8%
13.6%
22.6%
26.6%

54

55
DP

0.19

-3.46

G

Market excess return
R2 (%)
0.42
-3.16
p-value
0.21
U gain
0.96
-3.12

Market return
R2 (%)
1.20
p-value
0.09
U gain
4.86

Statistics

Panel A: Next one-month market return

is January 1977 – December 1998.

1.17
0.04
4.50

2.10
0.03
8.38

SY

0.46
0.19
0.72

0.76
0.16
3.16

BM

-0.07
0.90

-0.84

0.91
0.03
2.40

CAPE

-0.37

0.02
0.22
2.97

EP

-2.07

-1.05

0.38

-0.99

Term

-1.10

-0.78

0.47

-1.11

Default

-2.33

-1.13

0.48

-0.43

T-Bill

-1.87

-1.63

0.67

-0.61

T-Bond

1.43
0.05
5.42

1.01
0.07
3.72

ICC

consistency, we also subtract the yield of one-month T-bill from sy and ICC. The out-of-sample period is January 1999 – December 2012, and the training period

the results of predicting market excess return, which is continuously compounded market return minus the continuously compounded one-month T-bill rate. For

is corrected for the serial correlation using the Newey-West formula with a lag of 11 (the number of overlapping observations). In each panel, we also report

variables are defined in the same way as in Panel A, except for sy and ICC which take the original value rather than the 24-month moving average. The p-value

is constrained to lie between zero and 1.5 (inclusive). In Panel B, the market return to predict is next one-year continuously compounded return. All predictive

three by forecasting returns using a particular predictive variable rather than the historical average benchmark. The weight on stocks in the investor’s portfolio

Campbell and Thompson (2008), the utility gain (Ugain) is the additional utility to an investor with mean-variance preferences and a risk aversion coefficient of

we report out-of-sample R2 and related statistics. We calculate the p-value of OOS R2 from the adjusted-MSPE statistic of Clark and West (2007). Following

and ICC are calculated as their 24-month moving average. All return, spread and yield variables are expressed in annualized percentages. For each predictor,

(T -Bill), the continuously compounded yield on 30-year Treasury bonds (T -Bond), the continuously compounded aggregate implied cost of capital (ICC). sy

cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings ratio (CAP E), the term spread (T erm), the default spread (Def ault), the continuously compounded one-month T-bill rate

the log value of forecasted earnings growth rate (g), the log value of the book-to-market ratio (BM ), the log value of the earnings-to-price ratio (EP ), Shiller’s

predict is next one-month continuously compounded return. The predictive variables include: stock yield (sy), the log value of the dividend-to-price ratio (dp),

This table reports results of out-of-sample prediction of market returns based on stock yield and other predictive variables. In Panel A, the market return to

Table 6: Out-of-Sample Prediction of Market Returns based on Stock Yield and Other Predictors

56

DP

-2.42

G

Market excess return
R2 (%)
0.21
-0.58
p-value
0.34

Market return
R2 (%)
9.73
p-value
0.01

Statistics

Panel B: Next one-year market return

8.96
0.02

9.83
0.02

SY

5.57
0.03

11.13
0.01

BM

-6.89

-2.75

EP

-6.06

6.07
0.05

CAPE

1.75
0.21

-1.12

Term

-0.22

2.47
0.11

Default

-4.81

-1.15

T-Bill

-7.64

1.20
0.21

T-Bond

6.87
0.03

5.17
0.06

ICC

Table 7: Out-of-Sample Regressions: Factors Extracted from the Cross-Section
This table reports results of out-of-sample prediction of market returns based on a single forecasting factor extracted
from the cross-section of stock yield and other predictive variables. For example, to extract a market return predictor
from sy, we first form size-sy portfolios based on a two-way conditional sort on market capitalization and sy, then
calculate the portfolio-level sy, and finally run the three-stage regressions in Kelly and Pruitt (2013) to generate
the out-of-sample predictor of market return (KP -sy). Similarly, we generate the out-of-sample predictor of market
return (KP -DP ) from the log dividend-to-price ratios (DP ) of portfolios formed based on a two-way conditional
sort on market capitalization and DP . We use the data since January 1977 to generate both KP -sy and KP -DP .
For comparison, we also follow Kelly and Pruitt (2013) exactly to extract a return predictor (KP -BM ) from the
log book-to-market ratios BM of Fama-French portfolios, using the data since January 1930. Finally, for ease of
comparison, we reproduce the results from Table 6 using the market-level sy, DP , and BM . For each generated OOS
predictor, we calculate the out-of-sample R2 of predicting market returns and its p-value. The out-of-sample period
is January 1999 – December 2012. We calculate the p-value of OOS R2 from the adjusted-MSPE statistic of Clark
and West (2007), and correct it for the serial correlation using the Newey-West formula with a lag of 11 (the number
of overlapping observations) when predicting next one-year returns.

predictor

horizon

6 portfolios
R2 (%)
p-value

25 portfolios
R2 (%)
p-value

KP sy

1-month
1-year

2.70
11.66

0.03
0.06

2.71
19.49

0.03
0.03

2.10
9.83

0.03
0.02

KP DP

1-month
1-year

1.41
5.06

0.12
0.11

1.47
9.57

0.12
0.07

1.20
9.73

0.09
0.01

KP BM

1-month
1-year

1.58
13.15

0.03
0.05

1.47
14.11

0.04
0.03

0.76
11.13

0.16
0.01

57

market
R2 (%)
p-value

