                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MONETARY POLICY AND DEBT FRAGILITY

                                         Antoine Camous
                                         Russell Cooper

                                       Working Paper 20650
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20650


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2014




Thanks to Costas Azariadis, Marco Bassetto, Piero Gottardi, Immo Schott, Ramon Marimon and seminar
participants at the Pennsylvania State University, European University Institute, Rimini Center For
Economic Analysis (RCEF 2014), XIX Workshop On Macroeconomics Dynamics, Congress of the
European Economic Association 2014, the Fall 2014 CU/PSU Macroeconomics Conference, the EUI
Alumni Conference 2014 and the University of Mannheim. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Antoine Camous and Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Debt Fragility
Antoine Camous and Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 20650
October 2014, Revised July 2015
JEL No. E42,E58,E63,F33

                                             ABSTRACT

The valuation of government debt is subject to strategic uncertainty, stemming from investors' sentiments.
Pessimistic lenders, fearing default, bid down the price of debt. This leaves a government with a higher
debt burden, increasing the likelihood of default and thus confirming the pessimism of lenders. This
paper studies the interaction of monetary policy and debt fragility. It asks: do monetary interventions
mitigate debt fragility? The answer depends in part on the nature of monetary policy, particularly the
ability of the monetary authority to commit to future state contingent actions. With commitment to
a state contingent policy, the monetary authority can indeed overcome strategic uncertainty. Under
discretion, debt fragility remains unless reputation effects are sufficiently strong.


Antoine Camous
Department of Economics
European University Institute
Via della Piazzuola, 43
50133 Firenze, Italy
antoine.camous@eui.eu

Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
                              Monetary Policy and Debt Fragility∗

                                       Antoine Camous†, Russell Cooper‡

                                                    July 24, 2015



                                                        Abstract

          The valuation of government debt is subject to strategic uncertainty, stemming from investors’ sen-
       timents. Pessimistic lenders, fearing default, bid down the price of debt. This leaves a government with
       a higher debt burden, increasing the likelihood of default and thus confirming the pessimism of lenders.
       This paper studies the interaction of monetary policy and debt fragility. It asks: do monetary interven-
       tions mitigate debt fragility? The answer depends in part on the nature of monetary policy, particularly
       the ability of the monetary authority to commit to future state contingent actions. With commitment
       to a state contingent policy, the monetary authority can indeed overcome strategic uncertainty. Under
       discretion, debt fragility remains unless reputation effects are sufficiently strong.

     Keywords: monetary policy, seignorage, inflation, sovereign debt, self-fulfilling debt crisis, sunspot equi-
libria.


     JEL classification: E42, E58, E63, F33.




1      Introduction
       But there is another message I want to tell you. Within our mandates, the ECB is ready to do
       whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it will be enough.              [Mario Draghi, July
               1
       2012]

     This paper studies the interaction of fiscal and monetary policy in the presence of strategic uncertainty
over the value of government debt. In real economies, beliefs of investors about the likelihood of government
default, and hence the value of its debt, can be self-fulfilling. Pessimistic investors, fearing government
    ∗ Thanks   to Costas Azariadis, Marco Bassetto, Piero Gottardi, Immo Schott, Ramon Marimon and seminar participants
at the Pennsylvania State University, European University Institute, Rimini Center For Economic Analysis (RCEF 2014),
XIX Workshop On Macroeconomics Dynamics, Congress of the European Economic Association 2014, the Fall 2014 CU/PSU
Macroeconomics Conference, the EUI Alumni Conference 2014 and the University of Mannheim.
   † Department of Economics, European University Institute, antoine.camous@eui.eu
   ‡ Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University, russellcoop@gmail.com
   1 This statement is an excerpt from the address of Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at a financial

conference, in July 2012.


                                                             1
default, will only purchase government debt if there is a sufficient risk premium. The resulting increase in
the cost of funds makes default more likely.2 Pessimism can be self-fulfilling even if fundamentals are sound
enough that an equilibrium without default exists as well.
   These results hold for real economies, in which the intervention of a monetary authority is not considered.
Does this debt fragility exist in a nominal economy? The presence of a monetary authority can provide an
alternative source of revenue through an inflation tax and perhaps use its influence to stabilize real interest
rates. Can the monetary authority act to eliminate strategic uncertainty over the value of sovereign debt? If
so, will it have an incentive to do so? The answers to these questions are relevant for assessing the relevance
of these results on strategic uncertainty in debt markets and for guidance on the conduct of monetary policy.
   The overlapping generations model with active fiscal and monetary interventions provides a framework
for analysis. The model is structured to highlight strategic uncertainty in the pricing of government debt
stemming from the default choice of a government. By construction, there is an equilibrium without default,
and in general there are other equilibria with state contingent default.
   The monetary authority intervenes through transfers to the fiscal entity, financed by an inflation tax.
The monetary intervention has a number of influences. First, the inflation tax delivers real resources to
the government, thus reducing the debt burden from taxation. Second, the realized value of inflation alters
the real value of debt and consequently the debt burden left to the fiscal authority. Third, it may impact
expectations of future inflation and thus the tax base for seignorage.
   Given these transfers and its outstanding obligations, the fiscal authority chooses to default or not. Our
analysis emphasizes the dependence of this default decision, and thus the extent of strategic uncertainty, on
the conduct of monetary policy. As our results develop, the capacity of the monetary authority to stabilize
sovereign debt markets relies on the interplay of the inflation and expectation channels, not on on the
collection of revenue from the inflation tax.
   We undertake the analysis under alternative monetary policy regimes. If there is complete discretion in
monetary policy or if the monetary authority commits to a strict inflation target, the strategic uncertainty
in the real economy is present in the monetary economy.
   However, if the monetary authority can commit to a particular state contingent transfer function, given
an inflation target, then its intervention can stabilize debt valuations. Specifically, this policy is designed to
eliminate all equilibria with state contingent default, preserving the one in which debt is risk-free. Interest-
ingly, this desired intervention does not “bail-out” the fiscal authority. Rather, the countercyclical nature
of this policy induces an accommodative fiscal stance in times of low productivity. This intervention leans
against negative sentiments of investors and preserves the fundamental price of debt.
   This policy is reminiscent of the commitment of the European Central Bank, reflected in the above quote
of Mario Draghi, to undertake whatever it takes to counter pessimistic self-fulfilling expectations on Eurozone
sovereign debt markets. Under the intervention we design, the central bank uses its commitment power to
have a stabilizing influence on sovereign’s debt valuations. In equilibrium, no actual intervention is required
and debt is uniquely valued. Moreover, this policy does not endanger the primary objective of the central
  2 This interaction between beliefs and default is central to Calvo (1988); and other contributions that followed, including

Cole and Kehoe (2000), Roch and Uhlig (2012) and Cooper (2012).



                                                             2
bank, to anchor inflation expectations around an inflation target.
   We present conditions such that this policy is credible, so that commitment to its implementation is
not needed. The implementation requires a punishment: we consider the case where a deviating monetary
authority returns to a strict inflation target regime. Not surprisingly, all else the same, a patient monetary
authority is less likely to deviate. But there is another element in the analysis: the higher the risk of self-
fulfilling debt crisis in the inflation target regime, the more credible is the promise of the central bank to
intervene ex post to counter pessimistic beliefs on debt valuation.
   Other analysis examine possible strategies for central banks to address self-fulling debt crises. Calvo
(1988) extends his real economy to include a discussion of inflation as a form of partial default. He imposes
an exogenous motive of money demand and an explicit cost of inflation function that affects net output.3
Calvo (1988) argues that there may exist multiple equilibria in the determination of inflation and the nominal
interest rate on government debt. For this analysis, there is no interaction between fiscal and monetary debt
repudiation.
   Corsetti and Dedola (2013) augments Calvo’s framework to study the interaction of fiscal and monetary
policy. Their analysis retains some of the central features of Calvo’s model, including exogenous money
demand and costly ex post inflation. They argue that monetary interventions through the printing press will
not generally resolve debt fragility. But, the central bank, through its holding of government debt, can have
a stabilizing influence.
   Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013) build a nominal economy with a debt roll-over crisis, as in
Cole and Kehoe (2000). They investigate the optimal degree of conservativeness of the central bank (as in
Rogoff (1985)) as a tool to address inefficient debt crisis. Moderate inflation aversion contains the occurrence
of self-fulfilling debt crisis and restrains the inflation bias in normal times.
   Our analysis differs from these others papers in a couple of fundamental ways: (i) endogenous money
demand and (ii) no assumed ex post costs of inflation. In particular, money demand in our model comes
from intertemporal savings of households and the cost of inflation occurs through the ex ante effect of
anticipated inflation on labor supply. The endogeneity of money demand is central to our results. Our
environment displays a complementarity between expected and realized inflation. Money demand reflects
expected inflation. The absence of an explicit ex post cost of inflation provides a strong incentive for ex post
inflation. With these two features, under discretion, the central bank can be cornered into a high inflation
equilibrium, unable to either inflate nominal debt or provide additional resources via seignorage, along with
a low inflation equilibrium.4 Accordingly, our analysis of fragility in debt markets builds upon the critical
need to anchor inflation expectations.
   The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the economic environment and the fiscal problem
of the government. Section 3 displays debt fragility in a benchmark real economy. Section 4 defines the
relevant equilibrium concept in the nominal economy and investigates the presence of debt fragility under two
monetary policy frameworks: delegation and discretion. Section 5 characterizes a monetary policy rule that
can eliminate debt fragility and presents conditions such that this strategy is credible. Section 6 concludes.
  3 Specifically, see equations (16) and (19) in Calvo (1988).
  4 This   feature of our model is similar to that explored in Chari, Christiano, and Eichenbaum (1998).



                                                               3
2       Economic Environment
Consider an overlapping generation economy with domestic and foreign agents. Agents live two periods.
Time is discrete and infinite.
    There are a couple of key components of the model. First, agents differ in productivity in young age and
form a demand for savings. Relatively poor agents hold money as a store of value rather than incurring a
cost to save through an intermediary. Importantly, money demand is endogenous, thus making the tax base
for seignorage dependent on inflation expectations of young agents.
    Second the government issues debt each period and faces a choice on how to finance the repayment of its
obligations. In particular, the government can tax labor income, print money or default on its debt.
    The environment is structured to highlight debt fragility: there are multiple self-fulfilling values of gov-
ernment debt. In this section, we describe the choices of private agents and the fiscal environment.


2.1     Private Agents
Every period, a continuum of mass 1 of domestic agents (households) is born and lives two periods. These
agents consume only when old and their preferences are linear in consumption and labor disutility is
quadratic. This restriction is introduced to neatly capture the reaction of agents to government policy
choices.
    Domestic agents produce a perishable good in both young and old age. Production is linear. In youth,
productivity is heterogenous. A mass ν m of agents have low productivity z m = 1. A mass ν I = 1 − ν m of
agents have high productivity z I = z > 1. In old age, productivity A is stochastic, i.i.d., and common to all
old agents.5
    Agents have access to two technologies to store value: money or financially intermediated claims. Access
to the latter is costly: agents pay a participation cost Γ for access to intermediaries. Limited financial market
participation sorts agents in two groups. For convenience, we will refer to poor agents, who will hold only
money in equilibrium, and rich agents, who hold intermediated claims in equilibrium. Intermediated claims
are invested either in nominal government bonds or in a risk-free asset, e.g. storage, that delivers a real
return R.


2.1.1      Poor Households

Poor households have low labor productivity z m = 1 in youth. Their savings between young and old age are
composed only of money holdings, whose real return is given by π̃ 0 , the inverse of the gross inflation rate.6
Their labor supply decisions in young and old age solve:


                                              max0 E u(c0 ) − g(n0 ) − g(n),
                                                                   
                                                                                                                            (1)
                                               n,n

   5 Formally, the distribution of A has full support on the closed and compact set [A , A ]. F (·) is the associated cumulative
                                                                                        l h
distribution function, and f (·) = F 0 (·).
   6 We verify later that these agents prefer to save via money rather than costly intermediaries in equilibrium.




                                                               4
subject to young and old age real budget constraints:


                                                     m=n                                                       (2)
                                                     c0 = A0 n0 (1 − τ 0 ) + mπ̃ 0 + t0 .                      (3)


   In youth, poor agents supply labor n and have real money holdings, m, carried on from young to old
age. Return on money is given by the gross inverse inflation rate π̃ 0 . In old age, poor agents supply labor
n0 , which is augmented by aggregate productivity A0 . τ 0 is the tax rate on labor income of old agents and
t0 ≥ 0 a possible lump-sum transfer. Denote by nm      m
                                                y and no the optimal labor supply decision of young and
                                                           n2
old poor agents. With u(c) = c and g(n) =                  2 ,   labor supply decisions are:

                                                      0            0      0
                                             nm               m
                                              y = E(π̃ ) and no = A (1 − τ ).                                  (4)


   Labor supply in both young and old age are driven by real returns to working. In youth, agents form
expectations π̃ e = E(π̃ 0 ), and supply labor accordingly: if agents expect high inflation, i.e. a low π̃ e , they
will reduce labor supply and the associated demand for real money holding. Similarly, tax on old age labor
income is distortionary: a high tax rate reduces return to working and hence the labor supply of old agents.
   In contrast to, for example, Calvo (1988), money demand is endogenous in our model, reflecting a labor
supply and an asset market participation decision. This is important since the impact of expected monetary
interventions is to influence the magnitude of the ex post tax base created by money holdings. This interaction
between the tax base and the inflation tax rate generates an inflation Laffer curve.


2.1.2     Rich Households and Financial Intermediation

Rich households differ from poor agents by their productivity in youth, z I = z > 1. This higher productivity
induces them to pay the fixed cost Γ to access intermediated saving. A parametric restriction ensures that
young rich agents save via the financial sector for any positive expected inflation rate.7 Formally,

Assumption 1.
                                                                     RΓ
                                                            z2 >         > 1.                               (A.1)
                                                                   R2 −1
   The rich solve:


                                                 max0 E u(c0 ) − g(n0 ) − g(n),
                                                                      
                                                                                                               (5)
                                                     n,n


subject to young and old age real budget constraints:


                                   m + s = zn − Γ                                                              (6)
                                   s = bI + k                                                                  (7)
                                   c0 = A0 n0 (1 − τ 0 ) + π̃ 0 m + 1D (1 + i0 )π̃ 0 bI + Rk + t0 .            (8)
  7 We   verify this in characterizing equilibria.



                                                                      5
    In youth, rich agents supply labor n and produce zn. After incurring the fixed cost Γ, they invest a per
capita amount s in intermediated claims. These claims are invested in government bonds bI and risk-free
assets k so that s = bI + k, where bI denotes the per-capita holding of government debt of domestic rich
agents. Government debt is nominal and pays an interest rate i0 next period if there is no default. When
old, these agents supply labor n0 , contingent on the realization of A0 and the tax rate τ 0 . Consumption in
old age depends on the decision D ∈ {r, d} of the government to repay or default on its debt, captured here
by the operator    1D in (8): 1r =1 and 1d =0.
    Finally, given linear utility of consumption, the portfolio decision between intermediated saving s and
money holding m is only driven by expected returns. As long as expected return on money holding π̃ e
is strictly inferior to the real return R on the risk-free asset, rich households do not hold money. The
portfolio for intermediated savings will include both nominal government debt and risk-free asset as long as
the expected return on government debt equals that on the asset:


                                                 (1 + i0 )π̃ e 1 − P d = R,
                                                                      
                                                                                                                            (9)


where P d is the probability of default, determined in equilibrium, and π̃ e the expected inflation over states
where debt is repaid. We refer to this as the ‘no-arbitrage condition’. Denote by nIy and nIo the optimal
labor supply decisions of intermediated agents in young and old age. The solution to (5) implies:


                                             nIy = Rz and nIo = A0 (1 − τ 0 ).                                             (10)


    Labor supply nIy of young agents is determined by the expected return R on intermediated savings. In
old age though, the effective return on intermediated savings will depend on the realized inverse inflation
rate π̃ 0 , the nominal interest rate i0 and the default decision of the government.


2.1.3    Foreign Households

In addition to domestic agents, there are also foreign households who hold domestic debt. Like rich house-
holds, they save through intermediaries that hold government debt and consume the domestic good. The
details of the foreign economy are not important for this analysis except that foreign households are risk
neutral and have access to domestic debt as a store of value. In equilibrium, they hold a fraction (1 − θ) of
domestic debt.8


2.2     The Government
The government is composed of a treasury and a central bank. Every period, it has to finance a constant
and exogenous flow of real expenses g. Government expenditures do not enter into agents utility. To finance
these expenses, it can raise taxes on old agent labor income, print money and issue nominal debt B 0 .9
   8 Given the indifference of risk neutral agents regarding their portfolio of government debt and storage, θ is not determined

in equilibrium. Thus equilibria will be characterized for given values of θ.
   9 The assumption of no taxation of income when young is just a simplification that allows us to neatly disentangle demand

for money, for intermediated claims and labor supply driven by taxation.



                                                               6
Alternatively, it can default on its inherited debt obligation.
    Under repayment, the real budget constraint of the government is:

                                                                            ∆M
                               (1 + i)π̃b + g = τ ν m Anm         I  I
                                                        o (τ ) + ν Ano (τ ) +   + b0 .                                      (11)
                                                                              P

The left hand side contains the real liabilities of the government, net of realized inflation π̃, where b is real
debt outstanding. On the right hand side, njo (τ ) is the labor supply decision of old agents of type j ∈ {I, m},
∆M is the change in the total money supply (M ) and P is the price level. Denote by σ the rate of money
creation that implements the change in money supply ∆M .
    Assume g = b0 , so that new expenses are financed exclusively by debt. With this restriction, fiscal policy
has no intergenerational element. Instead, debt created when agents are young is paid for or defaulted on
when these agents are old.10 We return to this restriction in our concluding comments. So the government
budget constraint under repayment becomes generation specific:

                                                                             ∆M
                                    (1 + i)π̃b = τ ν m Anm         I  I
                                                         o (τ ) + ν Ano (τ ) +   .                                          (12)
                                                                               P

    Instead of repayment, the government can fully renege on its debt. But there are two costs of default for
domestic agents. First, direct costs of default are born by old rich agents, who hold a fraction θ of government
debt. Second, if the government repudiates its debt, the country suffers from a deadweight loss, as commonly
assumed in the literature on strategic default.11 Formally, aggregate productivity contemporaneously drops
by a proportional factor γ. The model excludes punishments involving exclusion from future capital markets.
This is partly to ensure that default effects are contained within a generation but also reflects the quantitative
finding that the main force preventing default is the direct output loss.12
    As the government budget constraint holds over time for a given generation, a decision to default on
period t debt has no direct effect on future generations. That is, default affects only the welfare of current
old agents, who otherwise are taxed via seignorage or labor tax.
    The government weights the welfare burden of tax distortions against the direct costs and penalty induced
by the default decision. Denote by W r (·) the welfare of the economy under repayment and by W d (·) under
default. The decision to default is optimal whenever ∆(·) = W d (·) − W r (·) ≥ 0.
    Given aggregate productivity A, nominal interest rate i, real money tax base m−1 , tax rate τ , money
printing rate σ that satisfy (12) and the induced inverse inflation rate π̃, the welfare criterion W D (·) for
   10 This use of generational budget balance appears in Chari and Kehoe (1990) and Cooper, Kempf, and Peled (2010), for

example. An alternative, as in Cole and Kehoe (2000), could add more strategic uncertainty through debt rollover. For an
analysis of self-fulfilling debt crisis with active debt issuance and maturity management, see Lorenzoni and Werning (2013).
   11 Penalties and direct sanctions are central theoretic concepts for enforcement of international asset trade. See the seminal

work by Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). For an extensive review, see Eaton and Fernandez (1995).
   12 Empirical evidence regarding reputation costs of default are mixed: exclusion from international credit markets are short-

lived and premium following defaults are usually found to be negligible. An extensive discussion can be found in Trebesch,
Papaioannou, and Das (2012). From a theoretical point of view, Bulow and Rogoff (1989) show that reputation mechanisms
cannot enforce international asset trade, if the government can buy foreign assets as an alternative source of insurance.




                                                               7
D ∈ {r, d} is:

                                                                     2                      2
                                                             nm
                                                               o (D)
                                                                                      nI (D) 
                    W D (A, i, m−1 , τ, σ, π̃) = ν m cm
                                                      o (D) −           + ν I cIo (D) − o       .                            (13)
                                                                 2                        2

The levels of π̃ are chosen under each of the options, as a function of the monetary regime under which the
economy operates.
    Specifically, under repayment, D = r, the welfare of old agents is:
                                                  2
               r                     r   A(1 − τ )
                                                      + ν m m−1 π̃ r + (1 + i)π̃ r − R θb + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ).
                                                                                      
            W (A, i, m−1 , τ, σ, π̃ ) =                                                                                      (14)
                                             2

Here the inflation is created by the printing of money that is transferred directly to the treasury.
    The option to default, D = d, triggers penalties but no tax need be raised. In keeping with the genera-
tional view of the budget constraint, any money creation in the current period is transferred lump-sum to
the current old. The amount of this transfer will depend on the monetary regime. In this case, the welfare
of old agents becomes:
                                              2
              d                  d    A(1 − γ)
            W (A, i, m−1 , σ, π̃ ) =              + ν m m−1 π̃ d − Rθb + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ) + T (σ, m−1 , π̃ d ),               (15)
                                          2

where T (σ, m−1 , π̃ d ) is the aggregate lump sum transfer to old agents that implements π̃ d .13


2.3     Assumptions
The following two assumptions are used for characterizing equilibria. The first places a lower bound on γ so
that default is costly, especially when no debt is held by domestic agents.

Assumption 2.
                                                      A2l γ(2 − γ)
                                                                   > νm.                                                  (A.2)
                                                            2
    Under this assumption, default is not a desirable option when seignorage revenue alone could service
principal and interest on debt.14 The next assumption ensures that the fundamentals of the economy are
compatible with a risk-free outcome, i.e. given the real level of debt b, a real interest rate of R, the debt will
be repaid for all A. That is, there is a solution to (9) without default. Formally,

Assumption 3. b < b̄ where
                                                              A2l (1 − γ)γ
                                                       b̄ =                .                                              (A.3)
                                                                    R
    Note that Assumption 3 is stated in the extreme case where there is no seignorage revenue, and all debt
is held by foreigners.15 The presence of an equilibrium without default provides a convenient benchmark for
  13 Computations    are detailed in Appendix 7.1.
  14 This is established in the construction of equilibria.
  15 This assumption is derived using the government budget constraint with no inflation, no fiscal resource from seignorage and

all debt is held by foreigners (θ = 0). It implies that there will be an equilibrium without default risk when some of the debt is
held by domestic agents and when money printing does provide resources to the fiscal authority. Indeed, domestic holding of
public debt or a higher money printing rate relaxes the willingness of the fiscal authority to default rather than repay its debt.


                                                                 8
the analysis.



3     Debt Fragility in a Real Economy
To explicitly illustrate debt fragility, first consider this economy without money and nominal quantities. The
equilibrium in the monetary economy will be constructed on the foundation of the multiplicity in the real
economy.
    The government issues real debt and can raise only taxes on labor income. Given A and real interest
rate i, its budget constraint under repayment is simply:


                                              (1 + i)b = A2 (1 − τ )τ.                                       (16)


Let τ be the smallest tax rate satisfying (16) so that tax revenue are locally increasing in the tax rate.
    Private agents can save only through intermediation. For simplicity, set Γ = 0 so that there are no costs
associated to saving through the holding of government debt. Further, assume θ = 0 so that all debt is held
by foreigners and all domestic saving is through storage.
    The labor supply choices of the rich are given by (10). Since the poor access the intermediary for saving,
their labor supply decisions are given by

                                                           0      0
                                          nm          m
                                           y = R and no = A (1 − τ ).                                        (17)


The government defaults whenever W̃ d (·) ≥ W̃ r (·), where these values for the real economy are defined by:
                                                          2
                                  r              A(1 − τ )
                                W̃ (A, i, τ ) =               + ν m R2 + ν I (Rz)2 ,                         (18)
                                                     2

and
                                                           2
                                      d      A(1 − γ)
                                 W̃ (A, i) =                     + ν m R2 + ν I (Rz)2 .                      (19)
                                                 2

    For the real economy with θ = 0, the government will default whenever τ > γ. Equivalently, using (16),
the government defaults for any realization of A < Ā, where Ā satisfies:

                                                           (1 + i)b
                                                   Ā2 =            .                                        (20)
                                                           γ(1 − γ)

This expression defines Ā(i), the default threshold of the government as a function of the real interest rate i.
                                                 
   The probability of default given i is F Ā(i) . Using this, the no-arbitrage condition (9) becomes:
                                                             
                                           (1 + i) 1 − F Ā(i) = R.                                          (21)




                                                            9
This equation may have several solutions.16 Default arises both because of fundamental shocks (low A)
and strategic uncertainty: the probability of default depends on the interest rate, and in equilibrium on the
beliefs of investors which determine this probability. Hence the multiplicity.

Proposition 1. If government debt has value, then there are multiple interest rates that solve the no-arbitrage
condition (21).

Proof. An equilibrium of the debt financing problem is characterized by an interest rate i and a default
threshold, Ā solving (20) and (21). Combining these expressions yields

                                                                         Rb
                                                 Ā2 1 − F (Ā) =
                                                               
                                                                               .                           (22)
                                                                      γ(1 − γ)

Any Ā solving this equation is part of an equilibrium.
      Denote by G(A) the left side and by Z the right side of (22). G(·) is continuous on [Al , Ah ], G(Al ) =
A2l   > 0 and G(Ah ) = 0.
      Consistent with Assumption 3, if Z < A2l = G(Al ), there is a risk free interest rate: Ā = Al and
(1 + i) = R is a solution to (22). Also, by continuity of G(·), there is Ā ∈ (Al , Ah ) such that G(Ā) = Z.
Hence there is also an interest rate that carries a risk-premium and that solves the no-arbitrage condition.
      Relaxing Assumption 3, if Z > A2l = G(Al ), all equilibria include default risk and thus a risk premium.
If b is very high, then Z will be large as well and there may be no equilibrium in which debt is valued. If
debt is valued so that there is a solution to (22), then G(A) > Z for some A > Al . Again, by continuity,
there is a second equilibrium.

      The multiple equilibria of the debt financing problem identified here are welfare ordered. The fundamental
equilibrium with certain repayment provides higher utility than any other equilibrium with higher interest
rate and state contingent default. In the fundamental equilibrium, repayment is preferred to default in those
states where default is optimal in the other equilibria. And in repayment states, lower interest rate in the
fundamental equilibrium requires lower taxes, hence higher welfare, than under the other equilibria.
      Importantly, note that Proposition 1 does not directly restrict the level of debt, b. As long as debt has
value, there are multiple equilibria. The level of debt though cannot be too large. Else an equilibrium with
valued debt will not exist, since the government would default for all realizations of A.
      The underlying source of strategic uncertainty is aptly captured by Proposition 1 for the real economy.
It is a building block for the analysis of a monetary economy. The subsequent developments allow debt to
be held both internally and externally.



4       Debt Fragility in a Monetary Economy
This section studies the interaction of monetary interventions and debt fragility. Intuitively, monetary policy
acts via three channels. First, it can collect seignorage taxes and supplement the resources collected through
labor taxation. Second, by adjusting the realized inflation rate, it can lower the real value of debt.
 16 This   source of multiplicity is at the heart of Calvo (1988) and Cooper (2012).


                                                               10
   But, third, there are potential resource costs of funding the government through the inflation tax: young
agents perceiving high inflation in the future will work less, reducing the monetary tax base. This effect
though depends on the extent of discretion in the conduct of monetary policy. Also, the mean inflation rate
π̃ e is priced into the nominal interest rate, which makes attempt to deliver surprise inflation difficult.
   Accordingly, this section of the paper is constructed around two polar cases, distinguished by the ability
of the monetary authority to commit.

   i. Monetary delegation: monetary policy decisions are made by an independent central bank that pursues
      a known and explicit rule, independent of fiscal considerations. We consider the case of strict inflation
      targeting: the central bank is committed to an unconditional inflation rate.

  ii. Monetary discretion: monetary and fiscal decisions are linked. Given the state of the economy, money
      creation and taxes are set so as to minimize welfare costs and tax distortions of old agents given a
      budget constraint. Default is also chosen optimally ex post.

Before analyzing debt fragility under these monetary regimes, we formally define the equilibrium concept of
the nominal economy.


4.1       State Variables and Equilibrium Definition
The strategic uncertainty identified in Proposition 1 is modeled through a sunspot variable, denoted s, that
corresponds to confidence of domestic and foreign households about the repayment of government debt next
period.

    - If s = so , agents are “optimists” : they coordinate on the risk free (fundamental) price of the govern-
      ment debt.

    - If s = sp , agents are “pessimists” : they coordinate on higher risk / lower price equilibria with state
      contingent default.

The distribution of sunspot shocks is i.i.d. Denote by p ∈ (0, 1) the probability of s = so . In the event there
is a unique equilibrium price, then the fundamental price obtains regardless of the sunspot realization. Note
that we only consider cases where debt has value.17
   The state of the economy is S = (A, i, m−1 , s, s−1 ). Aggregate productivity, A, is realized and directly
affects the productivity of the old. There are two endogenous predetermined state variables, m−1 and i,
respectively real money holdings of current old agents, and the nominal interest rate on outstanding public
debt. Both the sunspot shock last period, s−1 , and the current realization, s, may impact fiscal policy,
monetary policy and the choices of private agents.
   To define a Stationary Rational Expectations Equilibrium (SREE), it is necessary to be precise about
market clearing conditions, the link between money printing, inflation and seignorage revenue and from
these, the government budget constraint. These conditions are used in the equilibrium definition and in
constructing various types of equilibria.
 17 The   case of “market shutdown”, where debt has no value, is not of direct interest for our analysis.


                                                               11
4.1.1   Market Clearing

In every state, the markets for money and bonds must clear. The condition for money market clearing is

                                                              M (S)
                                                 ν m m(S) =         ∀S,                                         (23)
                                                              P (S)
where P (S) is the state dependent money price of goods and M (S) is the stock of fiat money. This equation
implies that the real money demand of the current young equals the real value of the supply.
   The market for government debt clears if the no-arbitrage condition (9) holds and the savings of the rich
plus the demand from the foreigners is not less than the real stock of government debt. We assume that the
foreigners’ endowment is large enough to clear the market for bonds as long as (9) is met.


4.1.2   Government Budget Constraint, Inflation and Seignorage

The SREE version of the government budget constraint, (12), requires a couple of building blocks. The
inverse inflation rate, π̃, is given by:

                                                 P (S−1 )    m(S)       1
                                       π̃(S) =            =                  ,                                  (24)
                                                  P (S)     m(S−1 ) 1 + σ(S)

using (23). Revenue from seignorage is:
                                                                                        
                             ∆M                                                 σ(S)
                                   = σ(S)ν m m(S−1 )π̃(S) = ν m m(S)                         .                  (25)
                             P (S)                                            1 + σ(S)

Here m(S−1 ) represents the real money holdings of the current old. Importantly, these equations imply a
one-to-one mapping between the rate of money creation σ(S) and realized inverse inflation π̃(S). This reflects
the fact that m(S−1 ) is given in (24) and the employment and money demand for the current generation,
m(S), is, as we verify below, independent of the current rate of money creation. Accordingly, our equilibrium
definition is stated with the government setting inflation π̃(S).
   Embedded in (25) is an interaction between inflation expectations, that determines the real money
holding m(S−1 ), and realized inflation. This element will give rise to a monetary Laffer curve and strategic
interactions between expected inflation and delivered inflation, as unveiled in the rest of the analysis.
   Substituting these expressions for seignorage and the inverse inflation rate into the government budget
constraint:
                                                                                                       
                                                                                               σ(S)
                (1 + i)π̃(S)b = τ (S) ν m Anm            I  I            m
                                                                     
                                            o (τ (S)) + ν Ano (τ (S)) + ν m(S)                              ,   (26)
                                                                                             1 + σ(S)

and using the labor supply policy functions of old agents:
                                                                                            
                                                                                    σ(S)
                           (1 + i)π̃(S)b = A 1 − τ (S) τ (S) + ν m m(S)
                                             2
                                                      
                                                                                                 .              (27)
                                                                                  1 + σ(S)




                                                          12
4.1.3     Stationary Rational Expectations Equilibrium

Definition 1. A Stationary Rational Expectations Equilibrium (SREE) is given by:
                                                                                                                
    - The labor supply and savings decisions of private agents, nm       m       I       I
                                                                 y (S), no (S), ny (S), no (S), m(S), k(S), b(S) ,

        who form rational expectations in youth, supply labor in young and old age, solve (1) and (5) subject
        to their respective budget constraints (2),(3) and (6),(8), given state contingent monetary and fiscal
        policies ({τ (S), π̃(S), D(S)}), for all S.

    - The government maximizes its welfare criterion by choosing a policy ({τ (S), π̃(S), D(S)}) subject to
        the government budget constraint, (27) for all S.

    - All markets clear (goods, money, bonds) for all S.

    The welfare criterion of the government will depend on the monetary policy framework, as detailed below.
The polar cases of delegation and discretion are studied within this framework; the conduct of monetary
policy determines what the government takes as given in choosing its policy.18 Also, we characterize equilibria
for given θ, share of government debt held by domestic agents, as its value is not pinned down in equilibrium.
    By making the sunspot binary (optimism or pessimism), we restrict attention to equilibria with potentially
at most two levels of the nominal interest rate. As discussed in Section 3, there could be more self-fulfilling
levels of interest rates associated with different default thresholds. Allowing the sunspot variable to have
more than two realizations could capture these outcomes, without changing the essential nature of the
following analysis.


4.2      Monetary Delegation
In this institutional structure, the treasury has discretionary power over fiscal policy, choosing fiscal policy
ex post given the monetary intervention. In contrast, the monetary authority is endowed with a commitment
technology. We find that under monetary delegation to a strict inflation target, debt fragility remains. The
key intuition behind this result is that strict inflation targeting turns a nominal debt contract into a real
security. Hence the presence of debt fragility in real economy identified in section 3 persists in the nominal
economy with strict inflation targeting.
    One interpretation of this structure is that the government of an individual country delegates its monetary
policy to an independent central bank, by joining a monetary union for instance. The central bank of
the union pursues an independent policy of strict inflation targeting and the fiscal authority is left with
discretionary tax policy choices (taxes or default).
    Specifically, the central bank commits to an inflation target 0 < π̃ ∗ ≤ 1 and delivers it by printing
money. By doing so, the central bank does not accommodate productivity shocks. Revenue from seignorage
  18 Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013) and Corsetti and Dedola (2013) study discretionary monetary authorities.

Our analysis will also highlight particular forms of commitment by the central bank as well as the reputation effect necessary
to implement this solution without commitment.




                                                             13
is transferred to the treasury. Formally, the policy of the central bank is:


                                                       π̃(S) = π̃ ∗         ∀S.                                               (28)


As the central bank is bound to deliver its inflation target π̃ ∗ , agents’ expectations are π̃ e = π̃ ∗ .19 In
a stationary equilibrium, there is a stationary rate of money creation, σ ∗ , directly linked to the target
inflation:     1
             1+σ ∗   = π̃ ∗ .
    Using (25), modified to reflect the equilibrium under an inflation target π̃ ∗ , revenue obtained from
seignorage is:
                                                                          
                                     ∆M                          σ(S)
                                           = ν m m(S)                          = ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ),                        (29)
                                     P (S)                     1 + σ(S)

as m = m−1 = π̃ e = π̃ ∗ . This is maximized at π̃ L ≡                1
                                                                      2   which is the top of the seignorage “Laffer curve”.
At π̃ ∗ > π̃ L , a reduction in π̃ ∗ (i.e. an increase in the rate of inflation) will increase revenue.20 Within this
monetary set-up, the government budget constraint under repayment becomes:


                                         (1 + i)π̃ ∗ b = A2 (1 − τ )τ + ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ).                                 (30)


    To formally derive the result that debt fragility persists in this monetary regime, we establish the existence
of several interest rates that solve the no-arbitrage condition. To do so, we first verify that the default decision
in the monetary economy has the same monotonicity property as in the real economy: if the government
defaults for a given realization of technology Ā, then it would default for any lower realization A ≤ Ā.

Lemma 1. Under Assumption 2, given a level of real obligations (1 + i)π̃ ∗ b, there is a unique Ā(i) ∈ [Al , Ah ]
such that if A ≤ Ā(i), then the treasury defaults on its debt. Otherwise it repays its debt.

Proof. Given a nominal interest rate i, the decision to repay or default on debt is given by ∆(·) = W d (·) −
W r (·), where the relevant welfare criteria are given by (14) and (15) and the lump-sum transfer under default
by T (π̃ ∗ ) = ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ). Hence, a point of indifference between default and repayment, Ā(i) solves:

                                [A(1 − γ)]2   [A(1 − τ )]2
                                            −              = (1 + i)π̃ ∗ θb − ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ),                           (31)
                                     2             2

where τ satisfies the government budget constraint (30). Denote by G(A) the left side of (31). Clearly if
G(A) is monotonically decreasing in A, then the default decision satisfies the desired cut-off rule. Rewrite
G(A) as follow:

                                                   [A(1 − γ)]2   A2   A2 τ (τ − 2)
                                         G(A) =                −    −              .                                          (32)
                                                        2        2          2
  19 Inparticular, if there is default, the monetary authority prints money and transfers it to old agents to meet this target.
  20 The determination of the optimal inflation target π̃ ∗ is not part of the present analysis. The model could provide a positive
theory of inflation, where the inflation target would be set to minimize distortions associated to tax revenue. Given the Laffer
curve property of seignorage, any inflation target 0 < π̃ ∗ < π̃ L is inefficient, but this does not affect the essential results
regarding debt fragility.




                                                                 14
Using the government budget constraint, (32) rewrites:

                                       A2 γ(γ − 2)                                      (τ − 2)
                            G(A) =                − (1 + i)π̃ ∗ b − ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ )           .                       (33)
                                            2                                            2(1 − τ )

The first term is negative since γ < 1. If seignorage revenue is enough to service debt, then no tax need be
raised and Ā(i) = Al , by Assumption 2.21 Otherwise, (1 + i)π̃ ∗ b − ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ) > 0. Finally, we need to
                                τ −2
derive the monotonicity of      1−τ    with respect to A. Its derivative is:

                                                         −1 dτ
                                                                   > 0,                                                    (34)
                                                      (1 − τ )2 dA

                           dτ
which is positive since    dA   < 0 for the lowest value of τ that solves the budget constraint. Overall, we have
  0
G (A) < 0. Hence, the cut-off value Ā(i) is unique and default occurs if and only if A ≤ Ā(i).
      Note that if Ā(i) ≤ Al , then debt is risk free. Finally, Ā(i) = Ah is inconsistent with the assumption
that debt has value.

      From this result, the probability of default P d becomes F (Ā(i)). This probability also implicitly depends
on π̃ ∗ , which appears on the right side of (31). Altogether, an interest rate for the government debt solves:
                                                                     
                                               (1 + i)π̃ ∗ 1 − F Ā(i) = R.                                                (35)


This expression outlines the interplay between beliefs, probability of default and best-response of the gov-
ernment. As in the real economy, the probability of default depends on the interest rate, and in equilibrium
on the beliefs of investors which determine this probability.

Lemma 2. Under Assumptions 2 and 3, for any inflation target 0 < π̃ ∗ ≤ 1, there are multiple interest
rates that solve the no-arbitrage condition (35).

Proof. An equilibrium of the debt financing problem is characterized by an interest rate i and a default
threshold Ā. Importantly, an equilibrium is such that beliefs of investors are consistent with the best response
of the government.
      Investors believe that the government defaults with probability P d = F (Ā). This belief induces Āb (i),
the default threshold consistent with P d :


                                           (1 + i)π̃ ∗ 1 − F (Ā) = R ⇒ Āb (i).
                                                                 
                                                                                                                           (36)


      Given i, the government decision to repay or default induces Āg (i), the realization of A for which the
government is indifferent between default and repayment:22


                                       ∆(A, i) = W d (A, i) − W r (A, i) = 0 ⇒ Āg (i).                                    (37)
  21 Tosee this, set θ = 0, m = 1 and π̃ r = 0 in (14) and (15) and verify that ∆(·) = W d (·) − W r (·) < 0 under Assumption 2.
  22 Lemma   1 established that this threshold is unique. To determine ∆(A, i) from (14) and (15), set π̃ = m = π̃ ∗ and set τ
from (30) if the government decides to repay.



                                                               15
    An equilibrium requires Āb (i) = Āg (i). The nominal interest rate i can takes value on [i, +∞) where i is
the nominal interest rate consistent with risk-free debt. Formally, it satisfies (1 + i)π̃ ∗ = R. We study the
monotonicity properties of Āb (·) and Āg (·).
    The default threshold Āb (i) induced by belief of investors has the following properties. First, Āb (i) = Al :
if investors charge i, it means that they expect no default. Second, differentiating (36) with respect to Ā
and i, one gets:
                                                                        
                                                 dĀb (i)    1 − F (Ā)
                                                          =               > 0,                                                 (38)
                                                   di       f (Ā)(1 + i)

since f (·) > 0. Finally, lim Āb (i) = Ah .
                            i→+∞
    The best response of the government to i is captured by Āg (i), the default threshold. Given Assumption
3, for low values of i, debt is risk free.23 Hence, there is  > 0 such that Āg (i + ) = Al . Second, by
differentiating (31) with respect to Ā and i, one gets:

                                       h 1−τ      i       h           (1 − τ )2 i
                                 π̃ ∗ b        − θ di + Ā (1 − γ)2 −             dĀ = 0.                                     (39)
                                        1 − 2τ                         1 − 2τ

                                         1−τ                                                       (1−τ )2
The factor of di is positive since      1−2τ   > 1 and the factor of dĀ is negative since          1−2τ     > 1. Hence:

                                                                           dĀg (i)
                                           if Āg (i) ∈ (Al , Ah ), then            > 0.                                       (40)
                                                                             di

Finally, there is an upper bound ī such that default occurs for all A if i ≥ ī:


                                                     ∀i > ī, Āg (i) = Ah .                                                   (41)


By continuity of the functions Āg (·) and Āb (·), there is a value i > i that satisfies Āg (i) = Āb (i).

    The monotonicity properties of Āg (i) and Āb (i) are summarized in Figure 1. Under Assumption 3, there
is always an equilibrium with certain repayment, where the nominal interest rate is i. In addition, there
will exist an equilibrium in which the debt is never repaid and, accordingly, investors place zero probability
on repayment.24 Lemma 2 characterizes additional interior equilibria in which default arises with a positive
probability: there is Ā ∈ (Al , Ah ) and i > i that satisfy the no-arbitrage condition with state contingent
default.
    Figure 1 illustrates the multiplicity of equilibria, including three interior equilibria. The equilibrium of
the debt financing problem labeled F is a locally stable equilibrium with a positive probability of default.
Here local stability refers to best-response dynamics and is used for comparative statics.25
  23 Relaxing Assumption 3 and allowing a fundamental equilibrium with positive probability of default does not change the

central result that several interest rates are compatible with the no-arbitrage condition. This is explicit in the real environment,
as in Proposition 1, and can be established in the nominal economy as well.
  24 As mentioned previously, we discard this “market shutdown” case, which always exists.
  25 Specifically, ‘best response dynamics’ points to the dynamics induced by investors responding to the treasury, followed by

the treasury responding to investors. To see why the F equilibrium is locally stable, suppose the interest rate i is lower than
the equilibrium value. Given i, the treasury decision is captured by a threshold level for default, Āg (i), along the solid line.
Given this, investors will ‘set’ an interest rate such that the no-arbitrage conditions holds, i.e. Āb (i) along the dashed line.



                                                                16
                        Figure 1: Multiplicity of Interest Rates under Monetary Delegation

                       Ā
                     Ah

                                                                         Beliefs of Investors: Āb (i)




                                                               Best Response of the Treasury: Āg (i)
                                          F




                      Al                                                         i
                            i
This figure represents the mapping from interest rate i to default threshold Ā, both for investors and the fiscal authority.
Investors associate an interest rate i to a default threshold via the probability of default in the no-arbitrage condition. This is
the dashed line. Given the interest rate i, the optimal decision of the fiscal authority to service its debt or default is captured
by the default threshold, indicated by the solid line. An equilibrium is reached when beliefs of investors are consistent with the
best-response of the fiscal authority. The figure highlights the existence of several equilibria, one of them being risk-free. The
equilibrium indicated with a F is locally stable under best response dynamics.



    This lemma provides the basis for the existence of a SREE in which sunspots matter, i.e. the value of
government debt is dependent upon the beliefs of investors. In equilibrium there are sunspot dependent
variations in employment, output and consumption.

Proposition 2. Under Assumption 2 and 3, for any 0 < π̃ ∗ ≤ 1, there is a SREE with the following
characteristics:

   1. If s−1 = so , the government security is risk free and the treasury reimburses with probability 1.

   2. If s−1 = sp , the interest rate incorporates a risk-premium and the treasury defaults on its debt with
      positive probability.

Proof. The characterization of the SREE directly comes from Lemma 2 and the existence of several interest
rates compatible with the no-arbitrage condition in equilibrium. We describe the optimal behavior of agents
consistent with the equilibrium definition.
    As π̃ e = π̃ ∗ ∈ (0, 1], poor agents save only with money holding and rich young agents invest in intermedi-
ated claims. Indeed, consider a young household with productivity z. It can either save with money holding
or via the financial sector, incurring the fixed cost Γ.
    If it chooses to hold money, its labor supply when young is n = zπ̃ e , its real demand for money holding
                                                                           2
is zn = z 2 π̃ e and the net expected contribution to consumption: zπ̃ e . If it chooses the intermediated
savings, its labor supply when young is n = Rz, its savings net of the intermediation cost s = Rz 2 − Γ and

Following this dynamic will lead to the locally stable equilibrium.


                                                                17
the net expected contribution to consumption: R(Rz 2 − Γ). Hence, intermediated saving dominates money
holding if and only if:

                                                              RΓ
                                                z2 >                     ,                                    (42)
                                                         R2   − (π̃ e )2

which is true for any π̃ e ∈ (0, 1] as long as Assumption 1 holds. An aggregate fraction θ ∈ [0, 1] of the
government security is being held by domestic rich agents.
   If s−1 = so , then young agents form expectations P d = 0 and π̃ e = π̃ ∗ . They supply labor accordingly.
Consequently, the interest rate on debt satisfies the no-arbitrage condition (9) with P d = 0 and π̃ e = π̃ ∗ .
Given i, seignorage revenue ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ) and using Assumption 3, the optimal policy of the treasury is then
to raise labor taxes τ for all A so as to satisfy its budget constraint and repay its debt.
   All markets clear. The money demand of the young poor agents is constant at π̃ ∗ . The price level adjusts
to ensure market clearing. From this, π̃ ∗ =     1
                                               1+σ ∗ .   In this equilibrium, inflation targeting and setting fixed
money growth rate are equivalent. Given the no-arbitrage condition, the bond market clears assuming the
foreign lenders have enough endowment to buy the government debt not purchased by domestic rich agents.
   For the case s−1 = sp , we outline only differences with the previous case. From Lemma 2, there is an
interest rate i that carries a risk premium and satisfy the no-arbitrage condition, such that (1 + i)π̃ ∗ > R.
Young agents form expectations P d > 0 and π̃ e = π̃ ∗ . They price the government debt according to P d > 0
and π̃ e = π̃ ∗ . Given i and seignorage revenue ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ), there is a unique threshold Ā(i) such that
the optimal policy of the treasury is to raise labor taxes τ for all A ≥ Ā(i) to satisfy its budget constraint
and default otherwise. Finally, expectations are consistent with the best response of the government: P d =
       
F Ā(i) .

   Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013) find a similar result if there is a very high perceived cost
of inflation: when the central bank is very inflation averse, it never chooses to inflate the nominal value of
debt, it is de facto committed to no inflation, converting nominal debt into real debt. Roll-over crises occur
for a larger range of debt.
   Overall this section, particularly Proposition 2, makes clear that debt fragility, as identified in real
economies (Proposition 1), extends to economies with nominal debt. In effect, the inflation target of the
monetary authority converts the nominal obligation to a real one. Seignorage does reduce the real debt
burden left to the fiscal authority, but without eliminating the underlying strategic uncertainty. The choice
of the inflation target does not allow the monetary authority to peg the real interest rate. Instead the real
interest rate on debt continues to reflect the sentiments of investors.
   In Section 5, this stationary equilibrium is used as a threat point to support the credibility of an alternative
monetary regime. Let V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) be the life-time welfare of agents in a given generation under monetary
delegation, where π̃ ∗ is the inflation target and p the probability of optimism. Formally, using (13) and (37),




                                                          18
with m−1 = π̃ e = π̃ ∗ :

                               hZ   Ah                   i
           V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) = p          W r (A, i)dF (A)
                                Al
                                                                                                                                  (43)
                                          hZ   Ā                            Ah                                       (njy )2
                                                                         Z                        i     X
                             + (1 − p)              W d (A, i)dF (A) +            W r (A, i)dF (A) −             νj           .
                                             Al                          Ā                                             2
                                                                                                       j∈{m,I}


   The first term corresponds to the expected welfare of old agents under optimism, when the nominal
interest rate i induces repayment for any realization of technology A. The second term is the expected
welfare under pessimism, where the risk premium included in the nominal interest rate i > i leads the
treasury to default for low realizations of A ∈ [Al , Ā]. Finally, as inflation expectations are anchored, the
third term captures young agents’ disutility of labor is independent of the realization of the sunspot shock.26
   Importantly, the welfare of a generation under monetary delegation is increasing in the probability of
optimism p and decreasing with the nominal interest rate i associated with pessimism. Indeed, as discussed
above, the equilibrium under optimism Pareto dominates the coordination failure outcome, and the higher
the risk premium under pessimism, the lower is welfare.
   Finally, Proposition 2 is stated for any level of inflation target π̃ ∗ . This does not imply though that the
equilibrium is independent of the inflation target. The inflation target will influence seignorage revenue and
affect the fiscal burden. The size and magnitude of these effects will depend on the target inflation relative
to the peak of the “Laffer curve”.

Proposition 3. In the equilibrium characterized in Proposition 2, for π̃ ∗ ≥ π̃ L , an increase in the target
inflation rate will increase seignorage and lower the probability of default if and only if the equilibrium of the
debt financing problem is locally stable.

Proof. The proof relies on three expressions. The point of indifference between repayment and default, (i.e.
the default threshold Ā) is given in (31), the government budget constraint given in (30), and the no-arbitrage
condition, given in (35). These are all evaluated at a given inflation target and thus π̃ ∗ . Substituting the
no-arbitrage condition into (31) gives:

                            [Ā(1 − γ)]2   [Ā(1 − τ )]2                             Rθb
                                         −               + ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ ∗ ) −            = 0,                                 (44)
                                  2              2                                1 − F (Ā)

where τ satisfies the government budget constraint evaluated at Ā.
   Taking the derivative of (44) w.r.t. Ā and π ∗ :

  h                                                       Rθbf (Ā) i      h
                                                                                                        ∗
                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                             ∗
   Ā(1 − γ)2 − Ā(1 − τ )2 + Ā2 (1 − τ )τA −                                2                m
                                                                   2 dĀ + Ā (1 − τ )τπ̃∗ + ν (1 − 2π̃ ) dπ = 0, (45)
                                                         1 − F (Ā)

where τA and τπ̃∗ are given by the derivative of the government budget constraint evaluated in Ā. Substituting
 26 Formally,   nm     ∗     I
                 y = π̃ and ny = Rz from (4) and (10).




                                                                 19
the no-arbitrage condition into the budget constraint (30) and taking the derivative w.r.t. τ, π ∗ , A, one gets:

                              1      h Rbf (A)                  i                                       ν m (1 − 2π̃ ∗ )
                τA =                              − 2A(1 − τ )τ                              τπ̃∗ = −                    .   (46)
                         A2 (1 − 2τ ) 1 − F (A) 2                                                        A2 (1 − 2τ )
                                               


Rearranging (45), one gets:

   h                     (1 − τ )2    Rbf (Ā)  1 − τ       i    h                     1 − τ i ∗
       Ā(1 − γ)2 − Ā             +            2        − θ dĀ + ν m (1 − 2π̃ ∗ ) 1 −          dπ̃ = 0.                   (47)
                          1 − 2τ     1 − F (Ā)    1 − 2τ                                1 − 2τ

The factor of dπ̃ ∗ is positive since π̃ ∗ ≥ π̃ L and                1−τ
                                                                    1−2τ   > 1. Hence the sign of the factor of dĀ is critical to
derive the response of the default threshold to a change in the inflation target.
   This sign is determined by the condition of local stability. An equilibrium is locally stable under best
                                          dĀg (i)       dĀb (i)
response dynamics if and only if            di       <     di .     Rewriting (38) with the no-arbitrage condition and using
(39), the condition for local stability becomes:

                                                     (1 − τ )2    Rbf (A) h 1 − τ      i
                               Ā(1 − γ)2 − Ā                 +          2        − θ < 0.                                 (48)
                                                      1 − 2τ     1 − F (A)   1 − 2τ

                                  dĀ
Hence under local stability,      dπ ∗   > 0.

   Proposition 3 is essentially a comparative statics result and thus holds for only a subset of equilibria of
the debt financing problem, i.e. those that are locally stable under best response dynamics. A locally stable
equilibrium is indicated in Figure 1 and refers to the determination of the interest rate on debt and the
default cut-off. The relative slopes of the two curves at this point are used in the proof of Proposition 3.
   This section studies debt fragility when the monetary authority commits to a strict inflation target. As
the environment does not feature any ex post cost of inflation, the central bank could be tempted to deviate,
inflate beyond expectations and thus steal the benefits of predetermined real money balances. Still, this
policy could be sustained with a reputational mechanism that takes full demonetization of the economy as
the punishment for deviating from the inflation target. Indeed, the welfare in the real economy is lower than
the welfare in the monetary economy. We formally discuss this class of reputational mechanisms in Section
5.2.


4.3      Monetary Discretion
Does monetary discretion insulate against debt fragility? Intuitively, a discretionary policy maker could
adjust inflation and seignorage to accommodate variations in the price of government debt driven by strategic
uncertainty and avoid default.
   In a monetary discretion regime, the government has full discretionary power over both monetary and
fiscal policy. It designs its policy (τ (S), π̃(S), D(S)) in every state, as a best response to realized productivity
shock A, the sunspots (s−1 , s) and predetermined variables of the economy m−1 and i. The government
maximizes the welfare of home agents. This is, in effect, the same as minimizing the cost of its policy to



                                                                       20
taxpayers, hence to old agents, since they contribute to government’s resources via the tax on labor income
and seignorage on money holding.
   In an environment with discretion, money creation provides an ex post source of revenue without creating
any distortion. This low social cost of revenue ought to reduce the likelihood of default and stabilize debt
values.
   But, an essential element of this environment is the interaction between expected and realized inflation.
Specifically, if agents anticipate high inflation (low π̃ e ), they would reduce labor supply in youth and their
real money holdings m−1 accordingly. To collect revenue from seignorage, the central bank then has to
deliver a higher inflation rate (low π̃), consistent with the initial beliefs of agents. Hence, under discretion,
the capacity of the central bank to support a stressed fiscal authority may be compromised by the strategic
complementarity between expected inflation and delivered inflation: if agents anticipate the willingness of
the central bank to resort to inflation, the real money tax base would decrease, which in turn reduces the
capacity of the central bank to intervene.
   The formation of expectations by young agents reflects these ex post policy choices. Let π̃ e (S) denote
the expectation of future (inverse) inflation given the current state S. Then the requirement of rational
                                    0
expectations is π̃ e (S) = ES 0 |S π̃(S ) where the expectation is over the future state given S. This condition
will be used in the construction of equilibria under discretion.
   To characterize a SREE under discretion, we first determine the policy choices of a discretionary policy
maker, then analyze the debt pricing dimension of the equilibrium and the associated stationary inflation
expectations. The SREE combines these essential elements.


4.3.1     Choice Problem of a Discretionary Government

Given the productivity shock A, real money holding m−1 and nominal interest rate i on debt, the government
chooses the money printing rate σ and whether to default (D = d) or raise taxes τ and repay its debt (D = r).
Under this regime, the government sets the money growth rate σ D and collects seignorage given by:

                                             ∆M
                                                = ν m m−1 σ D π̃ D ,                                         (49)
                                              P

where m−1 is the real money holding of current old agents and π̃ D is the inverse rate of inflation for D ∈ {r, d}
induced by the choice of σ D . It is given by:

                                                             1     m
                                                 π̃ D =               .                                      (50)
                                                          1 + σ D m−1

   Here m ≡ m(S) is the real money demand of current young agents. As seen in (4), the money demand of
the young is driven by current inflation expectations that are entirely independent of the current choices of
the discretionary policy maker. Further, m−1 , real money held by the current old, is predetermined when the
monetary authority decides on σ D . Thus (50) captures a direct link from money growth to inverse inflation




                                                            21
π̃ D . The government budget constraint under repayment is:


                                        (1 + i)π̃ r b = A2 (1 − τ )τ + ν m m−1 σ r π̃ r .                                  (51)


    Hence, the government solves
                                    h                                                                         i
                                           r                    r      r          d                 d      d
                 D ∈ {r, d} = argmax max
                                       r
                                         W   (A, i, m −1 , τ, σ   , π̃   ), max W   (A, i, m −1 , σ   , π̃   )  ,          (52)
                                            τ,σ                                 σd


subject to its budget constraint (51), a non-negativity constraint on labor tax τ ≥ 0 and the following
restriction on the realized inverse inflation rate: π̃ D ∈ [π̃, 1]. The solution generates a default choice as well
as a tax rate τ in the event of repayment and money growth rates σ D dependent on the default decision,
D = d, r. As mentioned above, the money growth rate induces a realization of the inflation rate, hence we
describe monetary policy as the choice of π̃ D (·).
    Following Calvo (1978), we assume that money printing is bounded so that the effective inverse inflation
rate cannot be lower than π̃ > 0.27 Importantly, our results do not hinge upon this precise bound, but rather
lie in the strategic interaction between expected and realized inflation under discretion.28
    If the government chooses to repay the debt, the real money tax base m−1 is given. Its policy is naturally
biased toward inflation since taxing money holdings does not distort labor supply decisions of current money
holders. If this tax revenue is sufficient to cover its obligations, there is no labor tax imposed, and, using
Assumption 2, repayment is preferred over default. Else, if seignorage does not generate enough revenue to
cover its obligations, the government must impose a labor tax if it chooses to avoid default. Under discretion,
the government relies primarily on seignorage revenue to service debt. This characterization is summarized
in Lemma 3.
    In the event of default, the choice of the inflation rate is welfare neutral given the specified social welfare
function: when default occurs, monetary policy is implemented via lump-sum transfers which are purely
redistributive, and consequently has no influence on the choices of the government. We set π̃ d = π̃ in the
event of default so that this rate is consistent with the inflation chosen whenever the government is indifferent
between default and repayment.
    The following lemma summarizes the state contingent choices of the government under discretion.

Lemma 3. Under Assumption 2, given S, the policy choices of the discretionary government are:

   1. if the government chooses to repay its debt, then
                                                            ν m m(S)
         a. π̃ r = max π̃, Π(S) , where Π(S) =           ν m m−1 +(1+i)b ,

         b. τ > 0 and solves the government budget constraint (51) if and only if π̃ r = π̃.
  27 Chari, Christiano, and Eichenbaum (1998) impose a similar restriction on the highest inflation regime that the central bank

can implement. In the appendix of that paper, this restriction is rationalized by the presence of an alternative technology such
that agents can bypass the cash-in-advance constraint. In effect, the return on this alternative technology pins down the worst
sustainable equilibrium and thus π̃. In our framework, the poor could store at a return of r < 1 instead of holding money and
a parallel argument could be made for π̃.
  28 Corsetti and Dedola (2013) and Aguiar, Amador, Farhi, and Gopinath (2013) adopt an ex post cost of inflation to limit

money creation.




                                                               22
  2. if the government chooses to default, then τ = 0 and π̃ d = π̃.

  3. the government chooses to default if and only if

                                      [A(1 − γ)]2   [A(1 − τ )]2
                            ∆(·) =                −              − (1 + i)π̃θb + T (S, π̃) > 0,
                                           2             2

      where τ solves (51) given π̃ r = π̃ under repayment and T (·) is the lump-sum transfer that implements
      π̃ under default.

Proof. If the government repays, it will first use the inflation tax to obtain revenue since this tax is not
distortionary. It will use labor taxation only if needed to repay the debt. Hence, if the real inflation tax base
is large enough to service debt, then its labor tax policy is τ = 0.
   We derive first the condition under which seignorage alone is enough to service debt. From the budget
                                                                                (1+i)b
constraint (51), if τ = 0, then (1 + i)π̃ r b = ν m π̃ r m−1 σ implying σ =    ν m m−1 .   Using (50), we get that under
             r     m(S) 1
repayment π̃ =     m−1 1+σ ,   where m−1 is real money held by the old and m(S) is the level of real money
                                                                                                                  ν m m(S)
demand of the current young. The resulting inverse rate of inflation is given by Π(S) =                        (1+i)b+ν m m−1 .
Hence, resource from seignorage is enough to service debt if Π(S) ≥ π̃.
   We next verify that Π(S) ≥ π̃ implies the treasury chooses to service its debt rather than default, i.e.
∆(·) ≡ W d (·) − W r (·) < 0. With τ = 0, ∆(·) is:

                               [A(1 − γ)]2   A2
                     ∆(·) =                −    + ν m m−1 (π̃ − π̃ r ) − (1 + i)π̃ r θb + T (S, π̃).                         (53)
                                    2        2

                                                                                                        m(S)
Here T (·) = ν m m−1 σ d π̃ is the lump-sum transfer that implements π̃ d = π̃, with σ d =             π̃m−1   − 1. Also, as
                                                                                       r m                 r       m(S)
seignorage is sufficient to service principal and interest on debt, (1 + i)b = σ ν m−1 , with σ =                 π̃ r m−1   − 1.
Finally, by the definition of π̃ D , ν m m−1 π̃ D (1 + σ D ) = ν m m(S) for D = r, d. Rearranging (53), one gets:

                                        [A(1 − γ)]2   A2
                                ∆(·) =              −    − ν m m−1 π̃ r σ r (θ − 1)
                                             2        2
                                        [A(1 − γ)]2   A2                 σr
                                      =             −    − ν m m(S)            (θ − 1).                                      (54)
                                             2        2              1 + σr

                                                  m(S)σ r
This is negative by Assumption 2 as long as        1+σ r (1 − θ)   < 1. With θ ≤ 1 and σ ≥ 0 under both optimism
                                              e                    m(S)σ
and pessimism, π̃ ≤ 1 so that m(S)= π̃ (S) ≤ 1. Hence               1+σ (1   − θ) < 1. We get ∆(·) < 0, i.e. when
seignorage is enough to service principal and interest, the government chooses not to default.
   If resource from seignorage is not enough to service principal and interest on debt, then positive labor
taxes are implemented: τ > 0 if and only if π̃ > Π(S). In this case, default is possible. Using these elements
together with (14) and (15), one gets the expression for ∆(·) stated in the Lemma.

   Equation (54) highlights an interesting aspect of redistribution in this economy. If all debt is held
internally, θ = 1, the default decision in this monetary economy is independent of the rate of money creation.
This reflects the fact that the inflation tax is not distortionary and simply redistributes between rich and
poor, both of whom are risk neutral. In this case, ∆ < 0 and there is surely no default. But if θ < 1, then



                                                           23
the inflation tax borne by the poor old agents is redistributed to the foreign holders of the debt, which is
welfare reducing. Still, as argued in the proof, default does not occur if the debt obligation can be financed
entirely by seignorage.


4.3.2    Price of Government Debt

Building on this characterization, we next investigate whether debt fragility remains under monetary dis-
cretion. First, we show that the multiplicity of interest rates consistent with the no-arbitrage condition (9)
persists and interacts with inflation expectations.

Lemma 4. Under Assumptions 2 and 3, under monetary discretion, there are multiple interest rates that
solve the no-arbitrage condition (9).

Proof. Consider the debt pricing building block of the equilibrium. We show that there are several possible
outcomes, and consistent with our equilibrium definition, these different outcomes are driven by the real-
ization of the sunspot s−1 . Using Assumption 3 and Lemma 3, there is a risk-free equilibrium of the debt
financing problem, with inflation expectations π̃ e (so ) ≥ π̃.29 This may arise with τ = 0 and π̃ e (so ) ≥ π̃ or,
from Lemma 3, with τ > 0 and π̃ e (so ) = π̃.
    Suppose investors believe the government will default on its debt with positive probability. If the belief is
self-fulfilling, then the optimal policy of the government must be to set the inflation level to π̃ for all A whether
it reimburses its debt or defaults. Otherwise, resources from seignorage would be enough to cover principal
and interest on debt for all realization of A, and default would be avoided. Hence, inflation expectations of
agents are consistent with the best response of the government at π̃ e (sp ) = π̃. The no-arbitrage condition
pricing public debt becomes:
                                                                   
                                               (1 + i)π̃ 1 − F Ā(i) = R,                                                   (55)


where Ā(i), defined in Lemma 1, is the boundary of the default region given i.
    From Lemma 2, we know that there are at least two interest rates i that are consistent with this equi-
librium condition, one of which carries a risk-premium and induces the government to default for some
realizations of A. Hence the initial pessimistic beliefs are self-fulfilling and support the existence of an
interest rate that carries a positive probability of default.

    The key is that inflation expectations and probability of default are jointly linked by the anticipation
of the best response of the discretionary government. In particular, the interest rate with a risk-premium
that solves the no-arbitrage condition is systematically associated with the lowest real money tax base
m = π̃ e (sp ) = π̃, which in turn prevents the central bank from inflating away the real value of debt.
  29 In general π̃ e (S) denotes expected (inverse) inflation. The notation π̃ e (s) highlights the dependence of expectations on

the sunspot, s. This is the expectation held by young agents regarding the future value of π̃. This value determines the labor
supply and real money demand of young poor agents. It also influences the nominal interest rate, see (9).




                                                               24
4.3.3      Inflation Expectations

We now turn to the third component of the equilibrium: the determinants of inflation expectations π̃ e (s).
This section establishes two results. First, there exist inflation expectations, contingent on the sunspot
realization, that are consistent with the choices of the government. Second, there may be multiple such
levels of inflationary expectations. This last point arises from the complementarities between monetary
expectations and policy response.
     As shown in the proof of Lemma 4, in the event of pessimism, young agents expect high inflation, i.e.
π̃ (sp ) = π̃. That is, whenever the equilibrium of the debt financing problem induces state-contingent
 e

default, the inflation rate is maximal. So, regardless of the current state S, given pessimism in the previous
period, s−1 = sp , the inverse inflation rate is π̃(S) = π̃. This is then consistent with the initial expectations
of the current old, formed when they were young in the previous period, i.e. π̃ e (sp ) = π̃.
     The issues of existence and multiplicity of inflation expectations arise when s−1 = so . From Lemma
4, young agents anticipate the government will service its debt obligation for all S. The question is then
how the government will repay its obligation. Given the bias toward inflationary financing of debt, what
determines π̃ e (so ) is whether seignorage resource is enough to service principal and interest on debt for all
(A, s). If the debt is not too large, then the inflation tax alone is sufficient to cover debt obligations: i.e.
π̃ r (A, s, ·) > π̃ for all (A, s) and π̃ e (so ) > π̃. In this case, τ (A, s) = 0 for all (A, s). Else, the inflation tax
will be maximal, π̃ e (so ) = π̃, and supplemented by a labor tax. In both cases D(A, s, ) = r for all (A, s).
     Formally, Lemma 3 established that with s−1 = so , given the real money tax base ν m m−1 = ν m π̃ e (so ),
the inflation delivered by the discretionary government satisfies:
                                             n            ν m π̃ e (s)          o
                    π̃ r (A, s, ·) = max                                   ; π̃                         ∀A ∀s ∈ {so , sp },                  (56)
                                                 ν m π̃ e (so ) + (1 + i)b

where the max operator captures whether seignorage resource is enough to service principal and interest on
debt, and π̃ e (s) = m(S) is the real money demand of current young agents, conditional on the realization of
the current sunspot s. The no-arbitrage condition gives: (1 + i)π̃ e (so ) = R. Accordingly, π̃ e (so ) ≥ π̃ can be
part of a stationary equilibrium if and only if it satisfies:
                                      n          ν m π̃ e (so )              o               n        ν m π̃ e (sp )              o
                 π̃ e (so ) = p max                                     ; π̃   + (1 − p) max                                 ; π̃  ,         (57)
                                          ν m π̃ e (so ) + π̃eR (so ) b                        ν m π̃ e (so ) + π̃eR (so ) b


where p is the stationary probability of optimism.
     The following lemma establishes the existence of stationary inflation expectations under optimism that
are consistent with the policy choices of the government for all b ∈ (0, b̄).
                                                                                                                                       ν m π̃(1−π̃)
Lemma 5. Given Assumptions 2 and 3, under monetary discretion, there is a debt threshold b̂ =                                                R
such that:

     1. If 0 < b < b̂, then π̃ e (so ) > π̃ is consistent with the government choice π̃ r (A, s, ·) > π̃, for all (A, s).

     2. If b̂ ≤ b < b̄, then π̃ e (so ) = π̃ is consistent with the government choice π̃ r (A, s, ·) = π̃, for all (A, s).



                                                                         25
                             Figure 2: Multiplicity of Inflation Regime under Optimism

                                  π̃ e (so )




                                                                  F




                                                                  F
                                         π̃                       •
                                                                                                b
                                                           b̂
The figure illustrates the possibility of multiple stationary inflation expectations compatible with the policy of the government.
For b ≥ b̂, several outcomes are possible: the ones marked F correspond to the seignorage Laffer curve, where several rates
of inflation are consistent with the repayment of debt, with no labor taxes. In addition, the outcome labelled • can arise:
agents reduce their real money demand to π̃, which in turn induces the discretionary government to generate π̃ and complement
seignorage resource with positive labor taxes to service debt. The inflation regime under optimism selected in this analysis are
indicated in blue.


Proof. Computation details are provided in Appendix 7.2.

    In the first case, the level of debt and inflation expectations are such that seignorage is sufficient to service
debt for any realization of s. In the second case, the level of debt and inflation expectations are such that
seignorage is not sufficient to service debt, and must be complemented with labor taxes for any realization
of s.30
    In fact, for some debt level b ≥ b̂, π̃ e (so ) can take several values. This is due to the interactions between
expected inflation and delivered inflation, present in (57). It can give rise to a seignorage Laffer curve,
where several rates of inflation in excess of π̃ generate the same real resource.31 In addition, there is another
possible outcome with maximum inflation, i.e. π̃ e (so ) = π̃, and positive labor taxes. These elements are
summarized in Figure 2. To be clear, this multiplicity is a consequence of allowing an endogenous money
demand through the overlapping generations structure.
    Lemma 5 establishes the existence of π̃ e (so ) for all b < b̄, but does not describe all the possible regimes.
Indeed, as explained in the proof of Lemma 4, the inflation regime under optimism does not influence the
existence of multiple valuations of debt. Hence, without loss of generality, we select in Lemma 5 an inflation
regime for b ≥ b̂, marked in blue in Figure 2.
   30 We do not impose further parametric restriction to ensure that b̂ < b̄, where b̄ is defined by Assumption 3. This requires the

lower bound on productivity Al or the cost of default γ to be high enough or the share of money holder ν m to be low enough.
If it were the case that b̂ ≥ b̄, then only case 1 of Lemma 5 would apply, our results would not be affected.
   31 This is the standard textbook Laffer curve, as in Theorem 26.2 of Azariadis (1993), and discussed in Appendix 7.2.




                                                                26
4.3.4     Equilibrium characterization

The analysis has established the government budget constraint under discretion, the potential for multiple
solutions to the debt valuation equation and the existence of inflation expectations consistent with monetary
policy. Taken together, these elements create the basis for sunspot equilibria associated with the valuation
of government debt. Formally,

Proposition 4. For any π̃ > 0, under Assumptions 2 and 3, there is a SREE under discretion with the
following properties:

  1. If s−1 = so , government debt is risk free as the treasury reimburses with probability 1, with either:

          a. if 0 < b < b̂, then π̃ e (so ) > π̃ and for all A all s, π̃(A, s, ·) > π̃, τ (A, s, ·) = 0, D(A, s, ·) = r,

          b. if b̂ ≤ b < b̄, then π̃ e (so ) = π̃ and for all A all s, π̃(A, s, ·) = π̃, τ (A, s, ·) > 0, D(A, s, ·) = r.

  2. If s−1 = sp , the interest rate incorporates a risk-premium. For all A, π̃(A, ·) = π̃. The treasury defaults
        on its debt for all A < Ā where Ā ∈ (Al , Ah ) and π̃ e (sp ) = π̃.

Proof. We describe the optimal behavior of agents consistent with the equilibrium definition. This proof
builds on Lemma 4 and the existence of several interest rates (and associated inflation expectations) consis-
tent with the equilibrium definition.
   If s−1 = so , then by Assumption 3, debt is risk free. Two cases need to be distinguished, as established
in Lemma 5. If b < b̂, then inflation expectations under optimism π̃ e (so ) allow seignorage resource to
be sufficient to service principal and interest on debt. Young agents form expectations of no default and
π̃ e (so ) > π̃. They supply labor accordingly, young agents with low productivity save with money, young
rich agents save via intermediated claims; the interest rate i on the government security satisfies the no-
arbitrage condition (9) with a zero probability of default, i.e. P d = 0, and π̃ e (so ). The optimal policy of the
government is then to set for all A, all s, π̃(A, s, ·) > π̃, τ (A, s, ·) = 0 and repay the debt.
   On the other hand, if b̂ ≤ b < b̄, then there is an equilibrium with π̃ e (so ) = π̃, seignorage resource is
not sufficient and taxes need be raised to service debt. Using Lemma 3 and Assumption 3, for all A, all s,
π̃(A, s, ·) = π̃, τ (A, s, ·) solves the government budget constraint (51) and debt is repaid. Accordingly, young
agents form expectations P d = 0, π̃ e (so ) = π̃, the government security is priced according to (9). In both
cases, all markets clear.
   For s−1 = sp , we detail only the differences with the previous case. Independently of the level of b,
young agents form rational expectations in which there is a positive probability of default, i.e. P d > 0, and
π̃ e (sp ) = π̃. The government security is priced accordingly. Given i and seignorage revenue ν m π̃(1 − π̃),
there is a unique threshold Ā(i) > Al such that the optimal policy is to raise labor taxes τ for all A ≥ Ā(i)
so as to satisfy the budget constraint (51) and default otherwise. Finally, expectations are consistent with
the best response of the government: P d = F (Ā(i)).

   Does monetary discretion provide a shield against debt fragility? Can the government inflate the real
value of debt and generate additional resources to service its debt? The answer is negative. As the proposition



                                                              27
makes clear, this result does not hinge upon a particular inflation ceiling π̃.32 Indeed, when pessimism hits
the economy, the interplay between inflation expectations and real money tax base corners the central bank
into a high inflation regime with no more capacity to inflate debt or provide additional resources to the
treasury. Hence, under monetary discretion, the sunspot shock to investors confidence triggers a joint shift
in inflation expectations and debt sustainability. This shift in inflation expectations is the driving force that
neutralizes the strategy of the discretionary government to print money and collect seignorage to service its
debt.
    Finally, the strategic complementarity between expected and delivered inflation may give rise to inflation
multiplicity, as discussed in sub-section 4.3.3. This element is not explicit in Proposition 4. The point of the
proposition, and of this paper, is to study the interaction of debt fragility and monetary policy. Accordingly,
the analysis in Proposition 4 rests on the selection of a particular equilibrium in the event of optimism, i.e.
s−1 = so . The equilibrium selection is orthogonal to the multiple solutions of the debt pricing equation, as
argued before. Of course, it is possible to add another, independent, dimension to the problem by introducing
strategic uncertainty over the the inflation rate, given optimism.



5       Leaning Against the Winds
These results make clear that the monetary authority may be unable to prevent debt fragility. If there
is a commitment to an unconditional inflation target, the environment is similar to a real economy, thus
exposing the debt to multiple valuations. If the monetary authority has complete discretion, then it will use
the inflation tax to raise revenue ex post and again fiscal tools may be needed to finance debt repayments. In
both cases, when productivity is low, the tax burden can become excessive leading to default. In equilibrium,
the valuation of debt will be subject to investor sentiments in a sunspot equilibrium.
    This section considers a more nuanced monetary intervention which is accommodative during periods of
low productivity. We show that with commitment, this intervention eliminates debt fragility. Further, we
provide conditions such that reputation effects are strong enough to support this outcome without commit-
ment.


5.1     Stabilization through Commitment
This section returns to the commitment case. Instead of imposing an inflation target, we allow the central
bank to choose a state-contingent inflation policy that alters the real debt burden and distributes resources
from seignorage across states. As in Chari, Christiano, and Eichenbaum (1998) this is a one period com-
mitment, allowing the monetary authority to commit to inflation next period, contingent on the current
state. By carefully choosing the distribution of realized future inflation, the central bank can provide a
shield against debt fragility.
    Suppose the monetary authority commits to a rule given by π̃(A, i, s−1 ): the rate of inflation in the
current period depends on current productivity, the interest rate on outstanding debt as well as the sunspot
 32 Specifically,   it holds for π̃ arbitrarily close to 0, i.e. an inflation ceiling arbitrarily high.




                                                                      28
realization from previous period.33 This rule is devised with a couple of key properties. First, to induce
agents to hold money, the rule will deliver a target rate of inflation. Second, it will support the fundamental
equilibrium by using monetary tools to counter pessimistic expectations so that equilibria with strategic
uncertainty no longer exist.34 In this way, the monetary authority responds to variations in current beliefs,
reflected in the sunspot and the interest rate, by appropriately setting policy for the future. Importantly, if
investors were pessimistic in the previous period, this policy responds to variations in productivity: the rate
of inflation is inversely related to current productivity. Specifically, when A is high, the rate of inflation is
relatively low and fiscal policy, through the setting of tax rates, bears more of the burden of financing debt
obligations. But during times of low productivity, when default is likely, the monetary authority inflates the
real value of debt and generates seignorage revenue. Both effects allow the fiscal authority to set low taxes
and avoid default.
    We first describe the desired properties of this policy, derive its existence and properties in Lemma 6.
Then, we characterize the stationary equilibrium of the economy under π̃(A, i, s−1 ) and argue that such
monetary policy rule stabilizes debt valuations.35
    Specifically, suppose the central bank commits to a rule in which π̃(A, i, so ) = π̃ ∗ for all (A, i): under
optimism, there is an inflation target as in monetary delegation. Delivered inflation π̃ ∗ is independent of both
current productivity A and the interest rate on debt. When s−1 = sp , the central bank implements a state
dependent (on (A, i)) monetary policy, labelled ‘law’, for leaning against the winds. This policy satisfies two
key properties.
    First, given pessimism the policy rule anchors inflation expectations: π̃(A, i, sp ) meets the inflation target
on average:
                                                  Z
                                                        π̃(A, i, sp )dF (A) = π̃ ∗ ,                                           (58)
                                                    A


for all i. Combined with the policy under optimism, π̃(A, i, so ) = π̃ ∗ , unconditional inflation expectations
are anchored at π̃ ∗ . Thus, the real money tax base is invariant and resources from seignorage are given by:

                                               ∆M
                                                  = ν m π̃ ∗ 1 − π̃(A, i, sp ) .
                                                                              
                                                                                                                               (59)
                                                P

The government budget constraint under repayment becomes:


                               (1 + i)π̃(A, i, sp )b = A2 (1 − τ )τ + ν m π̃ ∗ 1 − π̃(A, i, sp ) .
                                                                                                
                                                                                                                               (60)


    Second, π̃(A, i, sp ) deters state contingent default: given A and i, the treasury either reimburses its debt
with probability 0 or 1. For low values of debt obligations, the fiscal authority will choose to repay its debt,
  33 This commitment is independent of other elements of the state vector.
  34 To be clear, the policy is designed to eliminate equilibria with state contingent default. The equilibrium with certain default
remains.
  35 As written, the intervention depends on (A, i, s
                                                        −1 ). In the equilibrium constructed below, optimism is equivalent to an
interest rate satisfying (1 + i)π̃ ∗ = R. Hence there is only one interest rate conditional on optimism. If there is pessimism, we
condition monetary policy on the interest rate on the outstanding debt in order to specify the monetary intervention both on
and off the equilibrium path. An alternative would write the equilibrium conditions solely as a function of the interest rate,
not the sunspots. This is used in the discussion of policy implementation.


                                                                  29
for all A. For high values of these obligations, the fiscal authority will default, again for all A. Of course,
the size of the debt obligations are determined in equilibrium, based upon investor beliefs and central bank
policy. Formally, Lemma 6 establishes that there is a monetary policy rule ’law’ that satisfies these two
properties.

Lemma 6. Given an inflation target 0 < π̃ ∗ ≤ 1, there is a monetary policy rule π̃(A, i, sp ) that satisfies the
inflation target and deters state contingent default. Moreover, π̃(A, i, sp ) > 0 for all (A, i) and is increasing
in A.

Proof. We derive a state-contingent monetary policy rule π̃(A, i, sp ) that satisfies (58) and deters state
contingent default. Consider the case θ = 0, where all debt is held abroad, and ν m ≈ 0, which makes
seignorage a negligible source of income for the fiscal authority. This simplified framework outlines clearly
that the capacity of the central bank to influence the default decision of the treasury does not primarily rely
on providing more or less resources, but rather on its capacity to alter the real return to debt across states.
The proof is extended to the general case θ ≥ 0 and ν m ≥ 0 in Appendix 7.3.
   Given s−1 = sp , we focus on the dependence of inflation on the interest rate on outstanding debt and
the realization of the technological shock A. Consider a state contingent rule π̃(A, i, sp ), denoted π̃ pA in
the following analysis. This rule induces a unique interest rate cut-off iδ such that if i < iδ then the fiscal
authority is induced to repay its debt for all A, i.e. with probability 1. If i > iδ , then the fiscal authority
defaults for all A, i.e. with probability 1. For i = iδ , the fiscal authority is indifferent between repayment
and default for all A. This condition for indifference is:


                       ∆(A, iδ , m−1 , τ, π̃ pA ) = W d (·) − W r (·) = 0                    ∀A,             (61)


where m−1 = π̃ ∗ using the inflation target condition (58), π̃ pA is defined below and τ satisfies the government
budget constraint (60) given (A, iδ , π̃ pA ):


                                                 (1 + iδ )π̃ pA b = A2 (1 − τ )τ.                            (62)


Using θ = 0 and ν m ≈ 0, (61) implies τ = γ for all A. From the government budget constraint:

                                           A2 (1 − γ)γ
                                 π̃ pA =                                               ∀A.                   (63)
                                            (1 + iδ )b

Applying the inflation target requirement (58), the nominal interest rate cut-off iδ is:

                                                         (1 − γ)γ
                                                                      Z
                                              1 + iδ =                    A2 dF (A),                         (64)
                                                            π∗ b      A


which gives:

                                                                A2 π ∗
                                                     π̃ pA = R            .                                  (65)
                                                              A
                                                                A2 dF (A)



                                                                 30
We verify that this monetary rule deters state contingent default:

                                              d∆(A, i, m, τ, π̃ pA )              dτ
                                                                     = A2 (1 − τ ) ,                                   (66)
                                                     di                           di

                      π̃ p
                         Ab
where     dτ
          di   =   A2 (1−2τ )   > 0 from (62). As ∆(A, iδ , π̃ ∗ , τ, π̃ pA ) = 0 for all A, we get that for all A and all
i < iδ , ∆(·) < 0 and for all i > iδ , ∆(·) > 0. Hence there is no nominal interest rate i > 0 that induces the
fiscal authority to default on its debt in a state-contingent manner. Finally, from (65), we get π̃ pA > 0 and
dπ̃ p
 dA
    A
        > 0.

    The lemma establishes two critical properties of ‘law’ - π̃(A, i, sp ). First, for all A, π̃(A, i, sp ) > 0, which
rules out any issue of demonetization of the economy and state-contingent complete default via inflation. Sec-
ond, the policy rule is countercyclical: π̃(A, i, sp ) is increasing in A, i.e. the lower the technology realization,
the higher is inflation. Accordingly, the real return to debt is state contingent and increasing in A.36 Also,
this policy distributes resource from seignorage across states, with high seignorage revenue ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ pA ) for
low realizations of A. Hence, even if seignorage revenue is not essential to rule out equilibria with default,
the policy further contributes to lower the fiscal burden in states where fiscal needs are the highest, i.e. the
induced fiscal policy is also countercyclical.37
    When the central bank commits to π̃(A, i, s−1 ), there is a unique price for debt, namely the fundamental
price under inflation targeting. That is, there is no sunspot equilibrium affecting the valuation of debt.
Formally,

Proposition 5. Under Assumptions 2, 3, when the monetary authority commits to π̃(A, i, s−1 ), with
π̃(A, i, sp ) given in Lemma 6, debt is uniquely valued and risk-free. Debt fragility is eliminated.

Proof. Under Assumption 3, there is a risk-free outcome under strict inflation target 0 < π̃ ∗ ≤ 1. Hence,
there is an equilibrium nominal interest rate i under optimism that satisfies (1 + i)π̃ ∗ = R. Now under
pessimism, the monetary authority commits to π̃(A, i, sp ) as defined in Lemma 6. As seen in the proof of
this lemma, this rule delivers inflation as a function of the technological shock A. It is noted {π̃ pA } in the
following developments. We verify that under this rule, the best response of the treasury is to repay its debt
for all A and that the equilibrium interest rate is i.
    A central property of {π̃ pA } is that it delivers the inflation target on average. By continuity and mono-
tonicity of π̃ pA in A, there is a realization Ã such that π̃ pÃ = π̃ ∗ . In this case, the best-response of the fiscal
authority is to raise taxes and repay its debt. Second, {π̃ pA } is such that if the fiscal authority repays its
debt with positive probability, it repays its debt with probability 1. Hence, under {π̃ pA }, the fiscal authority
repays its debt for all A: debt is risk-free. Finally, the no-arbitrage condition under inflation target π̃ ∗
uniquely pins down the nominal interest rate. Hence, under {π̃ pA }, the nominal interest rate is i:
                                                       Z
                                             (1 + i)       π̃ pA dF (A) = (1 + i)π̃ ∗ = R.                             (67)
                                                       A
  36 The central bank uses its unique capacity to generate state-contingent inflation to turn a non-state contingent nominal

bond into a state contingent real asset.
  37 In fact, the proof in the text focuses on the case of ν m near zero, where seignorage resource is negligable.




                                                                   31
                                Figure 3: State Dependent Monetary and Fiscal Policy

π̃(A, s−1 )                                            π̃(A, sp ) τ (A, s−1 )
                                                                                                                γ
          π̃   ∗                                              0
                                                       π̃(A, s )                                               τ (A, sp )




                                                                                                              τ (A, so )

                                                              A                                                            A
                      (a) Monetary Policy                                                (b) Fiscal Policy
The left panel represents the state dependent monetary policy to which the central bank commits. The right panel represents
the induced fiscal policy. The dependence of the policies on the sunspot and realized productivity are displayed.




   This proposition makes clear that the commitment of the central bank rules out the effect of pessimism
on the value of debt. The key to this result is the relaxation of the incentive to default by the fiscal authority
through the erosion of the real return to debt in low productivity states.
   Figure 3 displays the equilibrium monetary policy rule and the induced tax policy, as described in
Proposition 5.38 In the case s−1 = sp , note the distribution of inflation over realization of A: for low A,
high inflation, i.e. low real value of debt and high seignorage revenue. Hence, in case of pessimism, the
monetary authority implements a countercyclical policy that stabilizes the price of debt and provides fiscal
relief for low values of A, compensated by lower inflation for higher realizations of A. A critical element of
this policy is the commitment of the central bank so that inflation expectations are anchored and the real
money tax base is not sensitive to variations in private agents sentiments. It illustrates how the central bank
can alter the real value of debt, and incidentally distribute income from seignorage, so as to contain the
fiscal pressure that weights on the fiscal authority. In this sense, the monetary authority leans against the
winds of pessimism as well as those associated with low productivity.
   As written, the monetary intervention depends jointly on the sunspot from the previous period as well
as the interest on outstanding debt. Along the equilibrium path, from Proposition 5, only the fundamental
price of debt will be observed. Though extraneous uncertainty may still exist, it will not be reflected in the
equilibrium interest rates. With this in mind, it may be more natural to condition monetary interventions
on interest rates so that along the equilibrium path, no actual intervention is needed. But, the monetary
authority stands ready to intervene in response to higher interest rates that reflect investor pessimism. This
 38 The   dependence on i is not explicit as these are the policy functions along the equilibrium path.




                                                                  32
is, in effect, a threat of the monetary authority off the equilibrium path to intervene either to support the
fiscal authority or, if interest rates are too high, to allow default with probability one.
    Formally, in this case, the monetary authority commits to the following policy, labelled ’wit’, for ’whatever
it takes’ :

                                                if i = i, then ’dlg’ : ∀A π̃(A, i) = π̃ ∗
                                                                                                                       (68)
                                                if i > i, then ’law’ : ∀A π̃(A, i) = π̃ pA

With this implementation, the central bank commits to a strategy conditional on the nominal interest rate
and ensures that private investors coordinate on the fundamental price of debt i. In equilibrium, only the
fundamental price of debt is observed and the central bank implements its unconditional inflation target.
This approach is reminiscent of the analysis in Bassetto (2005). Indeed, committing to this specific strategy
rather than to a policy rule allows the monetary authority to react to deviations from private agents and
ensures a unique equilibrium outcome.39
    Under this rule, given an inflation target π̃ ∗ , debt fragility is eliminated and the expected life-time welfare
of private agents is given by:

                                                Ah                                       (njy )2
                                            Z                              X
                                    ∗
                        V   wit
                                  (π̃ ) =            W r (A, i)dF (A) −             νj           ≥ V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p),   (69)
                                            Al                                             2
                                                                          j∈{m,I}


The inequality is strict whenever the probability of optimism p is lower than 1.


5.2     Stabilization without Commitment
The preceding analysis assumes that the monetary authority is granted the capacity to commit to policies
and argues that this power can eliminate multiplicity. This section replaces the assumption of commitment
with an equilibrium response to deviations from ’wit’ that can, in principle, support this policy without
commitment. The argument uses a version of the grim trigger strategy in repeated games, as in Rubinstein
(1979). We focus on certain features of the economy, such as the presence of strategic uncertainty, that make
deviations from policy ’wit’ costly and thus support the elimination of debt fragility as an outcome without
commitment.
    The monetary authority has an incentive to deviate from its committed policy to take advantage of the
non-distortionary nature of the inflation tax. To counter this gain, we construct an equilibrium in which
any deviations from ’wit’ are met by a strict application of ’dlg’, the monetary delegation regime of strict
inflation targeting. From Section 4.2, this generates lifetime welfare for each generation of V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p), given
by (43), and which depends positively on p, the probability of optimism.
    The construction, formalized in Proposition 6, goes as follows. Along the equilibrium path the monetary
authority follows ’wit’ described in (68). This generates lifetime welfare of V wit (π̃ ∗ ). In a given state, the
central bank can deviate and consider any policy whatsoever: this is modeled as complete discretion for
  39 In other words, committing to a strategy allows the monetary authority a second mover-advantage while anchoring expec-

tations in this dynamic game.



                                                                   33
a single period, which is the most profitable deviation. After that deviation, the ’whatever it takes’ type
intervention is no longer credible. The monetary authority returns to its essential mandate of a targeted
inflation rate π̃ ∗ , labelled ’delegation’.
    As in Lemma 6, assume θ = 0 for this presentation. We derive two expressions for the welfare of old
agents under the two outcomes of following the ’wit’ policy (68) or operating under discretion ’disc’, W wit (·)
and W disc (·) respectively. First consider the policy to be supported:


                                                        2
                                                     dlg
                         W dlg (A, i, m−1 ) = A(1−τ ) + ν m m−1 π̃ dlg + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ), if i = i
                         
                                                   2
    W wit (A, i, m−1 ) =                       
                                                      law
                                                           2                                                                  (70)
                         W law (A, i, m ) = A(1−τ ) + ν m m π̃ law + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ), if i > i.
                         
                                        −1          2          −1



    Under ’delegation’, the central bank implements its strict inflation target π̃ dlg = π̃ ∗ . Whenever the
nominal interest rate is above its fundamental value, the central bank implements π̃ law = π̃ pA , as defined
in Lemma 6.40 The associated tax rates solve the government budget constraint (12) given the monetary
intervention. Recall that ’wit’ describes policy as long as i ∈ [i, iδ ]. If the interest rate on debt exceeds iδ
the monetary authority cannot prevent a certain default.41 Thus we explore credibility only for i ∈ [i, iδ ].
    Now consider the potential deviation. Under discretion, given individual real money holding m−1 , the
welfare of old agents is given by:
                                                                  2
                            disc                  A(1 − τ disc )
                        W          (A, i, m−1 ) =                       + ν m m−1 π̃ disc + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ),                   (71)
                                                       2

    W disc (A, i, m−1 ) is the welfare of the old agents when the tax rate and inverse inflation rates, (τ disc , π̃ disc )
are determined under discretion, as in Proposition 4. In this case, the optimal monetary policy is to rely
on the inflation tax: π̃ disc = π̃. The base for this tax, i.e. the money holdings of the old agents, will be
determined by the inflationary expectations they held in the prior period.
    The incentive for maintaining policy ’wit’ is characterized by the following difference in agents’ welfare:

                                                                                      β
           ∆(A, i, m−1 , p) = [W wit (A, i, m−1 ) − W disc (A, i, m−1 )] +               [V wit (π̃ ∗ ) − V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p)].   (72)
                                                                                     1−β

    Here W wit (A, i, m−1 ) − W disc (A, i, m−1 ) is the immediate gain to old agents from deviating to full
discretion from ’wit’. This is clearly a gain since the non-distortionary inflation tax is desirable ex post,
particularly when agents are holding large money balances.
                                                   h                                 i
                                                 β
   The punishment arises from the second term, 1−β   V wit (π̃ ∗ ) − V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) , where β ∈ (0, 1] is the rate at
which the monetary authority discounts successive generations.42 Here the punishment for deviating from
policy ’wit’ is the continuing operation of the monetary authority under the strict inflation target regime.
   40 For the clarity of the exposition in this section, we assume that π̃ is low enough so that the feasibility of ’law’ is not an

issue, i.e. π̃ pA > π̃. Further, we assume that b is high enough, i.e. b > ν m π̃ ∗ . None of the results depend crucially on these
                 l
elements.
   41 Again, the market shutdown case is of no interest for the present analysis.
   42 This welfare criterion is not inconsistent with the one derived for the repayment vs. default decision on debt. As discussed

in 2.2, this decision has welfare consequences that are contained within a generation.




                                                                34
The idea here is that, like the ECB, the policy ’wit’ is built upon a basic commitment to an inflation target.43
As constructed, that inflation target is met on average by the policy and along the equilibrium path. If policy
’wit’ is not maintained, then the experiment with that form of intervention is over and the monetary authority
returns to its essential goal of strict inflation target. In fact, resorting to the inflation target is a punishment
precisely because of the possibility of self-fulfilling debt crisis. Indeed, since V wit (π̃ ∗ ) = V dlg (π̃ ∗ , 1), we have
V wit (π̃ ∗ ) > V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) for p < 1.
    We evaluate the credibility of the policy ’wit’ whenever the capacity of the institution to anchor inflation
expectations is not challenged. Accordingly, along the deviations considered, m−1 = π̃ ∗ . If ∆(A, i, π̃ ∗ , p) ≥ 0,
then policy ’wit’ is incentive compatible in state (A, i, p). Using this construction, the ’wit’ policy can be
supported in an equilibrium without commitment if the costs of deviating from it are sufficiently high.
Formally,

Proposition 6. If the probability of pessimism is sufficiently high and β close enough to unity, then the
monetary authority will pursue the ’wit’ policy in all states, i.e. ∆(A, i, π̃ ∗ , p) ≥ 0 for all A and i ∈ [i, iδ ].
Debt fragility is eliminated.

Proof. Clearly W wit (A, i, π̃ ∗ ) − W disc (A, i, π̃ ∗ ) ≤ 0 since the monetary authority operating under discretion
could replicate policy ’wit’. In fact from Proposition 4, it will choose π̃ = π̃. This inflation rate is higher
than that under policy ’wit’ for any (A, i). Higher inflation relaxes the debt burden left to be serviced with
distortionary taxation and unambiguously increases welfare. Also note that by construction ’wit’ deters
state-contingent default. A fortiori, no default is possible under discretion.
    As V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) is increasing in p, ∆(A, i, π̃ ∗ , p) is decreasing in p. So for low enough p, V wit (π̃ ∗ ) −
                                                                       β
V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p) can be large. Further, for β close to unity,         1−β [V
                                                                             wit ∗
                                                                                (π̃ )   − V dlg (π̃ ∗ , p)] can be arbitrarily large.
                                                                                    ∗
Hence for p sufficiently small and β close enough to unity, ∆(A, i, π̃ , p) > 0 for all A.

    This proposition nests two types of deviations from the equilibrium path. First, suppose investors in
period t − 1 believe in policy ’wit’, charge the fundamental interest rate i and expect the unconditional
inflation target π̃ ∗ in all states. Still in period t the monetary authority operating under ’wit’ can choose to
deviate and resort to discretion. The gain from this is the use of the non-distortionary inflation tax, which
is the highest for A = Al . The cost is that ’whatever it takes’ is no longer credible. But the foundation of
the monetary authority as following strict inflation targeting, i.e. delegation, is not altered. If the conditions
of Proposition 6 are satisfied, the monetary authority does not deviate along the equilibrium path.
    Providing incentives for the monetary authority along the equilibrium path is necessary but not sufficient
for ’whatever it takes’ to be incentive compatible. Consider a deviation by investors in which they believe
there is a positive probability of default implying i > i. We maintain the integrity of the monetary authority
and thus anchor inflationary expectations at π̃ ∗ .44 In this case, ’wit’ prescribes to implement {π̃ pA } as
described in Lemma 6. In this case, the incentive compatibility constraint will be binding in all states if it
binds when A = Ah . Indeed, to deliver the inflation target on average, the central bank tightens monetary
  43 The deviation from ’wit’ to ’disc’ could be replaced by a deviation to the inflation target. This would generate a smaller

short term gain, making it easier to support ’wit’.
  44 As discussed earlier, policy ’wit’ applies only for interest rates below a level denoted iδ . For pessimism sufficiently high so

that i > iδ , ’wit’ prescribes default with probability one. In that situation, there is no credibility to evaluate.


                                                                 35
policy whenever the realization of technology is high. Still, if the conditions for Proposition 6 hold, the
monetary authority will have an incentive to intervene to preserve its reputation and follow policy ’wit’. In
this case, the pessimism of the investors is not warranted, whatever the realization of A.
    The conditions for supporting policy ’wit’ have two components. This first is the usual condition that
the monetary authority does not discount the future too heavily. The second is not standard and involves
the strategic uncertainty of the model. A gain from policy ’wit’ is the elimination of debt crisis that do arise
with probability (1 − p) under the strict inflation target regime. As this probability of pessimism gets larger,
the penalty associated with sticking to the inflation target regime is larger. Accordingly, the higher the risk
of coordination failure under inflation targeting, the more credible it is for the central bank to promise to
undertake ’whatever it takes’ to counter pessimistic beliefs.
    Finally, note that here we are not considering a deviation in which investors no longer trust the monetary
authority to meet the inflation target on average. Otherwise, investors may hold arbitrary expectations
about future inflation, which would influence the gain from discretion relative to ’wit’. As argued in Section
4.2, the foundation for the credibility of the strict inflation target regime could be supported with the threat
of demonetization of the economy.



6     Conclusions
The goal of this paper was to determine whether monetary policy enhances or mitigates fiscal fragility. Cast
as a real economy, the basic environment has fragile debt: there are multiple valuations of government debt
depending on the beliefs of investors.
    The effects of introducing monetary interventions depends on the commitment of the central bank. If the
central bank is committed to an inflation target, then debt fragility remains. If the central bank is allowed
full discretion, then the presence of an inelastic source of finance through seignorage is internalized by private
agents. Any temptation to inflate the real value of debt is anticipated and debt fragility remains.
    Finally, we analyze how a committed central bank can deter debt fragility, by designing a specific monetary
policy rule. We devise a state contingent intervention that eliminates pessimistic evaluations of government
debt. The policy requires the monetary authority to implement a countercyclical policy, that erodes the real
value of debt and provides resources, through seignorage, in times of low productivity and thus low revenue.
By supporting the fiscal authorities in these states, the incentive for default is eliminated. Sovereign debt is
no longer subject to multiple valuations driven by investors’ sentiments. Interestingly, the credibility of this
monetary strategy increases with the risk of a self-fulfilling debt crisis.
    A number of extensions are worth consideration. First, the paper studies the extremes of commitment
and discretion. An interesting middle case would be stochastic commitment. A government acting in period t
would be allowed to adjust its policy in period t+1 with a probability less than one. This partial commitment
would create a cost of high inflation and thus enrich the analysis.
    Second, the model is dynamic but the fiscal policy is within a generation. Thus we have assumed away
the possibilities of debt turnover and intertemporal punishments for default.
    Third, our analysis has underlined that the capacity of the central bank to stabilize debt valuations rely


                                                       36
on the issuance of non contingent nominal assets labelled in domestic currency. It does not apply to real,
indexed debt or debt issued in foreign currency. Allowing governments this choice would be of interest.
    Finally, as in many other studies, the outcome with discretion imposes an upper bound on inflation.
Providing further micro foundations for this bound remains an open area. Perhaps a political economy model
that stresses the redistribution aspects of labor income vs inflation tax would be a productive approach.



7     Appendix

7.1    Welfare under Repayment and under Default
As explained in section (2.2), the repayment vs. default decision in this environment is a discrete choice that
affects only the welfare of old agents. Hence, the welfare criteria of interest for D ∈ {r, d} is:

                                                    h         nm
                                                               o (D)
                                                                    2i      h         nI (D)2 i
                    W D (A, i, m−1 , τ, σ, π̃) = ν m cm
                                                      o (D) −          + ν I cIo (D) − o        .           (73)
                                                                 2                        2

Using the labor supply policy functions from (4) and (10), we get the following consumption and labor supply
vectors:


           cm         m
            o (r) = Ano (r)(1 − τ ) + m−1 π̃
                                             r
                                                                   cm         m                    d
                                                                    o (d) = Ano (d)(1 − γ) + m−1 π̃ + t

           nm
            o (r) = A(1 − τ )                                      nm
                                                                    o (d) = A(1 − γ)

           cIo (r) = AnIo (r)(1 − τ ) + (1 + i)π̃ r bI + Rk        cIo (d) = AnIo (d)(1 − γ) + Rk + t
           nIo (r) = A(1 − τ )                                     nIo (d) = A(1 − γ).


Using ν I bI = θb, one can solve for k, the risk-free component of individual portfolio of rich agents from their
budget constraint:


                            znIy = Rz 2 = bI + k + Γ ⇒ ν I Rk = ν I R Rz 2 − Γ) − Rθb.                      (74)


We derive the expressions for W r (·) and W d (·):
                                                2
              r                   r     A(1 − τ )
                                                    + ν m m−1 π̃ r + (1 + i)π̃ r − R θb + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ)
                                                                                    
           W (A, i, m−1 , τ, σ, π̃ ) =                                                                      (75)
                                            2
                                             2
            d                  d      A(1 − γ)
           W (A, i, m−1 , σ, π̃ ) =               + ν m m−1 π̃ d − Rθb + ν I R(Rz 2 − Γ) + T (·),           (76)
                                          2

where τ solves the government budget constraint under repayment and T (·) = ν m m−1 σπ̃ d is a lump sum
transfer that implements π̃ d under default.
    Default is optimal whenever ∆(·) = W d (·) − W r (·) ≥ 0.




                                                              37
7.2     Proof Lemma 5
As discussed in section 4.3.3, π̃ e (so ) ≥ π̃ can be part of a stationary equilibrium if and only if it satisfies:
                                    n           ν m π̃ e (so )         o               n         ν m π̃ e (sp )         o
               π̃ e (so ) = p max                                 ; π̃   + (1 − p) max                             ; π̃  ,   (77)
                                        ν m π̃ e (so ) + (1 + i)b                        ν m π̃ e (so ) + (1 + i)b

where the no-arbitrage condition gives: (1 + i)π̃ e (so ) = R, and p is the stationary probability of optimism.
    First consider the situation in which seignorage alone is not sufficient to service principal and interest on
debt. In this case, the government sets π̃ r (s, ·) = π̃ for all s, and raises additional labor taxes. Agents form
expectations accordingly and (77) writes:


                                                      π̃ e (so ) = (1 − p)π̃ + pπ̃ = π̃.                                     (78)

                                       ν m π̃
This case emerges whenever          ν m π̃+ R
                                                    ≤ π̃, which rewrites:
                                             π̃ b



                                                                         ν m π̃(1 − π̃)
                                                              b ≥ b̂ =                  .                                    (79)
                                                                                R

    Next, we show that whenever 0 < b < b̂, there is a level of inflation expectation under optimism, π̃ e (so ),
such that seignorage alone is sufficient to service principal and interest on debt for all (A,s). (77) writes
then:

                                                     ν m π̃ e (so )                             ν m π̃
                             π̃ e (so ) = p                         R
                                                                           + (1 − p)                         R
                                                                                                                        .    (80)
                                              ν m π̃ e (so ) + π̃e (so ) b           ν m π̃ e (so ) +    π̃ e (so ) b


                                                   R
Multiply both sides by ν m π̃ e (so ) +        π̃ e (so ) b   and get:


                                     ν m π̃ e (so )2 − pν m π̃ e (so ) + Rb − (1 − p)ν m π̃ = 0.                             (81)


Hence, (80) has at least a positive solution if b ≤ bα , where:

                                                                p2 ν m + 4(1 − p)ν m π̃
                                                         bα =                           .                                    (82)
                                                                          4R

Under this condition, the solution to (81) that is necessarily positive45 is given by:
                                                                    q
                                                               p+    p2 + 4(1 − p)π̃ − 4 νRb
                                                                                           m
                                               e     o
                                              π̃ (s ) =                                          .                           (83)
                                                                                2

This solution is compatible with (77) if it satisfies the following two conditions:

                                    ν m π̃ e (s)
                                                         ≥ π̃                                  ∀s ∈ {so , sp },              (84)
                            ν m π̃ e (so ) + π̃eR(so ) b

  45 The other solution to the polynomial can be both positive and feasible, hence there is possibly multiple stationary inflation

regimes due to the Laffer curve property of seignorage.



                                                                          38
    We verify that bα ≥ b̂ and that for all b < b̂, when π̃ e (so ) is given by (83), then the conditions (84) are
satisfied.
                           
    Note F (p) = 4R bα − b̂ . Substituting and rearranging:


                                   F (p) = p2 ν m − p4ν m π̃ + 4ν m π̃ 2 = ν m (p − 2π̃)2 ≥ 0,                                       (85)


which gives bα ≥ b̂.
    Next, note G(p, b) ≡ π̃ e (so ) , where π̃ e (so ) is given by (83). The feasibility condition (84) for s = sp then
reads:
                                                      q
                                                          p2 + 4(1 − p)π̃ − 4 νRb
                                                                                         s
                                              p+                                m                Rbπ̃
                                  G(b, p) =                                          ≥                    .                          (86)
                                                                 2                           ν m (1 − π̃)

In this expression, the left side G(b, p) is decreasing in b, whereas the right side is increasing in b; G(0, p) > 0
and the right side is equal to 0 for b = 0; G(b̂, p) ≥ π̃ and the right side is equal to π̃, for b = b̂. Hence for
all b < b̂, (86) is satisfied.
                                                                                             νm
    Finally, the feasibility condition (84) for s = so requires b ≤ bδ =                     4R   and:
                                              q                                      q
                                        1−        1 − 4 νRb
                                                          m                     1+     1 − 4 νRb
                                                                                               m
                                                               ≤ G(b, p) ≤                          .                                (87)
                                                  2                                      2

Since π̃(1 − π̃) ≤ 14 , we have b̂ ≤ bδ . Note Bl (b) and Bu (b) the lower and upper bounds of this inequality.
                                                       √                 √
                                                     1− 1−4π̃(1−π̃)    1− (1−2π̃)2
   Bl (b), is increasing in b, Bl (0) = 0, Bl (b̂) =      2         =      2       ≤ π̃ for all π̃ ∈ [0, 1]. As G(b, p)
is decreasing in b and G(b̂, p) ≥ π̃, we have that for all b ∈ [0, b̂], G(b, p) ≥ Bl (b).
    We finally verify that G(b, p) ≤ Bu (b) for all b < b̂. Taking the derivatives of G(b, p) w.r.t. p:

                                        dG(·)   1            p − 2π̃           
                                              =    1+ q                           .                                                  (88)
                                         dp     2       p2 + 4(1 − p)π̃ − 4 νRb
                                                                              m



                          dG(·)                                                                         p−2π̃
If p − 2π̃ > 0, then       dp     > 0. If p − 2π̃ < 0, then verify that −1 ≤ √                                         ≤ 0, so that again
                                                                                                  p2 +4(1−p)π̃−4 νRb
                                                                                                                   m
dG(·)
 dp     > 0. Hence, for all p ∈ [0, 1], all π̃ ∈ [0, 1], all b ∈ [0, b̂]:

                                                                          q
                                                                     1+    1 − 4 νRb
                                                                                   m
                                       G(b, p) ≤ G(b, 1) =                               = Bu (b).                                   (89)
                                                                            2

Overall, we have shown that for all b ≤ b̂, there is π̃ e (so ) that satisfies (83) and solves (77).


7.3      Existence of the ”Leaning Against the Winds” Policy
This section details the proof of Lemma 6 in the general case θ ∈ [0, 1] and ν m ≥ 0.
   We adopt the following notations. Consider the central bank committing to a policy contingent on A,
noted {π̃ A }, and such that A π̃ A dF (A) = π̃ ∗ . Given m−1 = π̃ e (·) = π̃ ∗ , where π̃ ∗ is the inflation target of
                            R



                                                                     39
the central bank, the discretionary default decision of the treasury is captured by:


                 ∆(A, i, π̃ ∗ , τ, π̃ A ) = W d (·) − W r (·)
                                           [A(1 − γ)]2   [A(1 − τ )]2
                                       =               −              + ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ A ) − (1 + i)π̃ A θb,   (90)
                                                2             2

where τ solves the government budget constraint given π̃ A :


                        G(A, i, π̃ ∗ , τ, π̃ A ) = A2 (1 − τ )τ + ν m π̃ ∗ (1 − π̃ A ) − (1 + i)π̃ A b = 0.      (91)


    Moreover, in the economy with θ > 0, default occurs for two reasons: either it is the best response of the
treasury: ∆(·) > 0, or the fiscal capacity of the country cannot service debt, since τ ≤ 21 .
    We show that there is a unique state-dependent inflation policy {π̃ pA } and an induced interest rate cut-off
iδ such that the policy delivers the inflation target on average, and, if the central bank commits to {π̃ pA },
then the fiscal authority services its obligation for all A if and only if i < iδ .
    We proceed in two steps: first we show that for any it , there is a unique policy {π̃ A (it )} such that the
treasury reimburses its debt if and only if i < it . Second, we show that there is a unique iδ such that
{π̃ A (iδ )} satisfies the inflation target. The desired policy is given by π̃ pA = π̃ A (iδ ) for all A.
    Part I. Consider a nominal interest rate it such that 1 + it > 0 and a realization A ∈ [Al , Ah ].
    (i) The following elements establish that there is a unique inflation level π̃ A (it ) such that the fiscal
authority is indifferent between repayment and default.
    First, there is an inverse inflation rate π̃ 1A (it ) such that debt is serviced with no taxes on labor income.


                                              G(A, it , π̃ ∗ , τ, π̃ 1A (it )) = 0 ⇒ τ = 0.                      (92)


In this case, using Assumption 2, ∆(·) < 0. Using the government budget constraint with τ = 0, one gets:

                                                                        ν m π̃ ∗
                                                π̃ 1A (it ) =                         > 0.                       (93)
                                                                ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + it )b

    Similarly, the central bank can set the inverse inflation rate to π̃ 2A (it ) so that if the treasury desires to
service its debt, it has to set τ = 12 . Formally:

                                                                          A2
                                                                                 + ν m π̃ ∗
                                                    π̃ 2A (it ) =          4
                                                                                              .                  (94)
                                                                      ν m π̃ ∗   + (1 + it )b

    Importantly, for any inflation rate between these two cases, the lower the inflation, i.e. the higher π̃ A ,
the higher the tax rate to service debt. Formally, differentiating the government budget constraint w.r.t. τ
and π̃ A :

                                                                        dτ     ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + it )b
                                ∀π̃ A ∈ [π̃ 1A (it ), π̃ 2A (it )],          =                       > 0.        (95)
                                                                       dπ̃ A      A2 (1 − 2τ )




                                                                          40
    Moreover, the lower the inflation, i.e. the higher π̃ A , the higher the value of ∆(·) = W d (·) − W r (·):

                               d∆(·)    1−τ m ∗
                                      =        (ν π̃ + (1 + it )b) − (ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + it )θb) > 0,                                        (96)
                                dπ̃ A   1 − 2τ

         1−τ
since   1−2τ   > 1 for τ ∈ [0, 21 ).
    Hence, there is a unique π̃ A (it ) that has the desired property to make the treasury indifferent between
repayment and default. Especially,

    - if ∆ A, it , π̃ ∗ , 12 , π̃ 2A (it ) > 0, then π̃ 1A (it ) < π̃ A (it ) < π̃ 2A (it ),
                                          


    - if ∆ A, it , π̃ ∗ , 12 , π̃ 2A (it ) ≤ 0, then π̃ A (it ) = π̃ 2A (it ).
                                          


    (ii) Next, we verify that for any i < it , the fiscal authority services its debt, otherwise for any i > it , it
defaults. Given π̃ A (it ), we have:

                             d∆(·)               dτ                  1−τ
                                   = A2 (1 − τ )    − π̃ A (it )θb =        π̃ A (it )b − π̃ A (it )θb > 0.                               (97)
                              di                 di                  1 − 2τ

    (iii) Also, we establish the following properties of π̃ A (it ):

                                      dπ̃ A (it )                                                 dπ̃ pA (it )
                                                  >0                                                           < 0.                       (98)
                                         dA                                                          dit

If π̃ A (it ) = π̃ 2A (it ), these properties are straightforward. In the case π̃ A (it ) < π̃ 2A (it ), first differentiate the
government budget constraint w.r.t. (A, i, τ, π̃ A ) to get:

            dτ    2(1 − τ )τ                        dτ     π̃ A b                                           dτ     ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + i)b
               =−                                      = 2                                                       =                        (99)
            dA    A(1 − 2τ )                        di  A (1 − 2τ )                                        dπ̃ A      A2 (1 − 2τ )

Then differentiate ∆(A, i, π̃ ∗ , τ, π̃ A ) w.r.t to its arguments and using the derivative of τ w.r.t (A, i, π̃ A ), one
gets:

         h                   (1 − τ )2 i      h 1−τ                                                i
          A(1 − γ)2 − A                                  ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + i)b − ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + i)θb dπ̃ A = 0
                                                                            
                                         dA +                                                                                            (100)
                              1 − 2τ           1 − 2τ
         h 1−τ                    i      h 1−τ                                               i
                                                 ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + i)b − ν m π̃ ∗ + (1 + i)θb dπ̃ A = 0.
                                                                      
                  π̃ A b − π̃ A θb di +                                                                                                  (101)
           1 − 2τ                         1 − 2τ

         1−τ       (1−τ )2                              1
Since   1−2τ   >    1−2τ     > 1 for all 0 ≤ τ ≤        2   and 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1, we get the desired results.
    (iv) Finally, the limits behavior of π̃ A (it ) are derived from the inequality


                                                        π̃ 1A (it ) < π̃ A (it ) ≤ π̃ 2A (it ),                                          (102)


which gives        lim π̃ A (it ) = 0 and tlim π̃ A (it ) > 1.
                it →+∞                         i →−1
    Part II. By applying the inflation target requirement (58), we show that there is a unique iδ > 0 such




                                                                         41
that:
                                               Z
                                                     π̃ A (iδ )dF (A) = π̃ ∗ .                               (103)
                                                 A

                   R
   Note H(i) =      A
                         π̃ A (i)dF (A), which is defined for all i such that 1 + i > 0. The properties of π̃ A (i)
naturally convey to H(i): H(i) is strictly decreasing in i; lim H(i) = 0; lim H(i) > 1.
                                                                    i→+∞         i→−1
   Hence there is a unique iδ such that H(iδ ) = π̃ ∗ .
   Overall, the monetary policy rule {π̃ pA } that meets the inflation target and deters state contingent default,
exists, and satisfies:


                                                   ∀ A π̃ pA = π̃ pA (iδ ).                                  (104)



References
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath (2013): “Crisis and Commitment: Inflation
  Credibility and the Vulnerability to Sovereign Debt Crises,” NBER Working Papers 19516, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Azariadis, C. (1993): Intertemporal macroeconomics. Blackwell Oxford.

Bassetto, M. (2005): “Equilibrium and government commitment,” Journal of Economic Theory, 124(1),
  79–105.

Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff (1989): “Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?,” The American Economic
  Review, 79(1), pp. 43–50.

Calvo, G. A. (1978): “Optimal Seigniorage from Money Creation: An Analysis in Terms of the Optimum
  Balance of Payments Deficit Problem,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 4(3), 503–517.

Calvo, G. A. (1988): “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American Economic Review,
  78(4), 647–61.

Chari, V. V., L. J. Christiano, and M. Eichenbaum (1998): “Expectation Traps and Discretion,”
  Journal of Economic Theory, 81(2), 462–492.

Chari, V. V., and P. J. Kehoe (1990): “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 783–802.

Cole, H. L., and T. J. Kehoe (2000): “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(1),
  91–116.

Cooper, R. (2012): “Fragile Debt and the Credible Sharing of Strategic Uncertainty,” NBER Working
  Paper 18377, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Cooper, R., H. Kempf, and D. Peled (2010): “Regional Debt in Monetary Unions: Is it Inflationary?,”
  European Economic Review, 54(3), 345–358.

                                                             42
Corsetti, G., and L. Dedola (2013): “The Mystery of the Printing Press: Self-fulfilling Debt Crises and
  Monetary Sovereignty,” CEPR Discussion Paper 9358, Center for Economic Policy Research.

Eaton, J., and R. Fernandez (1995): “Sovereign Debt,” NBER Working Paper 5131, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz (1981): “Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
  Analysis,” Review of Economic Studies, 48(2), 289–309.

Lorenzoni, G., and I. Werning (2013): “Slow Moving Debt Crises,” Working Paper 19228, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Roch, F., and H. Uhlig (2012): “The Dynamics of Sovereign Debt Crises and Bailouts,” draft, University
  of Chicago.

Rogoff, K. (1985): “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(4), 1169–89.

Rubinstein, A. (1979): “Equilibrium in supergames with the overtaking criterion,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 21(1), 1 – 9.

Trebesch, C., M. G. Papaioannou, and U. S. Das (2012): “Sovereign Debt Restructurings 1950-2010,”
  IMF Working Papers 12/203, International Monetary Fund.




                                                     43
