                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ONE STEP AT A TIME:
        THE EFFECTS OF AN EARLY LITERACY TEXT MESSAGING PROGRAM
                       FOR PARENTS OF PRESCHOOLERS

                                      Benjamin N. York
                                       Susanna Loeb

                                     Working Paper 20659
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20659


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2014, Revised March 2018




The authors would like to give special thanks to Carla Bryant, Chief of Early Education of San
Francisco Unified School District, and her team, for the many ways in which they supported this
study. They also thank Helen Maniates, Assistant Professor of Teacher Education at the
University of San Francisco, Molly Wertz, Executive Director of Raising A Reader in San
Francisco, Alameda and Contra Costa Counties, and various team members of Jumpstart
Northern California, including Jennifer Curran and Catherine Aranda, for their feedback on
READY4K! text messages. This research was supported by the Silver Giving Foundation, the
Evelyn and Walter Haas, Jr. Fund, and the Institute of Education Sciences (IES), United States
(U.S.) Department of Education, through Grant R305B090016 to Stanford University. The
opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Silver Giving
Foundation, the Evelyn and Walter Haas, Jr. Fund, IES, the U.S. Department of Education, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. This randomized controlled trial (RCT) was registered in
the American Economic Association Registry (RCT ID AEARCTR-0000536).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Benjamin N. York and Susanna Loeb. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
One Step at a Time: The Effects of an Early Literacy Text Messaging Program for Parents
of Preschoolers
Benjamin N. York and Susanna Loeb
NBER Working Paper No. 20659
November 2014, Revised March 2018
JEL No. I1,I10,I12,I2,I20,I25

                                          ABSTRACT

Large systematic differences in young children’s home learning experiences have long-term
economic consequences. Many parenting programs place significant demands on parents’ time
and inundate parents with information. This study evaluates the effects of READY4K!, an eight-
month-long text-messaging intervention for parents of preschoolers that targets the behavioral
barriers to engaged parenting. We find that READY4K! increased parental involvement at home
and school by 0.15 to 0.29 standard deviations, leading to child gains in early literacy of about
0.11 standard deviations. The results point to the salience of behavioral barriers to parenting and
the potential for low-cost interventions to reduce these barriers.


Benjamin N. York
ParentPowered Technologies
10 Mulberry Ct. #3
Belmont, CA 94002
ben.york@parentpowered.com

Susanna Loeb
524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

       The home learning experiences of young children vary dramatically (Bradley et al. 2001).

Hart and Risley (1995), for example, find that by the age of four, children in low-income families

hear about 30 million fewer words than children in “professional families.” Parenting interventions

represent one strategy for addressing such differences, yet to date, only a small number of

programs have shown positive effects on parents or their children (Duncan, Ludwig, and

Magnuson 2010). Even the most promising interventions, including pediatric clinic-based

programs and home visitation programs have meaningful limitations such as access and cost. Most

existing interventions try to rapidly change complex parenting behaviors through a small number

of time- and information-intensive parent education sessions.

       An alternative to existing approaches is to break down the complexity of parenting into

small steps that are easy-to-achieve, and provide encouragement, support, and reinforcement to

parents over extended periods of time. Given its widespread use, extremely low cost, and ease of

scalability, text messaging is a promising vehicle for implementing this strategy. Over 96 percent

of American adults under the age of 50 have cell phones, 98 percent of cell phone owners can

access texts, and text messages have a 95 percent open rate (Ehrlich 2013; Anderson 2015). Black

and Hispanic adults, who often exhibit the highest dropout rates in parenting programs, send texts

even more frequently than their white counterparts (Zickuhr and Smith 2012). Texting has proven

to be effective in behavior change applications. In education, Castleman and Page (2015) find

positive effects of a texting program for recent high school graduates designed to curb summer

“melt,” which occurs when college-intending graduates fail to matriculate in college the year after

high school. Similarly, Bergman (2016) finds that high school students whose parents received

messages about their missing work and grades had improved by 0.19 standard deviations (SD).



                                                                                      Page 1 of 53
       This study adds to research on both parenting and behavioral interventions by evaluating

the effects of an eight-month-long text-messaging program for parents of preschoolers called

READY4K!, designed to help them support their children’s development. During the 2013-14 and

2015-16 school years, we conducted randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of the program in San

Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD). Between the two years 1,031 parents and guardians

agreed to participate in the study, and we randomly selected half to receive the program. Each

week, these parents received three texts about an academic skill or set of skills: a “FACT” text

designed to inform and motivate parents; a “TIP” text that aimed to minimize the cognitive,

emotional, and time burdens of engaged parenting by providing parents with highly-specific

activities that build on existing family routines; and a “GROWTH” text, which provided parents

with encouragement and reinforcement as well as a follow-up tip. About every two weeks, we sent

one “placebo” text to parents in the control group, often pertaining to the district’s kindergarten

enrollment process or required vaccinations.

      We find strong evidence that parents in the treatment group used the tips and found the

program to be helpful. For example, treatment group parents found READY4K! texts to be 0.41

SD more helpful than control group parents (p<0.01). In addition, treatment parents reported

engaging in more home literacy activities with their children, ranging from pointing out rhyming

words to concepts of print like showing their children the different parts of a book– an average of

0.16 SD (p<0.10). According to teachers, parents in the treatment group more frequently asked

questions about their children’s school experiences than the control group parents – effects of up

to 0.21 (0.14 average) SD (p<0.05). Increases in parental involvement at home and school

translated into learning gains for children, as students whose parents received READY4K! texts

scored an average of 0.11 SD (p<0.05) higher on a spring early literacy assessment. Children who



                                                                                      Page 2 of 53
scored below the median of the baseline skills particularly benefited from the intervention with an

increase in literacy skills of 0.31SD (p<0.01).

       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we review research on the

behavioral barriers to engaged parenting, as well as on parenting and text messaging interventions.

Section 3 describes study procedures. In Section 4, we present study results. We conclude this

paper in Section 5 with a discussion of the findings.

2. Literature Review

       Virtually all parents want their children to succeed in school (Stevenson, Chen, and Uttal

1990), yet some parents provide their children with comparatively more support. For example,

economically disadvantaged and wealthy parents exhibit large and systematic differences in

parenting practices, though there are clear variations within economic groups as well. From birth

to age two, non-poor children are more likely than poor children to be caressed, kissed, or hugged

by their mother, and they are less likely to be spanked. Non-poor birth-to-two-year-olds also have

greater access to children’s books and are more likely to be read to than their poor counterparts.

These disparities have significant consequences, as children who experience responsive and

stimulating parental care tend to score higher on assessments of motor, social, emotional, literacy,

and numeracy skills than those who do not (Bradley et al. 2001; NICHD Early Child Care Research

Network 2006; Melhuish et al. 2008). Skill gaps that develop early in life are difficult to overcome

and have significant negative implications for later life economic outcomes (Heckman 2006).

       Given that most parents want their children to succeed in school, why are some parents

more involved in their children’s learning? Unequal access to resources – such as toys, books, free

time, parks, and libraries – is clearly a part of the answer to this question (Costello et al. 2003;

Riccio et al. 2013). This study, however, focuses on behavioral barriers to involved parenting that



                                                                                       Page 3 of 53
are not included in most basic economic models of utility maximization under a budget constraint.

These factors may be easier and more cost effective to address through policies or interventions.

       We identify at least four sets of barriers that may cause families to underinvest in the

academic development of their children. Each component of the READY4K! program is designed

to address at least one of these barriers. First, parents may have insufficient information regarding

which skills their children should be learning during the prekindergarten years and the importance

of those skills for the long-term success of their children. Second, engaged parenting is a

cognitively complex and broad endeavor. In the face of this daunting task, parents may make

suboptimal choices regarding the investment into their children’s academic development. Third,

parenting requires continual attention over long periods of time and such tasks are often difficult

to sustain. Fourth, the benefits of current investments in early childhood education are distal and

uncertain. Time-inconsistent preferences may cause parents to substitute attention to more

immediately gratifying activities that do not have the same long-term benefits for their children.

       Imperfect information has been studied in a variety of contexts, but may be especially

salient in early childhood. Only recently have researchers quantified the long-term benefits of

quality early education experiences (Heckman 2006). Some parents may not have information

about the importance of parenting or productive parenting practices, and fail to provide their

children with an adequate level of support or the right types of support. Imperfect information has

been studied in other educational contexts with mixed results. Avery and Kane (2004) and Grodsky

and Jones (2007), for example, find little evidence that students or parents lacking information

about the costs and benefits of college explains the socioeconomic stratification of college

attendance. Other studies find that the provision of information impacts school choices and student




                                                                                       Page 4 of 53
outcomes (Hastings and Weinstein 2008; Valant and Loeb 2014). READY4K! reduces

information asymmetries by sending texts that detail the importance of each week’s skill.

       Even if parents have accurate information and knowledge, the limited information

processing capabilities of the human mind (Simon 1955) may cause parents to underinvest in their

children. In the face of cognitively demanding tasks – such as tasks requiring a substantial amount

of choice, and continuous, on-going tasks – individuals tend to make choices based on faulty

heuristics or they avoid making decisions altogether (Mullainathan and Thaler 2000). The

cognitive demands of parenting are high, as each day parents must make decisions about what to

say, do, and provide to their children in every situation. Making choices about activities to support

child development may be particularly daunting for parents, given that many of the skills required

to be successful in school are outside of parents’ area of expertise (e.g., literacy, numeracy, and

socio-emotional skills).

       Ample research provides evidence of suboptimal behavior (e.g., poor decision making) in

the face of high cognitive demand (bounded rationality). For example, one study underscoring the

difficulty of tasks that require substantial choice finds that reducing the selection of jams offered

to consumers from 24 to six varieties, all equally appealing, increases the likelihood of a jam

purchase by ten-fold (Iyengar and Lepper 2000). In education, a random assignment study of

simplifying the college enrollment process finds that students of low- to moderate-income families

who received assistance filling out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid, along with

information about their eligibility for aid and local post-secondary options, were substantially more

likely to submit the aid application and enroll in college the following fall than students in families

that only received information (Bettinger et al. 2012). Poverty may also exacerbate the cognitive

demand barrier. As people living in poverty focus on meeting daily financial challenges, such as



                                                                                         Page 5 of 53
buying food and paying rent, less cognitive capacity remains for completing other complex tasks

such as parenting. Researchers have shown the existence of the scarcity phenomenon both in the

laboratory and in contexts such as farming (Shah, Mullainathan, and Shafir 2012; Mani et al. 2013).

READY4K! reduces the cognitive complexity of developing literacy skills by providing tips on

activities parents can employ during regular routines using common household objects.

        Increasing evidence also points to the possibility that limits to attention can lead to

suboptimal behavior (Karlan et al. 2010). Given the significant demands on most parents’ time,

parents likely have particularly limited attention. A single mother, for instance, might have the

goal of providing daily test preparation support to her child for an exam to be administered in a

month, but may be preoccupied by the day-to-day rigors of being a parent (e.g., working one or

more jobs, shopping for groceries, paying the bills, house chores, and bathing, dressing, feeding,

transporting, and entertaining her child or children) and forget to help her child until the final days

leading up to the assessment, ultimately underinvesting in the child’s preparation relative to her

initial preference. A series of randomized experiments finds that sending regular reminders to new

savings account holders improves their saving behavior, providing evidence for the importance of

limited attention (Karlan et al. 2010). With each text, READY4K! redirects parent attention to the

important task of literacy development.

        Finally, time-inconsistent preferences, or self-control problems (DellaVigna 2009), are

likely most germane to parents. In parenting, a potentially significant source of self-control

problems is delayed gratification. Although many parents derive pleasure from doing activities

with their children, the benefits of activities that will increase children’s school readiness skills are

not always evident and parents may prefer to do other activities with their children that are more

familiar or will be sure to make their children happy. Moreover, school readiness-building



                                                                                           Page 6 of 53
activities generally do not lead to immediate gains in child development, meaning that parents

must wait for the satisfaction that they receive from engaging in these activities. Parental

involvement also requires parents to forego personal activities with immediate rewards, such as

talking to a friend on the phone or going for walk, and thus has potentially significant timing

hurdles. Many people tend to do too little when gratification is delayed (Thaler and Sunstein 2008).

Bandura and Schunk (1981) showed that reframing a large distal goal into a series of small

proximal goals increased students’ confidence and improved test scores. READY4K! mitigates

time-inconsistent preferences by repeatedly encouraging parents and highlighting the more

proximal goal of success in kindergarten.

       Many parenting programs try to quickly change complex parenting behaviors through a

short series of time-intensive parenting information sessions. This strategy has proven to be largely

ineffective, especially over the long run (Duncan, Ludwig, and Magnuson 2010). This lack of

effectiveness is not surprising given that behavioral hurdles to parenting are generally not

alleviated and, in fact, may be increased by common approaches that place significant demands on

parents’ time and inundate parents with information.

       An alternative strategy that has shown promise is to target parents’ home literacy practices

by leveraging children’s visits to the doctor’s office. Pediatric clinic-based programs provide

parents with information on the importance of literacy development as well as books and other

resources. These relatively inexpensive interventions concentrate on information asymmetries and

have correlated with improvements in literacy practices among low-income, black, and Hispanic

parents (Golova et al. 1999; Needlman et al. 2005; Blom-Hoffman et al. 2007; Zuckerman 2009).

Program participation generally predicts children’s language development (Sharif, Rieber, and




                                                                                        Page 7 of 53
Ozuah 2002). One such program, the Reach out and Read (ROR) program, has received a

particularly high level of attention in the literature (Mendelsohn et al. 2001).

       Some childcare centers and elementary schools have carried out similar family-based home

literacy interventions (e.g., Whitehurst et al. 1994; Jordan, Snow, and Porche 2000). Recent meta-

analyses of these programs find that they are associated with small but significant short-term gains

for young children (Manz et al. 2010; Reese, Sparks, and Leyva 2010). These studies again

concentrate on information asymmetries by providing parents training on how to read with their

children. For example, a random assignment study of a reading program that teaches parents

dialogic reading techniques such as asking open-ended questions finds positive treatment effects

on children’s writing, language, and print concepts skills (Whitehurst et al. 1994).

       While clinic- and school-based programs show promise, they have a number of limitations.

Many of the benefits of clinic-based interventions occur during visits, which are often infrequent.

The shortcomings of school-based programs are even greater, largely driven by the time and effort

demands school-based programs place on parents. For instance, the overall participation rate in a

study of ParentCorps, which consists of 13 school-based, two hour-long parent and child sessions,

was 42 percent, and the average number of sessions attended by treatment group parents was less

than six (Brotman et al. 2011). Dropout rates in center-based programs are often high, and it is

often the parents who could benefit the most from support who drop out (Prinz and Miller 1994).

       The ubiquity of technology has provided new opportunities to field interventions that

address these behavioral barriers. Interventions that depend in part, or solely, on texting have

shown promise. Castleman and Page (2015) evaluate a texting program for recent high school

graduates designed increase college enrollment. The program, which was delivered between early

June and mid-August, consists of a series of 10 texts messages to students and their parents, sent



                                                                                       Page 8 of 53
roughly over five-day intervals. The messages addressed limited attention by reminding students

and their parents about tasks required by the students’ intended college such as completing

important paperwork. They also prompt students and parents to ask for additional assistance if

needed, potentially reducing the cognitive demand of these tasks. The study finds that students

were roughly three percentage points more likely to enroll at two-year institutions and that texting

was particularly effective for students with low access to college-planning supports. Another

notable experimental texting study sent parents or guardians of high school students messages for

six months about students’ missing assignments such as homework, classwork, exams and grades

(Bergman 2016). This study mainly focuses on parental information asymmetries and the limited

attention of parents and finds positive treatment effects on attendance, assignment completion,

behavior, and grade point average, and some evidence of effects on math test scores.

       Most relevant for this study, Mayer at al. (2015) provide parents of children in Head Start

with tablets with which they operationalize behavioral economics principals to increase the

number of books children read at home. The Parents and Children Together (PACT) intervention

requires that parents set a goal around the number of books children read in the home. This soft

commitment device is supported by text messages that remind and encourage the parents, which

address limited attention and time-inconsistent preferences. The authors found that treated parents

read 88 minutes more with their children a week. They attribute the lower amount of reading in

the control group to the fact that parents heavily discounted the future.

       To the best of our knowledge, there have been no attempts to use texting as the sole vehicle

to leverage multiple behavioral economics principals in an effort to encourage parents to more

actively engage in academics with their children in the home. In this study, we evaluate the impact

of READY4K!, an early literacy-focused text messaging program for parents of preschoolers that



                                                                                       Page 9 of 53
does just that by breaking down parenting activities into small steps that are relatively easy to

achieve in a highly-structured fashion.

3. Procedures

3a. The Intervention

       READY4K! is an eight-month-long text messaging program for parents of four year olds

designed to help them support their children’s academic development. This study reports on the

results of providing the program to two cohorts of prekindergarten families in the San Francisco

Unified School District (SFUSD). During the 2013-2014 school year we randomly selected

participants to receive a program dedicated solely to improving literacy skills. During the 2015-

2016 school year we randomly selected families to receive a program that supported the literacy,

math, and socio-emotional development of their children. Though the content of the program

differs between years, the structure of the program remains identical and we cull on the same

behavioral economics and education theories to change parental habits. Both programs draw on

research in academic development (e.g., California Department of Education 2008; Lonigan and

Shanahan 2009), academic-related parenting practices (e.g., Reese, Sparks, and Leyva 2010), and

behavioral economics (e.g., Simon 1955). Both programs are linked to the California Preschool

Learning Foundations and are structured as a spiral curriculum. They start with simple topics and

gets progressively more advanced over time. Topics are re-introduced throughout the year for

reinforcement. In describing the program, we concentrate on the literacy texts because they are

common between years. Information on the math and socio-emotional texts are available on

request.

       Parents in the treatment group received three READY4K! texts messages per week during

the school year (starting in October and ending in May), each week addressing a particular set of



                                                                                   Page 10 of 53
skills. On Mondays, they received “FACT” texts, designed to inform and motivate parents by

highlighting the importance of a particular skill or set of skills. On Wednesdays, they received

“TIP” texts, designed to minimize the cognitive, emotional, and time burdens of engaged

parenting. These texts include short, simple, and highly specific activities for parents to do with

their children that build on existing family routines. To maximize the likelihood of uptake, we

aimed to make the activities fun for parents and their children. On Fridays, parents received

“GROWTH” texts, which provide encouragement, and extend the Wednesday tips. The following

is an example week of texts:



FACT: Letters are the building blocks of written language. Children need to know the letters to

learn how to read & write.

TIP: Point out the first letter in your child’s name in magazines, at the store & on signs. Have your

child try. Make it a game. Who can find the most?

GROWTH: Keep pointing out letters. You’re preparing your child 4K! Now when you point out

a letter, ask: What sound does it make?



       Overall, literacy texts cover a wide range of skills and related parenting practices,

including: upper- and lower-case letter recognition, letter sound awareness, beginning sound

awareness, rhyme awareness, name writing, concepts of print, story comprehension, vocabulary

development, listening to and singing songs, self-narration, parent-child conversations, and

establishing high-quality parent-child book reading routines. Math texts cover topics such as:

counting, number recognition, shapes, sorting, patterns, addition, subtraction, and comparisons of

size. Finally, socio-emotional texts concentrate on identifying emotions, identifying their causes



                                                                                      Page 11 of 53
and consequences, building emotion regulation, perseverance, sharing, and turn-taking. Parents

chose to receive texts in English, Spanish, or Chinese.

       In the first year of the program, we integrated text messages that emphasized parental

involvement at school. The following text, which we sent during a week about concepts of print,

is one example:



TIP: Ask the teacher about your child’s knowledge of concepts of print. Concepts of print include

knowing how book are organized & that words have meaning.



       In the first year we also included messages about SFUSD’s Raising A Reader (RAR)

program, which regularly sends books home to children. In particular, we coupled parent-child

reading activities with texts about RAR to alleviate concerns that families without books could not

engage in the suggested reading activities. For example:



TIP: Use the RAR red book bag to build your routine. Let your child hold the book. Ask what it is

about. Follow the words with your finger as you read.



       In the vast majority of cases, READY4K! texts build on activities that parents already do

with their children. By extending pre-existing family routines, the program’s messages minimize

the costs of adopting beneficial home literacy practices. Parents do not have to take up new

activities, which have time and emotional costs; they are simply asked to build on established

routines. For example, the following “spiral” week of texts focuses on leveraging bath time:




                                                                                     Page 12 of 53
FACT: Bath time is great for teaching your child important skills 4K. Start by asking: What are

the things we need for bath time? Why?

TIP: When you’re bathing your child, point out the letters on shampoo bottles. Ask your child to

name them and tell you the sounds that they make.

GROWTH: Keep using bath time to prepare your child 4K! Ask: What rhymes with tub (cub, rub),

soap (rope, hope) and bubble (double, trouble)?



       While parents in the treatment group received multiple READY4K! texts per week, parents

in the control group received one placebo text about every two weeks. These messages pertained

to the district’s kindergarten enrollment requirements or required vaccinations. For example:



READY4K: Immunization forms are available at any San Francisco Health Center & SFUSD’s

Educational Placement Center at 555 Franklin St., Room 100.



3b. Study Participants

       We conducted the experimental study of READY4K! with parents of four-year-old

preschoolers in SFUSD – administered by the Early Education Department (EED). EED serves

roughly one-third of San Francisco’s preschool market (the poorest third), operating 21 stand-

alone sites and 13 sites that are co-located at elementary schools. Stand-alone and co-located sites

function somewhat differently and have different sets of supports.

       To recruit parents at stand-alone sites, we built on EED’s existing enrollment processes by

distributing READY4K! enrollment forms to the department’s enrollment clerks and offering them

ten dollars for each family that they enrolled. In SFUSD, parents of preschoolers must turn in a



                                                                                     Page 13 of 53
completed enrollment form to an enrollment clerk prior to the start of the school year. In the first

year, to further encourage participation, we offered parents a ten-dollar Target gift card for

enrolling in the program. We discontinued this incentive in the second year due to cost

considerations, but this change did not pose a barrier to recruiting participants. In the first year, we

also provided ten dollars per month or a 12 dollar monthly Amazon.com gift card to all participants

because we did not want texting costs to represent a barrier to program participation. Surveys of

parents in the first year indicated that most families have an unlimited texting plan. We therefore

discontinued this incentive in the second year as well. This lack of incentive did not appreciably

change attrition rates.

       Unlike stand-alone sites, early education sites that are co-located at elementary schools do

not have an EED enrollment clerk. In lieu of the above strategy we sent home information to

eligible parents about the program along with our enrollment form. We also called some families

and opted them into the study over the phone. The incentive structure in the first year was the same

for these families.

      We began program enrollment in early June and completed it in late September, about six

weeks after the start of the school year, so as to include late preschool enrollees. Between the two

years, 1,031 of 1,761 eligible families, representing all 34 sites enrolled in the study.4

       Of the 1,031 families that enrolled in the study, 69 left SFUSD prior to the start of the

school year and 27 left the district during the year, leaving an analytic sample of 935 families.

Mobility is generally high in early education. Assuming that READY4K! did not affect initial




4
  In the first year, 519 of 874 families enrolled in the program and represented 31 of the 34 sites.
In the second year of the program, 512 of 887 families enrolled in the program and represented all
sites.
                                                                                         Page 14 of 53
enrollment or mid-year exit decisions, only 17 out of 935 families intentionally left the study – an

opt-out rate of roughly two percent.

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics on the sample of families represented in the parent

surveys, teacher surveys, and academic assessment. Sample sizes are smaller than the 935 families

due to survey non-response and student absences during the assessment window. The teacher

survey sample size is smaller because we were unable to survey teachers in the second year. While

nearly all families in the district receive financial aid for preschool attendance costs (e.g., during

the 2012-13 school year, only 12 percent of families paid full tuition), the participants in this study

are diverse in other ways. As shown in Table 1, roughly 34 percent of children in the academic

sample are Hispanic, 34 percent are Chinese, and 12 percent are black. The average fall age of

children and parents in the sample is 4.40 and 34.61 years, respectively. About half of the parents,

51 percent, chose to receive texts in English, 24 percent chose Spanish, and 25 percent chose

Chinese. Most parents (80 percent) had an unlimited texting plan at the start of the study.

Demographically, the population of four year olds in SFUSD is similar in composition to the

analytical sample. The population is 15 percent black, 35 percent Hispanic, 27 percent Chinese,

and slightly older (4.48 years old).

       Parents’ baseline practices and children’s baseline skills also vary. While on average,

parents reported engaging in literacy-building activities with their child three to six times per

week (including story-telling, reading, and singing), many parents reported engaging in this

activities more or less often. Similarly, parents reported a high degree of variation in their

children’s pre-treatment early literacy skills. While on average, parents indicated that their

children know most of the letters and can produce letter sounds and rhyme somewhat well, the

variation around these averages is quite large. Children’s direct assessment scores support



                                                                                        Page 15 of 53
parents’ reports. For example, the average fall literacy assessment score of children in the

academic sample is approximately 52 out of 126, with a standard deviation of about 37.

3c. Data

       This study uses multiple sources of data describing four year olds in SFUSD and their

parents. Information on parents comes from three sources: the READY4K! enrollment form, an

end-of-year survey of parents, and an end-of-year survey of teachers (the teacher survey was only

fielded in the first year). In the enrollment form, we collected basic information from parents

including their home address, cell phone number, cell phone service provider, and if they have

unlimited texting. We also asked parents to rate their early literacy-related parenting practices and

their children’s early literacy skills (Table 1 gives summary statistics). We collected these data

prior to the start of the intervention and all parents partially or fully completed the form.

       At the end of each respective school year, we mailed surveys to families’ homes, in which

we asked parents about their experiences participating in the study (we also sent a text message to

parents with a link to an on-line version of the survey). We asked all parents about their experiences

receiving and using study texts messages, as well as the activities they engaged in to help develop

their children’s early literacy skills. We offered parents 50 dollars for completing the survey.

Ultimately 558 did so, resulting in a response rate of approximately 60 percent.

       In the first year of the experiment, we also surveyed teachers about parental involvement.

We asked them about the frequency with which parents asked questions about their child’s

interests, what their child is doing and learning in school, and things they can do to help their child

learn to read. Teachers did not know which parents were in the treatment group and which were

in the control group. As with parents, we offered teachers 50 dollars for completing the survey.




                                                                                        Page 16 of 53
Overall, 63 teachers covering 258 of 449 families in the first year of the experiment completed and

returned them – a response rate of about 57 percent.

       To describe students, we use two additional sources of information: SFUSD’s

administrative records and students’ spring scores on the district’s early literacy assessment. In the

spring of each school year, the district assesses the early literacy skills of four years olds using

Phonological Awareness Literacy Screening (PALS). PALS was developed and validated at the

University of Virginia (Invernizzi et al. 2004). PALS is a one-on-one assessment that takes about

20 to 30 minutes to complete. It includes tests of children’s name writing skills, alphabet

knowledge, beginning sound awareness, print and word awareness, rhyme awareness, and nursery

rhyme awareness. The assessment has a leveled component: in the alphabet knowledge subtest,

children who correctly identify 16 or more upper-case letters move on to be assessed in lower-case

letters; and, children who correctly identify nine or more lower-case letters move on to letter

sounds. SFUSD collects PALS data through a partnership with the University of San Francisco,

which uses education graduate students to administer the assessment. The PALS assessment

window was between March and April, well before the end of the READY4K! intervention, which

occurred in May. All of the students in this study were assessed with the English-language version

of PALS.

3d. Randomization Checks

       In expectation, the only difference between the treatment group and the control group in a

randomized experiment is treatment status. On average, all other characteristics of treatment and

control group members, such as race, should be balanced. If by chance, despite the randomization

process, there is imbalance across the groups, then treatment effect estimates could be biased.




                                                                                       Page 17 of 53
        We randomized READY4K! within sites and therefore estimate a set of site fixed effects

models to evaluate covariate balance. These models take the following form:

                                    𝑋"#$ = 𝛽' 𝑇"#$ + 𝛾#$ + 𝜀"#$ (1)

where 𝑋"#$ is a pre-treatment covariate of child i (or his or her parent) in site s in year t, 𝑇"#$ is the

treatment status of the parent of child i in site s in year t, 𝛾#$ is a site-by-year fixed effect, and 𝜀"#$

is a child-level (or parent-level) error term (standard errors are clustered at the site-by-year level).

We examine the balance of several pre-treatment covariates, including: child age, race, and gender;

parents’ ratings of children’s pre-treatment early literacy skills; children’s fall assessment scores;

parents’ age, texting language, and parents’ self-reports of their early literacy-related parenting

activities.

        Table 2 illustrates that between the two years of the program there is little evidence of

covariate imbalance. Of the 57 estimates we generate to assess imbalance, only five are statistically

significant at the ten percent level or less (nine percent of the estimates). This estimated difference

could occur by chance. Further, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the covariates are jointly

different from zero in the parent survey and academic samples, but can in the teacher sample. 5

Appendix Table A3 shows that the first year of the program has more significant imbalance, while

the second year of the program does not. In all cases we present results separately for each year,

and combined between years, in models that include and exclude covariates.

3e. Estimating Treatment Effects

        This study evaluates the impact of READY4K! on parents’ attitudes towards the program,

related texting behaviors, home literacy practices, and involvement at school, as well as children’s



  5
    In robustness checks using robust standard error assumptions, we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the covariates are jointly different from zero in all three samples, including the
teacher survey sample. Results available upon request.
                                                                                            Page 18 of 53
early literacy skills. To assess the effect of the program on parents, we start by examining the end-

of-year parent survey data. In the survey, we asked parents about their attitudes toward

READY4K! and their program-related texting behaviors. In particular, we asked parents if they

read and used READY4K! text messages and if they found the texts to be helpful. We also asked

if they shared the texts and would recommend READY4K! to other parents.

        To evaluate the effects of the program on parents’ attitudes toward READY4K! and texting

behaviors, we estimate two sets of models. In the first set of models we simply regress measures

of parents’ texting attitudes and behaviors on treatment status and site-by-year fixed effects to

account for our randomization strategy. The second set of models adds all pre-treatment covariates

to increase the precision of effect estimates and to account for any imbalance in the covariates.

The second set of models takes the following form:

                               𝑌"#$ = 𝛽' 𝑇"#$ + 𝑋"#$ 𝛽. + 𝛾#$ + 𝜀"#$ (2)

where 𝑌"#$ is a measure of the attitude of parent i in site s in year t toward READY4K! or program-

related texting behavior, 𝑇"#$ is the parent’s treatment status, 𝛾#$ is a site-by-year fixed effect, 𝑋"#$

is a vector of pre-treatment covariates, and 𝜀"#$ is a parent-level error term (standard errors are

clustered at the site-by-year level). The vector of covariates, 𝑋"#$ , include all the variables in Table

2 including child gender, race, age, and performance on the baseline literacy assessment and parent

gender, age, education, responses to baseline survey questions, and choice of texting language. In

addition, we add an indicator if the child progressed to the leveled portion of the literacy exam in

the fall. When running our models, we imputed missing values as 0 for indicator variables and the

sample mean for continuous variables and included a missing indicator in the regression. For the

performance on the fall literacy assessment we included indicators for missing any of the

underlying questions that contribute to the total score. In all tables, “administrative and fall parent


                                                                                          Page 19 of 53
survey covariates” refer to all variables except the performance on the fall assessment. Those

variables are referred to as “fall literacy assessment covariates.”

       In addition to asking about texting behaviors and attitudes, the end-of-year survey also

asked parents about their home literacy activities. In particular, it asked them to indicate how many

times during the last week they engaged in various activities, such as helping their children write

their name, reciting nursery rhymes, and reading to their children. Our first step in analyzing this

data is to conduct a factor analysis to help assess the dimensionality of the data. Results of this

analysis indicate that one underlying early literacy parenting factor explains approximately 48

percent of the variance in the data in the first year and 58 percent in the second year. Based on this

result, we use principal components analysis to create a global home literacy composite variable

(see Appendix Table A6 for the elements of this composite and their weightings).

       To evaluate the effects of READY4K! on parents’ home literacy practices, we use the same

two-model approach described above. We include as outcomes the global home literacy composite

variable and specific home literacy practices, including how often parents read to their children,

looked at pictures in a book, told stories, pointed out words that begin with the same sound and

words that rhyme, showed their children the different parts of a book (e.g., cover, author, title, and

pages), recited nursery rhymes, pointed out letters in the home environment, and said and

explained new words using household objects. In the second year of the experiment we were able

to ask only a subset of the questions we fielded in the first year. We therefore present results for

each question fielded in each year, the home literacy composite variable from each year, and a

pooled home literacy composite variable.

       We also use the aforementioned two-model approach to evaluate the effects of the

treatment on parental involvement at school and children’s early literacy development. The



                                                                                       Page 20 of 53
outcomes for our analysis of parental involvement at school are teachers’ end-of-year ratings of

how often parents ask questions about their children, including questions about: their child’s

interests and friends; how their child gets along with others; what their child is doing and learning

in school; their child’s understanding of early literacy skills; things they can do at home to help

their child learn to read; and children’s book recommendations. As with the parental home literacy

activity data, we use principal components analysis to create a global composite variable for

parental involvement at school. We find that one factor explains about 81 percent of the variance

in the school involvement data (see Appendix Table A6 for elements and their weightings).

       To evaluate the effects of READY4K! on children’s literacy development, we use

children’s spring PALS scores. We examine the impact of the program on both children’s

individual subtest scores and their average scores on PALS. To generate average scores, we

standardized children’s subtests scores, took an average of these standardized scores, and

standardized the average. We chose this approach because not all students took all subtests and

different subtests contain different numbers of items (our objective was to give equal weighting to

each subtest). For example, the upper-case letter knowledge subtest has 26 items, whereas the

maximum score on the name writing subtest is seven. Given that initial knowledge explains much

of the variation in spring test scores, we include controls for children’s baseline assessment scores

in the fully-specified model, as described above.

3f. Attrition Analysis

       Like many preschool programs, SFUSD’s program experiences significant attrition. As

noted above, 96 participating families left the district prior to or during the school year. Not

including these families, 17 families opted out of the study. The children of 114 families were not

tested in spring, in large part due to absences on testing day. As a result, we only have spring test



                                                                                      Page 21 of 53
score data on 821 children (89 percent of the 935 families who stayed in the district for the entire

year). In total, 558 parents filled out the parent survey and 63 teachers provided information on

the parental involvement of 258 parents (60 and 57 percent of staying families, respectively).

        The biggest concern with study attrition pertains to bias. If the types of treatment group

families who attrited are systematically different than the type of control group families who

attrited in a way that is related to study outcomes, then results are likely biased. For example, if

poorer families leave the treatment group at a higher rate than they leave the control group, and

income is positively related to study outcomes, than results are likely biased upward.

        We analyze attrition in the parent survey data, teacher survey data, and child outcome data

by testing whether attrition differs by treatment status. In particular, we regress a binary variable

that equals one if a family attrited on treatment status, controlling for site-by-year fixed effects.

Table 3 does not show evidence of differential attrition between the treatment and control groups

for any sample in either year. We test for differential attrition by treatment status and baseline

covariate by estimating a series of models that take the following form:

                     𝐴"#$ = 𝛽' 𝑇"#$ + 𝛽. 𝑋"#$ + 𝛽0 𝑇"#$ ∗ 𝑋"#$ + 𝛾#$ + 𝜀"#$ (3)

where 𝐴"#$ equals one if the family of child i in site s attrited in year t from the sample, 𝑇"#$ is the

treatment status of the parent of child i in site s in year t, 𝑋"#$ is a pre-treatment covariate of child

i or his or her parent, 𝑇"#$ ∗ 𝑋"#$ is an interaction of treatment status and the covariate, 𝛾#$ is a

site-by-year fixed effect, and 𝜀"#$ is a child-level error term (standard errors are clustered at the

site-by-year level). The coefficient on b 3 indicates whether or not there is differential attrition

with respect to 𝑋"#$ across the treatment and control groups. Appendix Table A7 presents the

results of this exercise for the pooled sample. Of the 57 tests, three are significant at the ten percent

level or less, which could occur by chance.


                                                                                          Page 22 of 53
4. Results

4a. Main Effects

        We find strong evidence that parents in the treatment group used READY4K! texts and

found the program to be helpful. As Table 4 indicates, parents who received READY4K! texts

were about 0.28 standard deviations (SD) more likely to use the information than parents who

received placebo texts (p<0.05). Moreover, the difference in the extent to which treatment and

control group parents found READY4K! texts to be helpful is roughly 0.41 SD (p<0.01). The

effect of the program on the extent to which parents would recommend study texts is about 0.30

SD (p<0.01). Parents in the treatment group were also more likely to share to READY4K! texts

with other parents than control group parents – an effect of approximately 0.28 SD (p<0.05). If

parents in the treatment group shared texts with parents in the control group, then study results are

likely biased towards zero. However, we cannot test for this type of experimental contamination.

        In addition to having positive attitudes toward READY4K! and program-related texting

behaviors, we find evidence that the treatment group parents reported engaging in more home

literacy activities with their children than parents in the control group. The results are particularly

robust in the first year of the experiment. As illustrated in Table 5, in the first year of the experiment

READY4K! positively affected the frequency with which parents reported telling stories, reciting

nursery rhymes, looking at pictures in a book, and showing their children’s different parts of a

book, such as the title, author, and page number. The effects sizes range from approximately 0.19

SD to 0.29 SD and all results are significant at conventional levels (see Model 2). Similarly,

READY4K! had a positive effect of about 0.27 SD on the global early literacy parenting composite

variable (p<0.05). In the second year of the experiment the point estimates are about half as large

and insignificant. We discuss possible reasons for this discrepancy in Section 4d. Pooling between



                                                                                           Page 23 of 53
the two years indicates that parents engaged in home literacy activities to a greater extent by 0.156

SD (p<0.10).

       We summarize the effects of READY4K! on parental involvement at school in Table 6.

According to teachers, parents in the intervention group were significantly more likely to ask

questions about their children. While not all of the differences in the individual variables are

statistically significant, the frequency with which treatment group parents asked the teacher about

their child’s friends, how their children get along with others, what their children are doing in

school, and things they can do to help their children learn to read is approximately 0.19 to 0.27 SD

greater than the frequency with which control group parents asked these questions (p<0.10 to

p<0.05). Likewise, READY4K! had a marginally significant positive effect of about 0.14 SD on

the parental involvement composite variable.

       In Table 7, we summarize the effects of the intervention on children’s early literacy

assessment scores. We present results on the average score of all questions, knowing that some

children did not progress to the leveled portion of the assessment and are therefore missing scores

for lower case letter recognition and letter sound awareness (we did not impute zeroes for these

children). We also present results on the average of the questions that were not part of the leveled

portion of the exam and on each individual item. Panels A and B report those results for each

experiment year. Panel C reports the results for individual items, pooled between experiment years.

       Our findings indicate that the intervention had a number of positive effects on children’s

literacy development. Panel A illustrates that the first year of the experiment generated small, but

insignificant positive estimates on the average of all questions, and no effects on the average of

the non-leveled questions. In the second year, however, there is a robust 0.146SD (p<0.05) increase

in the average of all questions, and a marginally significant 0.122SD increase in the average of the



                                                                                      Page 24 of 53
non-leveled questions. Panel C illustrates that pooling years results in a 0.109SD (p<0.05) increase

in the average of all questions. Looking at the individual questions, the results appear to be driven

by increases in lower case letter recognition and letter sounds awareness. The remainder of the

individual questions have positive, but small and insignificant point estimates. The intervention

also did not affect the propensity to move on to the leveled portion of the assessment. Given that

children were assessed seven to 11 weeks prior to the end of the intervention (22 to 34 percent of

the program remaining), it is possible to view this as a lower-bound estimate.

4b. Heterogeneity Analysis

       The main results indicate that the program increased the literacy performance of children

in the treatment group by 0.11SD to 0.15 SD. An open question is which part of the skills

distribution these types of interventions help the most. On one hand, families of children who

perform better at baseline may be more likely to interact with the texts to produce even greater

learning gains for their children. If this were the case, the program may increase the inequality of

outcomes in this population. Alternatively, children who are weaker at baseline stand to benefit

the most from interacting with the activities because they have the most room to grow. In this

scenario, the intervention could plausibly decrease the achievement gap of children in this

population.

       We explore which of these scenarios are at play by dividing the sample in half based on

student performance at baseline. We identify the median student performance on the fall

administration of PALS and separate those children who scored above and below the median.

Table 8 presents the results for children scoring below the median of the baseline skill distributions

and shows that the programmatic benefits are concentrated on this population of students. Model

2 indicates that the treatment increased the average performance of children by 0.33SD and 0.35SD



                                                                                       Page 25 of 53
(p<0.05) in the first and second year of the program, respectively. In the pooled sample, children

benefited by 0.31 SD (p<0.01). Looking at the average of the non-leveled questions, power is

limited in any one year, though the point estimates are consistently around 0.25 SD. In the pooled

sample the children benefited by a significant 0.26SD (p<0.05). The analysis of individual

questions indicate that these benefits are found on several individual skills. Children benefited in

identifying upper case letters, lower case letters, letter sounds, and in the ability to write their

name. Point estimates range from 0.18SD to 0.53SD (p<0.10 to p<0.05). Appendix Table A5

reports these results for children who scored above the median of the baseline skill distribution.

Strikingly, all point estimates are insignificant and quantitatively small, with no consistent

direction in point estimates. Overall, children weaker at baseline experienced the benefits of the

program, indicating that the program may have reduced some achievement gaps.6 Notably, these

results are consistent between years of the experiment.7

    4c. Differences in Outcomes Across Years

         Ex post, it is unclear why the estimated effects of the program were lower in the first year

for the full sample, though very similar for those students starting off with weaker skills. We can



6
  Substantial heterogeneity can exist based on ethnicity of the participating families and by texting
language. Small sample sizes hinder such an analysis, though there is suggestive evidence that
results are larger for Hispanic families and for families that received texts in English or Spanish.
These effects are once again concentrated on those children who scored below the median of the
baseline PALS distribution.
  7
    We have analyzed the robustness of the results to the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple corrections
technique (1995). Effects of the program on parental attitudes towards the texts are robust to these
corrections. Effects on parent activities, teacher reported outcomes, and overall PALS outcomes
were not. Results on PALS outcomes for children below the median of baseline skills were either
robust of very nearly so (p-value was within a few thousandths of the threshold). We consider the
aggregate PALS outcomes outside the scope of the correction technique because it was a pre-
specified analysis. We take these results to mean that the texts were definitively well received by
parents, that overall the program affected aggregate academic outcomes, and more robustly
affected outcomes of students weaker at baseline. The remainder of the estimates provide some
suggestive evidence on the mechanisms that could have produced these effects.
                                                                                      Page 26 of 53
only hypothesize why the point estimates differ. One possible explanation is simply that the

program was new in the first year. Through an iterative process that included focus groups, we

refined the texts, perhaps improving the quality of the texts. This improvement may be particularly

strong for texts sent in Spanish and Chinese. Translating literacy tips into different languages poses

a set of challenges. For example, the Chinese language does not have the concept of rhyming and

English nursery rhymes do not translate into Spanish. As we continued to improve the program,

we continued to ask native Spanish and Chinese to refine the translations to be culturally and

linguistically relevant.8

        A second possible reason for the stronger estimates in the second year is that a program

that combines literacy, mathematics, and socio-emotional skills may be more effective than a pure

literacy program. Parents may tire of engaging in only literacy skills over the course of eight

months. Though each week brought with it an opportunity to engage in a new literacy skill, parents

may benefit from more variety. An eight-month long texting program that asks parents to engage

with their child in one domain may not be able to overcome limited attention in the longer term.

In contrast, the combination program cycles among a literacy, mathematics, and socio-emotional

skills thereby giving parents an opportunity to engage with their children in different ways each

week. Practicing math and socio-emotional skills also may have spill over literacy benefits. Studies

indicate that, at this age, the barriers between domains are not be rigid and that increasing the effect

of one domain can improve performance on another (Butterworth 2005; Graziano et al. 2007;




  8
    About half the participants in each year chose to receive texts in English, making the sample
sizes in Chinese and Spanish small in any one given year. However, there is suggestive evidence
that effect of the program increased for families receiving Spanish texts in the second year, while
the program had little effect on families receiving Chinese texts in both years. This may indicate
that texts improved over time in Spanish, but the linguistic barriers of the Chinese language
remained in both years.
                                                                                         Page 27 of 53
Sarama et al. 2012; Morris et al. 2013). We are fielding more research to formally test whether

these “combination” programs capture synergies between domains to amply results.

       The larger estimates for the full sample in the second year of the program contrast with the

point estimates on the survey results which are smaller in the second year. Again, we can only

hypothesize, but the structure of the program may contribute to the differences in results between

years. In the first year of the experiment, we provided parents two literacy tips a week for 8 months.

In the second year of the program the literacy activities only comprised one third of the texts.

Assuming that the take up of the program and habit formation was comparable between years,

parents in the second year completed fewer literacy activities because they engaged in more

mathematics and socio-emotional activities. In this regime, the texting program by definition

would have a weaker effect on the frequency with which parents engaged in literacy activities.

Positive spillovers to literacy from mathematics and socio-emotional activities may compensate

for the reduced focus on literacy, resulting in stronger academic results in the second year.

5. Discussion

       Young children with few learning opportunities at home exhibit fewer skills across a broad

range of developmental domains – skills that are critical for economic success later in life

(Heckman 2006). Traditional parenting information sessions often do little to ameliorate

differences in children’s at-home experiences. Interventions that target parents’ literacy skills and

in-home visitations show more promise; however, access to these programs is often low.

Moreover, some parents who acquire the skills necessary to support their child’s learning fail to

stay involved in the long term, in part due to behavioral barriers.

       This study examines the effectiveness of an early literacy text messaging program that

targets the behavioral barriers to parental involvement by breaking down the complexity of



                                                                                       Page 28 of 53
parenting into bite-sized pieces and proving continuous encouragement and support over long

periods of time. We find that the texting program approach positively affected parents and their

children. Receiving READY4K! texts increased the extent to which parents engaged in home

literacy activities with their children, with effect sizes ranging from about 0.16 SD to 0.29 SD. The

intervention also increased involvement at school, as reported by teachers, with effect sizes of 0.14

SD to 0.27 SD. Increases in parental activity and involvement led to learning gains among children,

as READY4K! had an overall, significant positive effect of roughly 0.11 standard deviations on

students’ average spring PALS scores. The results, however, are concentrated on children who

scored below the median of the baseline skills distribution. The 0.31 SD increase in scores among

this group suggests that the program helps decrease achievement gaps among students.

       Though the results of this study are promising we continue to field research investigating

how to best structure these types of programs. For example, in a follow-up study, we (Doss et al.

2017) follow the sample of families in the first year of the program into kindergarten and recruit

more of their kindergarten peers. We show that personalizing and differentiating the literacy tips

can extract even larger academic gains. Children of parents who received the personalized and

differentiated literacy tips were 63 percent more likely to be reading at a higher level in the fall of

first grade when compared to the control group and a group that received a general text messaging

program akin to the one in this study. This follow-up study indicates that these programs do more

than merely hold the attention of parents and nudge them to engage with their children. Rather, the

content is also critical, potentially providing information, reducing the cognitive load of parenting,

holding attention, and addressing time-inconsistent preferences. The importance of content may

explain why the results of the original study are concentrated in the children weaker at baseline. If

the tasks were too easy for children scoring higher at baseline, they may not have had the



                                                                                        Page 29 of 53
opportunity to benefit from the program. Indeed, in the follow-up study there is evidence that the

benefits of differentiation and personalization are particularly helpful for the stronger students who

may not be well served by the general texts.

       The importance of content raises further questions such as the effect of each component of

the program (fact, tip, and growth) and whether all three features of the texting program have a

larger effect than the sum of the components. That is, synergistic gains may be realized by targeting

multiple behavioral barriers such as a lack of information, high cognitive load, lack of attention,

and delayed gratification. We are currently fielding studies to probe these questions.

       Interestingly, in the follow-up study, we find no significant effects in the general texting

group in the full sample, which may raise questions regarding the consistency and replicability of

the results. In probing this question more deeply we note that the follow-up study only contained

the families of the first year of the original study, plus families recruited in kindergarten, and did

not contain any recipients of the combined program. In this original study, the pure literacy

program in the first year also produced weaker literacy outcomes, with significant results seen only

for students below the median of the baseline skills distribution. With this fact in mind, we take

the first-year participants of the original study and look at the effects of the follow-up intervention

by the median of the baseline skills distribution (Table A8 presents the results). Strong inferences

are difficult to make because the small sample of students is distributed among a control group

and two treatment arms, and then divided in half. However, the point estimates are generally larger

for the general text treatment for students below the median of the baseline skills distribution. The

one exception being for the probability of exceeding expectations. Conversely, point estimates are

generally larger and more positive for the personalized and differentiated text treatment for

students above the median of the baselines skills distribution. No point estimate reaches the



                                                                                        Page 30 of 53
traditional level of significance and therefore the above analysis is only suggestive. The pattern of

results, however, support the notion that the general text messages have a greater effect on weaker

students at baseline, and the personalized and differentiated texts may help more advanced students

at baseline. We, however, cannot preclude the possibility that the lack of strong results of general

texts messages in the follow-up study is evidence that elements of the program did not replicate.

In an effort to support replicability, the programs fielded in this study can be found in Appendices

3 and 4. Additionally, we are currently formally testing whether combining literacy, math, and

socio-emotional domains into one program provides stronger results over programs that only

support one domain. These studies will add further clarity regarding the nuances of the program

and which conditions produce the strongest results.

       Though more work needs to be done to fully understand these types of programs, this paper

provides evidence that the READY4K! program meaningfully improved literacy outcomes for

children entering preschool with weaker literacy skills. The estimated effects for this group are

almost identical in the two years and two cohorts studied. A compelling implication of the findings

is that text messaging and similar technologies that can provide small bits of information to a broad

population could be viable strategies for promoting parental involvement and changing other

complex adult behaviors. The vast majority of American adults have cell phones, nearly all cell

phone owners already send and receive texts, and texting rates are particularly high in black and

Hispanic populations. Moreover, virtually all text messages are opened (by comparison, the e-mail

open rate in education is about 36 percent). We spent less than one dollar per family to send text

messages per school year, and fixed program expenses such as content development costs trend

towards zero on a per-family basis as the program scales. Scaling text messaging programs like

READY4K! is easy, as adding users to the program requires little administrative work. Based on



                                                                                      Page 31 of 53
its widespread use, low cost, and scalability, text messaging is a potentially attractive alternative

to other parenting interventions, which generally place significant demands on parents’ time and

effort and can be costly for providers, as well.




                                                                                      Page 32 of 53
                                            References

Abraham, C. and Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
      interventions. Health Psychology, 27(3), pp. 379.

Anderson, M. (2015). Technology device ownership: 2015. Pew Research. Retrieved,
      December 15, 2015 from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/10/29/technology-device
      ownership-2015

Astuto, J. and LaRue A. (2009). Home visitation and young children: An approach worth investing
       in? Society for Research in Child Development. Retrieved, December 15, 2015 from
       https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED509749

Avery, C. and Kane, T.J. (2004). Student perceptions of college opportunities. The Boston COACH
       Program. In Caroline Hoxby (ed.) College choices: The economics of where to go, when to
       go, and how to pay for it, pp.355-394, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Azzi-Lessing, L. (2011). Home visitation programs: Critical issues and future directions. Early
      Childhood Research Quarterly, 26(4), pp. 387-398.

Bandura, A. and Dale, S. (1981). Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and intrinsic interest
      through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(3),
      pp. 586-598.

Bergman, P. (2016). Parent-Child information frictions and human capital investment:
      Evidence from a field experiment. Working Paper. Retrieved April 8, 2016 from:
      http://www.columbia.edu/~psb2101/BergmanSubmission.pdf

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application
       assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA
       experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), pp. 1205-1242.

Blom-Hoffman, J., O’Neil-Pirozzi, T., Volpe, R., Cutting, J., and Bissinger, E. (2007). Instructing
      parents to use dialogic reading strategies with preschool children: Impact of a video-based
      training program on caregiver reading behaviors and children’s related verbalizations.
      Journal of Applied School Psychology, 23(1), pp. 117-131.

Bradley, R. H., Corwyn, R.F., Burchinal, M., McAdoo, H.P., and Coll, C.G. (2001). The home
       environments of children in the United States part II: Relations with behavioral
       development through age thirteen. Child Development, 72(6), pp. 1868-1886.

Bradley, R. H., Corwyn, R.F. McAdoo H.P., and Coll, C.G. (2001). The home environments of
       children in the United States part I: Variations by age, ethnicity, and poverty status. Child
       Development, 72(6), pp. 1844-1867.

Brotman, L. M., Calzada, E., Huang, K.Y., Kingston, S., Dawson-McClure, S., Kamboukos, D.,

                                                                                     Page 33 of 53
       Rosenfelt, A., Schwab, A., and Petkova, E. (2011). Promoting effective parenting practices
       and preventing child behavior problems in school among ethnically diverse families from
       underserved, urban communities. Child Development, 82(1), pp. 258-276.

Butterworth, B. (2005). The development of arithmetic abilities. Journal Child Psychology and
       Psychiatry, 46(1), pp. 3-18.

California Department of Education. (2008). California preschool learning foundations, volume 1.
       Sacramento, CA. Retrieved, December 15, 2015 from http://www.cde.ca.gov/sp/cd/re/
       documents/preschoollf.pdf

Castleman, B. L. and Page L.C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and
       peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates?
       Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 115, pp. 144-160.

Costello, J.E., Compton, S.N., Keeler G., and Angold, A. (2003). Relationships between poverty
       and psychopathology: A natural experiment. Journal of the American Medical Association,
       290(15), pp. 2023-2029.

Dahl, G. B. and Lochner, L. (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence
       from the earned income tax credit. The American Economic Review, 102(5), pp. 1927-
       1956.

DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. Journal of Economic
       Literature, 47(2), pp. 315-372.

Doss, C., Fahle, M., Loeb, S., and York, B.N. (2017). Supporting parenting through differentiated
       and personalized text messaging: Testing effects on learning during kindergarten. CEPA
       Working        Paper      16-18.        Retrieved     October     5,      2017       from
       https://cepa.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/wp16-18-v201611.pdf

Duncan, G. J., Ludwig, J., and Magnuson, K.A. (2010). Child development. In Phillip Levine and
      David Zimmerman (eds.) Targeting investments in children: Fighting poverty when
      resources are limited, pp. 27-58, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ehrlich, S. (2013). Mogreet releases best practices guide for successfully navigating text marketing
       rules and regulations. The Wall Street Journal, February 17, 2013.

Golova, N., Alario A.J., Vivier, P.M., Rodriguez, M., and High, P.C. (1999). Literacy promotion
      for Hispanic families in a primary care setting: A randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics,
      103(5), pp. 993-997.

Graziano, P. A., Reavis, R.D., Keane, S.P., and Calkins, S.D. (2007). The role of emotion
       regulation in children’s early academic success. Journal of School Psychology, 45(1), pp.
       3-19.



                                                                                     Page 34 of 53
Grodsky, E. and Jones, MT. (2007). Real and imagined barriers to college entry: Perceptions of
      cost. Social Science Research, 36(2), pp. 745-766.

Hart, B., and Risley, T.R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young
       American children, 1st ed. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.

Hastings, J.S. and Weinstein, J.M. (2008). Information, school choice, and academic achievement:
       Evidence from two experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), pp. 1373-1414.

Heckman, J.J. (2006). Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children.
     Science, 312(5782), pp. 1900-1902.

Invernizzi, M., Sullivan A., Meier, J., and Swank, L. (2004). Phonological Awareness Literacy
       Screening (PALS) prek teacher’s Manual. University of Virginia.

Iyengar, S., and Lepper, M. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a
       good thing? Personality & Social Psychology, 79(6), pp. 995-1006.

Jordan, G.E., Snow C.E., and Porche, M.V. (2000). Project EASE: The effect of a family literacy
       project on kindergarten students’ early literacy skills. Reading Research Quarterly, 35(4),
       pp. 524-546.

Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan S., and Zinman J. (2016). Getting to the top of mind:
       How reminders increase saving. Management Science, 62(12), pp. 3393-3411.

Lonigan, C. J., and Shanahan, T. (2009). Developing early literacy: Report of the National Early
      Literacy Panel. National Institute for Literacy. Retrieved, December 15, 2005 from
      https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED508381

Mani, A., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., and Zhao, J. (2013). Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function.
       Science, 341(6149), pp. 976-980.

Manz, P.H., Hughes C., Barnabas E., Bracaliello C., and Ginsburg-Block, M. (2010). A descriptive
       review and meta-analysis of family-based emergent literacy interventions: To what extent
       is the research applicable to low-income, ethnic-minority or linguistically-diverse young
       children? Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 25(4), pp. 409-431.

Mayer, S.E., Kalil, A., Oreopoulos, P., Gallegos, S. (2015). Using behavioral insights to increase
       parental engagement: The parents and children together (PACT) intervention. NBER
       Working Paper 21602. Retrieved October 5, 2017 from http://www.nber.org/papers/w7948

Melhuish, E. C., Phan, M.B., Sylva, K., Sammons, P., Siraj-Blatchford, I., and Taggart, B. (2008).
      Effects of the home learning environment and preschool center experience upon literacy
      and numeracy development in early primary school. Journal of Social Issues, 64(1), pp.
      95-114.

                                                                                    Page 35 of 53
Mendelsohn, A.L., Mogilner L.N., Dreyer, B.P., Forman, J.A., Weinstein, S.C., Broderick, M.,
      Cheng, K.J., Magloire T., Moore, T., and Napier, C. (2001). The impact of a clinic-based
      literacy intervention on language development in inner-city preschool children. Pediatrics,
      107(1), pp. 130-134.

Morris, P., Millenky, M., Raver, C.C., and Jones, S.M. (2013). Does a preschool social and
       emotional learning intervention pay off for classroom instruction and children’s behavior
       and academic skills? Evidence from the Foundations of Learning project. Early Education
       and Development, 24(7), pp. 1,020-1,042.

Mullainathan, S., and Thaler, R.H. (2000). Behavioral Economics. NBER Working Paper No.
       w7948. Retrieved December 15, 2015 from http://www.nber.org/papers/w7948

Needlman, R., Toker, K.H., Dreyer, B.P., Klass, P., and Mendelsohn, A.L. (2005). Effectiveness of
      a primary care intervention to support reading aloud: A multicenter evaluation. Ambulatory
      Pediatrics, 5(4), pp. 209-215.

NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. (2006). Child-care effect sizes for the NICHD study
     of early child care and youth development. The American Psychologist, 61, pp. 99.

Prinz, R.J., and Miller, G.E. (1994). Family-based treatment for childhood antisocial behavior:
       Experimental influences on dropout and engagement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
       Psychology, 62(3), pp. 645-650.

Reese, E., Sparks, A., and Leyva, L. (2010). A review of parent interventions for preschool
       children’s language and emergent literacy. Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 10(1), pp.
       97-117.

Riccio, J., Dechausay, N., Miller, C., Nuñez, S., Verma, N., and Yang, E. (2013). Conditional cash
        transfers in New York City: The continuing story of the Opportunity NYC-Family Rewards
        Demonstration. MDRC. Retrieved, December 15, 2015 from http://www.mdrc.org/
        publication/conditional-cash-transfers-new-york-city

Sarama, J., Lange, A.A., Clements, D.H., and Wolfe, C.B. (2012). The impacts of an early
      mathematics curriculum on oral language and literacy. Early Childhood Research
      Quarterly, 27(3), pp. 489-502.

Sharif, I., Rieber, S., and Ozuah, P.O. (2002). Exposure to Reach Out and Read and vocabulary
        outcomes in inner city preschoolers. Journal of the National Medical Association, 94(3),
        pp. 171-177
.
Simon, H.A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        69(1), pp. 99-118.

Shah, A.K., Mullainathan S., and Shafir, E. (2012). The consequences of having too little. Science,

                                                                                     Page 36 of 53
       338(6107), pp. 682-685.

Stevenson, H. W., Chen, C., and Uttal, D.H. (1990). Beliefs and achievement: A study of black,
       white, and Hispanic children. Child Development, 61(2), pp. 508-523.

Thaler, R.H., and Sunstein, C.R. (2009). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
       happiness, 2nd ed. New Haven, CT: Yale Press.

United States Department of Health and Human Services. (1996). Physical activity and health: A
       report of the surgeon general. Retrieved, December 15, 2015 from https://www.cdc.gov/
       nccdphp/sgr/

Valant, J., and Loeb, S. (2014). Information, choice, and decision-making: Field experiments with
        adult and student school choosers. Working Paper.

Whitehurst, G.J., Epstein, J.N., Angell, A.L., Payne, A.C., Crone, D.A., and Fischel, J.E. (1994).
      Outcomes of an emergent literacy intervention in Head Start. Journal of Educational
      Psychology, 86(4), pp. 542.

Zickuhr, K., and Smith, A. (2012). Digital differences. Pew Research Center. Retrieved, December
       15, 2015 from http://www.english.illinois.edu/-people-/faculty/debaron/482/482readings/
       PEW_Class.pdf

Zuckerman, B. (2009). Promoting early literacy in pediatric practice: Twenty years of Reach Out
      and Read. Pediatrics, 124(6), pp. 1660-166.




                                                                                    Page 37 of 53
                                                      Appendix

Table 1: Summary statistics (pooled sample)
                                             Parent Survey               Teacher Survey
                                                                                                    Academic Sample
                                                Sample                      Sample
Panel A. Children                          Mean (Std. Dev.)            Mean (Std. Dev.)            Mean      (Std. Dev.)
Female                                     0.49         -              0.46         -              0.49           -
Hispanic                                   0.28         -              0.41         -              0.34           -
Chinese                                    0.35         -              0.26         -              0.34           -
Black                                      0.13         -              0.12         -              0.12           -
White                                      0.12         -              0.09         -              0.11           -
Other Race                                 0.09                        0.12         -              0.09           -
Age in years (fall)                        4.39      (0.28)            4.34      (0.29)            4.40        (0.45)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall)   2.92      (0.91)            2.84      (0.93)            2.85        (0.94)
Parent rating of how often child ask to    3.01      (0.88)            2.94      (0.88)            2.93        (0.91)
   be read to per week (fall)
Child literacy assessment sum score         53.24      (37.27)         48.67       (37.12)          52.13      (36.79)
   (fall; max=126.0)
Panel B. Parents
Female                                      0.86          -             0.87          -             0.83          -
Age in years (fall)                         34.8       (6.03)           34.1       (5.78)           34.61      (6.47)
Has less than a bachelor's degree           0.72          -             0.73          -             0.74          -
Received texts in English                   0.55          -             0.48          -             0.51          -
Received texts in Spanish                   0.18          -             0.31          -             0.24          -
Received texts in Chinese                   0.27          -             0.21          -             0.25          -
How many times per week parent              2.57       (0.90)           2.55       (0.87)           2.56       (0.91)
   reads for pleasure (fall)
How many times per week parent tells        2.87       (0.86)           2.84       (0.84)           2.82       (0.86)
   a story to child (fall)
How many times per week parent              3.07       (0.84)           2.97       (0.82)           3.05       (0.86)
    sings to child (fall)
N=                                          558                         258                          821
Notes. Parents rated the letter knowledge of their child in one of four categories: 1=The child knows no letters, 2=Some,
3=Most, 4=All. Answer options for weekly parental activities and how often the child asked to be read to include:
1=Not at all, 2=Once or twice per week, 3=Three to six times, 4=Every day. Missing values set at the sample average.




                                                                                                       Page 38 of 53
Table 2: Randomization checks: The effect of treatment status on pre-treatment child covariates (pooled sample)
                                                                Parent Survey    Teacher Survey        Academic
Pre-treatment child covariates
                                                                   Sample           Sample              Sample
Child female                                                         0.029            -0.05              -0.003
                                                                   (0.043)          (0.063)             (0.035)
Hispanic                                                            -0.011           -0.059              -0.025
                                                                   (0.035)          (0.045)             (0.024)
Chinese                                                              0.013            0.034              -0.002
                                                                   (0.025)          (0.033)             (0.020)
Black                                                                0.017            0.031              0.033+
                                                                   (0.024)          (0.044)             (0.019)
White                                                               -0.037           -0.015              -0.013
                                                                   (0.026)          (0.027)             (0.016)
Other Race                                                           0.011            0.009               0.008
                                                                   (0.025)          (0.032)             (0.021)
Child age in years                                                   0.023             0.02               0.052
                                                                   (0.028)          (0.042)             (0.037)
Parent female                                                       -0.025            0.033               0.001
                                                                   (0.031)          (0.037)             (0.026)
Parent age in years                                                 -0.023          -1.284+               0.529
                                                                   (0.639)          (0.643)             (0.504)
Less than bachelor's degree                                         -0.034            0.012              -0.017
                                                                   (0.032)          (0.043)             (0.026)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall)                            0.166*            0.067               0.017
                                                                   (0.079)          (0.113)             (0.066)
How often child asks to be read to per week (fall)                 -0.181+           -0.137             -0.134+
                                                                   (0.096)          (0.125)             (0.069)
How many times per week parent reads for pleasure (fall)            -0.007            0.129              -0.024
                                                                   (0.081)          (0.088)             (0.057)
How many times per week parent tells a story to child (fall)        -0.043           -0.035               0.011
                                                                   (0.090)          (0.123)             (0.068)
How many times per week parent sings to child (fall)                -0.007            0.005              -0.016
                                                                   (0.086)          (0.137)             (0.062)
Child literacy assessment sum score (fall; max=126.0)                3.022           -5.071              -1.502
                                                                   (3.182)          (4.322)             (2.306)
Received texts in English                                           -0.032            0.017               0.025
                                                                   (0.031)          (0.040)             (0.029)
Received texts in Spanish                                            0.012           -0.043              -0.015
                                                                   (0.023)          (0.026)             (0.022)
Received texts in Chinese                                            0.02             0.026               -0.01
                                                                   (0.025)          (0.032)             (0.019)

p-value of test of joint significance                               0.410               0.016              0.320
N=                                                                   544                 251                805
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                              ✓                  ✓                   ✓
Notes. Fall parent survey responses are standardized. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-
year level. Sample size varies by covariate due to missing data. The sample size indicated in the table is the
average number of observations across covariates. The maximum sample size for the parent, teacher, and
academic samples are 555, 258, and 821 respectively. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                    Page 39 of 53
Table 3: The effects of treatment status on study attrition
                                                                  Year 1       Year 2      Pooled
Academic Sample                                                    0.003        0.018       0.011
                                                                  (0.045)      (0.037)     (0.029)

Parent Survey Sample                                               0.046        0.035       0.04
                                                                  (0.051)      (0.053)     (0.037)

Teacher Survey Sample                                              0.008          -           -
                                                                  (0.035)         -           -

N=                                                                  519         512        1,031

Randomization site fixed effects                                     ✓            ✓          ✓
Notes. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year level. + indicates p<0.10,
*p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                            Page 40 of 53
Table 4: The effects of READY4K! on parents' text messaging behaviors and attitudes (pooled sample)
Texting behaviors and attitudes:                                    Model 1           Model 2          N
Parent read text messages                                             0.150            0.153
                                                                                                      545
                                                                     (0.098)          (0.106)
Parent used text messages                                            0.295**          0.277*
                                                                                                      545
                                                                     (0.103)          (0.106)
Parent found text messages helpful                                   0.403**          0.405**
                                                                                                      541
                                                                     (0.100)          (0.098)
Parent shared texts with other parents                               0.248*           0.277*
                                                                                                      281
                                                                     (0.113)          (0.135)
Parent would recommend texts                                         0.302**          0.300**
                                                                                                      545
                                                                     (0.090)          (0.088)
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                ✓                ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                         ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                                      ✓
Notes. Reponses are pooled between experiment years, except for "Parents shared texts with other
parents," which was only asked in the first year. All outcomes are standardized by year. Administrative
and fall parent survey covariates include child gender, race, age, and parent gender, age, education,
responses to baseline survey questions, and choice of texting language. Fall literacy assessment
covariates are the total score on the fall literacy assessment and an indicator for advancing to the leveled
portion of the exam. All missing indicator variables are imputed with a zero and continuous variables
with the sample mean. Indicators for missing values are included. For the fall literacy assessment,
indicators for missing any underlying questions are included. Standard errors are clustered at the
randomization site-by-year level. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                 Page 41 of 53
Table 5: The effects of READY4K! on parents' home literacy activities
Panel A. Home literacy activity composite variable                               Model 1     Model 2        N
Global home literacy composite variable, experiment year 1                        0.149      0.269*
                                                                                                           267
                                                                                 (0.111)     (0.110)
Global home literacy composite variable, experiment year 2                        0.123       0.114
                                                                                                           269
                                                                                 (0.176)     (0.147)
Global home literacy composite variable, pooled sample                            0.136      0.156+
                                                                                                           536
                                                                                 (0.103)     (0.090)
Panel B. Specific home literacy activities, experiment year 1
Pointed out letters in the home environment                                       -0.091     -0.034
                                                                                                           285
                                                                                  (0.124)    (0.115)
Pointed out two words that begin with the same sound to your child                 0.141      0.186
                                                                                                           285
                                                                                  (0.129)    (0.112)
Pointed out two words that rhyme to your child                                     0.158      0.183
                                                                                                           282
                                                                                  (0.119)    (0.124)
Said & explained a new word to your child using household objects                  0.121      0.138
                                                                                                           287
                                                                                  (0.106)    (0.119)
Showed your child the different parts of a book (e.g., cover, title, author)      0.165+     0.228*
                                                                                                           285
                                                                                  (0.082)    (0.106)
Looked at pictures in a book with your child                                      0.240*     0.298*
                                                                                                           284
                                                                                  (0.115)    (0.126)
Showed or helped your child write his/her name                                    -0.002      0.071
                                                                                                           281
                                                                                  (0.117)    (0.131)
Read to your child                                                                -0.022      0.081
                                                                                                           285
                                                                                  (0.115)    (0.121)
Told your child a story                                                            0.100     0.191+
                                                                                                           287
                                                                                  (0.101)    (0.110)
Recited a nursery rhyme to your child                                              0.174     0.297*
                                                                                                           285
                                                                                  (0.116)    (0.117)
Panel C. Specific home literacy activities, experiment year 2
Pointed out letters to your child                                                  0.042        0.049
                                                                                                            271
                                                                                  (0.144)     (0.130)
Practiced word sounds with your child                                              0.094        0.077
                                                                                                            271
                                                                                  (0.190)     (0.162)
Practiced rhyming with your child                                                  0.112        0.126
                                                                                                            270
                                                                                  (0.158)     (0.143)
Helped your child learn new words                                                 -0.046       -0.057
                                                                                                            271
                                                                                  (0.178)     (0.151)
Showed your child the different parts of a book (e.g., cover, title, author)       0.054        0.052
                                                                                                            270
                                                                                  (0.141)     (0.131)
Showed your child we read from left to right                                       0.165        0.150
                                                                                                            270
                                                                                  (0.173)     (0.147)
Worked on literacy skills during family activities (meals, kitchen, etc…)          0.178        0.169
                                                                                                            270
                                                                                  (0.126)     (0.123)
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                            ✓            ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                                 ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                                              ✓
Notes. All outcomes are standardized by year. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year
level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                  Page 42 of 53
Table 6: The effects of READY4K! on parental involvement at school (experiment year 1)
Panel A. Parental involvement composite variable                   Model 1 Model 2             N
Global parental involvement composite variable                       0.117      0.138+
                                                                                              249
                                                                    (0.078)     (0.075)
Panel B. Teacher reports of how often parents ask questions about the following topics
Their child's interests                                              0.047       0.105
                                                                                              254
                                                                    (0.079)     (0.074)
Their child's friends                                                0.108      0.144+
                                                                                              253
                                                                    (0.087)     (0.082)
How the child gets along with others                                0.221*      0.207*
                                                                                              254
                                                                    (0.093)     (0.090)
What their child is doing in school                                 0.170+      0.177+
                                                                                              253
                                                                    (0.086)     (0.086)
What their child is learning in school                               0.078       0.076
                                                                                              254
                                                                    (0.089)     (0.096)
Their child's understanding of early literacy skills like the ABCs   0.084       0.093
                                                                                              253
                                                                    (0.101)     (0.107)
Things they can do to help their child learn to read                0.126+      0.152*
                                                                                              254
                                                                    (0.068)     (0.073)
Book recommendations                                                 0.057       0.085
                                                                                              250
                                                                    (0.077)     (0.074)

Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                ✓          ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                   ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                                ✓
Notes. All outcomes are standardized. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-
year level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                            Page 43 of 53
Table 7: The effects of READY4K! On children's spring early literacy assessment scores
Panel A. Average outcomes, first year of experiment                 Model 1 Model 2          N
Average of all questions                                              0.055       0.060
                                                                                            395
                                                                     (0.097)    (0.082)
Average of non-leveled questions                                     -0.014      -0.015
                                                                                            395
                                                                     (0.093)    (0.082)
Panel B. Average outcomes, second year of experiment
Average of all questions                                             0.142+     0.146*
                                                                                            426
                                                                     (0.076)    (0.068)
Average of non-leveled questions                                      0.117     0.122+
                                                                                            426
                                                                     (0.072)    (0.072)
Panel C. All outcomes, pooled sample
Average of all questions                                              0.100     0.109*
                                                                                            821
                                                                     (0.061)    (0.054)
Average of non-leveled questions                                      0.054       0.062
                                                                                            821
                                                                     (0.059)    (0.057)
Upper case letter recognition                                         0.041       0.039
                                                                                            814
                                                                     (0.065)    (0.049)
Beginning word sound awareness                                       -0.007       0.012
                                                                                            796
                                                                     (0.074)    (0.072)
Print and word awareness                                              0.064       0.054
                                                                                            801
                                                                     (0.064)    (0.068)
Rhyme awareness                                                       0.016       0.019
                                                                                            784
                                                                     (0.069)    (0.063)
Name writing                                                          0.047       0.041
                                                                                            817
                                                                     (0.064)    (0.069)
Probability of progressing to leveled portion of assessment          -0.015      -0.004
                                                                                            821
                                                                     (0.028)    (0.026)
Lower case letter recognition                                         0.089     0.124+
                                                                                            594
                                                                     (0.087)    (0.068)
Letter sounds awareness                                              0.156+     0.150*
                                                                                            558
                                                                     (0.089)    (0.071)
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                               ✓           ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                   ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                                ✓
Notes. All outcomes are standardized by year. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-
by-year level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                             Page 44 of 53
Table 8: Heterogeneity in READY4K! effects on children's spring early literacy assessment scores
Sample of children below median of baseline skills
Panel A. Average outcomes, first year of experiment                            Model 1    Model 2        N
Average of all questions                                                        0.193      0.330*
                                                                                                        198
                                                                               (0.155)     (0.137)
Average of non-leveled questions                                                0.128      0.253+
                                                                                                        198
                                                                               (0.154)     (0.145)
Panel B. Average outcomes, second year of experiment
Average of all questions                                                       0.306*      0.348+
                                                                                                        207
                                                                               (0.132)     (0.180)
Average of non-leveled questions                                               0.250+       0.286
                                                                                                        207
                                                                               (0.135)     (0.183)
Panel C. All outcomes, pooled sample
Average of all questions                                                       0.253*      0.313**
                                                                                                        406
                                                                               (0.101)     (0.108)
Average of non-leveled questions                                               0.192+      0.261*
                                                                                                        405
                                                                               (0.102)     (0.112)
Upper case letter recognition                                                   0.123      0.175+
                                                                                                        400
                                                                               (0.101)     (0.101)
Beginning word sound awareness                                                  -0.051      0.014
                                                                                                        388
                                                                               (0.137)     (0.126)
Print and word awareness                                                        0.179       0.179
                                                                                                        391
                                                                               (0.110)     (0.118)
Rhyme awareness                                                                  0.11       0.118
                                                                                                        378
                                                                               (0.107)     (0.117)
Name writing                                                                    0.218      0.287+
                                                                                                        402
                                                                               (0.147)     (0.156)
Probability of progressing to leveled portion of assessment                     -0.017      0.014
                                                                                                        405
                                                                               (0.046)     (0.047)
Lower case letter recognition                                                  0.336+      0.529**
                                                                                                        193
                                                                               (0.186)     (0.182)
Letter sounds awareness                                                        0.366*      0.456*
                                                                                                        171
                                                                               (0.215)     (0.233)

Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                           ✓          ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                              ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                                           ✓
Notes. All outcomes are standardized by year. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year
level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                 Page 45 of 53
Table A1: Summary statistics (Experiment Year 1)
                                                                        Parent Survey
                                                                                               Academic Sample
                                                                           Sample
Panel A. Children                                                    Mean (Std. Dev.)         Mean     (Std. Dev.)
Female                                                                0.48         -           0.47          -
Hispanic                                                              0.29         -           0.33          -
Chinese                                                               0.31         -           0.32          -
Black                                                                 0.17         -           0.13          -
White                                                                 0.11         -           0.1           -
Other Race                                                            0.11         -           0.12          -
Age in years (fall)                                                   4.33      (0.29)         4.33       (0.29)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall)                              2.91      (0.90)         2.89       (0.94)
Parent rating of how often child ask to be read to per week (fall)    2.97      (0.87)         2.95       (0.89)
Child literacy assessment sum score (fall; max=126.0)                54.22     (37.53)        53.35      (37.54)

Panel B. Parents
Female                                                                0.87       -             0.85         -
Age in years (fall)                                                  34.42    (5.42)          34.34      (5.58)
Has less than a bachelor's degree                                     0.7        -             0.72         -
Received texts in English                                             0.58       -             0.51         -
Received texts in Spanish                                             0.2        -             0.25         -
Received texts in Chinese                                             0.22       -             0.24         -
How many times per week parent reads for pleasure (fall)              2.57    (0.88)           2.55      (0.87)
How many times per week parent tells a story to child (fall)          2.86    (0.85)           2.85      (0.85)
How many times per week parent sings to child (fall)                  2.92    (0.83)           2.90      (0.84)
N=                                                                    287                      395
Notes. Parents rated the letter knowledge of their child in one of four categories: 1=The child knows no letters,
2=Some, 3=Most, 4=All. Answer options for weekly parental activities and how often the child asked to be read to
include: 1=Not at all, 2=Once or twice per week, 3=Three to six times, 4=Every day. Missing values set at the
sample average.




                                                                                                  Page 46 of 53
Table A2: Summary statistics (Experiment Year 2)
                                                                         Parent Survey
                                                                                                Academic Sample
                                                                            Sample
Panel A. Children                                                    Mean (Std. Dev.)          Mean     (Std. Dev.)
Female                                                                0.50          -           0.50          -
Hispanic                                                              0.28          -           0.35          -
Chinese                                                               0.39          -           0.36          -
Black                                                                 0.09          -           0.11          -
White                                                                 0.12          -           0.11          -
Other Race                                                            0.06          -           0.07          -
Age in years (fall)                                                   4.45       (0.25)         4.47       (0.55)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall)                              2.94       (0.93)         2.8        (0.94)
Parent rating of how often child ask to be read to per week (fall)    3.06       (0.88)         2.91       (0.94)
Child literacy assessment sum score (fall; max=126.0)                52.23      (37.04)        51.00      (36.09)

Panel B. Parents
Female                                                                0.85        -             0.81         -
Age in years (fall)                                                  35.19     (6.59)          34.86      (7.19)
Has less than a bachelor's degree                                     0.75        -             0.77         -
Received texts in English                                             0.52        -             0.51         -
Received texts in Spanish                                             0.17        -             0.22         -
Received texts in Chinese                                             0.32        -             0.27         -
How many times per week parent reads for pleasure (fall)              2.58     (0.93)           2.57      (0.95)
How many times per week parent tells a story to child (fall)          2.88     (0.87)           2.79      (0.88)
How many times per week parent sings to child (fall)                  3.23     (0.83)           3.18      (0.86)
N=                                                                    271                       426
Notes. Parents rated the letter knowledge of their child in one of four categories: 1=The child knows no letters,
2=Some, 3=Most, 4=All. Answer options for weekly parental activities and how often the child asked to be read to
include: 1=Not at all, 2=Once or twice per week, 3=Three to six times, 4=Every day. Missing values set at the
sample average.




                                                                                                   Page 47 of 53
Table A3: Randomization checks: The effect of treatment status on pre-treatment child covariates by year
                                                                        Parent Survey
Pre-treatment child covariates                                                             Academic Sample
                                                                           Sample
                                                                      Year 1     Year 2     Year 1    Year 2
Child female                                                           0.064      0.001     -0.002    -0.004
                                                                     (0.064) (0.058)       (0.058)    (0.041)
Hispanic                                                              -0.028      0.014     -0.055    -0.010
                                                                     (0.034) (0.059)       (0.034)    (0.026)
Chinese                                                                0.060     -0.029      0.023     0.041
                                                                     (0.040) (0.037)       (0.024)    (0.029)
Black                                                                  0.028      0.015      0.025    -0.025
                                                                     (0.040) (0.023)       (0.025)    (0.032)
White                                                                -0.064* -0.007         -0.017     0.001
                                                                     (0.030) (0.042)       (0.019)    (0.034)
Other Race                                                             0.028     -0.005      0.024    -0.007
                                                                     (0.035) (0.036)       (0.031)    (0.028)
Child age in years                                                     0.044      0.006      0.020     0.080
                                                                     (0.038) (0.035)       (0.028)    (0.066)
Parent female                                                         -0.030     -0.028      0.000     0.004
                                                                     (0.031) (0.058)       (0.033)    (0.040)
Parent age in years                                                   -0.811      0.741     -0.155     0.956
                                                                     (0.614) (0.850)       (0.470)    (0.700)
Less than bachelor's degree                                           -0.074     -0.033    -0.089*     0.003
                                                                     (0.045) (0.050)       (0.043)    (0.039)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall)                              0.253*      0.087      0.068    -0.022
                                                                     (0.109) (0.107)       (0.104)    (0.080)
Parent rating of how often child ask to be read to per week (fall)   -0.308* -0.053        -0.195+    -0.056
                                                                     (0.137) (0.112)       (0.109)    (0.079)
How many times per week parent reads for pleasure (fall)              -0.001     -0.031      0.045    -0.076
                                                                     (0.100) (0.123)       (0.089)    (0.068)
How many times per week parent tells a story to child (fall)          -0.061     -0.040     -0.001     0.043
                                                                     (0.111) (0.136)       (0.104)    (0.083)
How many times per week parent sings to child (fall)                  -0.020     -0.019      0.017    -0.052
                                                                     (0.119) (0.122)       (0.079)    (0.094)
Child literacy assessment sum score (fall; max=126.0)                  5.307      0.611     -2.122    -0.935
                                                                     (4.580) (4.404)       (3.564)    (3.045)
Received texts in English                                             -0.005     -0.061      0.051     0.002
                                                                     (0.032) (0.052)       (0.031)    (0.048)
Received texts in Spanish                                             -0.025      0.050    -0.049*     0.016
                                                                     (0.029) (0.032)       (0.021)    (0.037)
Received texts in Chinese                                              0.030      0.010     -0.001    -0.018
                                                                     (0.021) (0.046)       (0.017)    (0.033)

p-value of test of joint significance                                 0.001      0.326        0.092     0.215
N=                                                                     287        271          395       426
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                ✓          ✓           ✓          ✓
Notes. Fall parent survey responses are standardized. Missing values are replaced with sample average.
Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year level. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                Page 48 of 53
Table A4: The effects of READY4K! on parents' text messaging behaviors and attitudes by year
                                                         Model 1           Model 2          N
Panel A. First year of experiment
Parent read text messages                                 0.202            0.248+
                                                                                            279
                                                         (0.128)           (0.130)
Parent used text messages                                0.504**           0.538**
                                                                                            279
                                                         (0.147)           (0.158)
Parent found text messages helpful                       0.523**           0.613**
                                                                                            279
                                                         (0.143)           (0.138)
Parent shared texts with other parents                   0.248*            0.277*
                                                                                            281
                                                         (0.113)           (0.135)
Parent would recommend texts                             0.238+            0.245+
                                                                                            282
                                                         (0.122)           (0.135)
Panel B. Second year of experiment
Parent read text messages                                 0.095             0.066
                                                                                            266
                                                         (0.152)           (0.182)
Parent used text messages                                 0.076             0.055
                                                                                            266
                                                         (0.121)           (0.132)
Parent found text messages helpful                       0.274+            0.233+
                                                                                            262
                                                         (0.124)           (0.123)
Parent would recommend texts                             0.372**           0.383**
                                                                                            263
                                                         (0.135)           (0.136)

Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                    ✓                    ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                 ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                              ✓
Notes. All outcomes are standardized by year. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization
site-by-year level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05,
**p<0.01.




                                                                                          Page 49 of 53
Table A5: Heterogeneity in READY4K! effects on children's spring early literacy assessment scores
Sample of children above median of baseline skills
Panel A. Average outcomes, first year of experiment             Model 1        Model 2               N
Average of all questions                                         -0.014         0.000
                                                                                                    197
                                                                (0.101)        (0.087)
Average of non-leveled questions                                 -0.056        -0.072
                                                                                                    197
                                                                (0.098)        (0.091)
Panel B. Average outcomes, second year of experiment
Average of all questions                                          -0.045        -0.073
                                                                                                    219
                                                                 (0.084)        (0.070)
Average of non-leveled questions                                  -0.053        -0.078
                                                                                                    291
                                                                 (0.080)        (0.073)
Panel C. All outcomes, pooled sample
Average of all questions                                          -0.031        -0.028
                                                                                                    416
                                                                 (0.063)        (0.049)
Average of non-leveled questions                                  -0.054        -0.059
                                                                                                    416
                                                                 (0.062)        (0.057)
Upper case letter recognition                                     -0.009         0.000
                                                                                                    414
                                                                 (0.044)        (0.044)
Beginning word sound awareness                                     0.033         0.032
                                                                                                    408
                                                                 (0.074)        (0.077)
Print and word awareness                                          -0.061        -0.083
                                                                                                    410
                                                                 (0.085)        (0.087)
Rhyme awareness                                                   -0.069        -0.068
                                                                                                    406
                                                                 (0.088)        (0.087)
Name writing                                                      -0.068        -0.071
                                                                                                    415
                                                                 (0.059)        (0.059)
Probability of progressing to leveled portion of assessment       -0.012         0.001
                                                                                                    416
                                                                 (0.029)        (0.032)
Lower case letter recognition                                     -0.004         0.028
                                                                                                    401
                                                                 (0.085)        (0.093)
Letter sounds awareness                                            0.035         0.012
                                                                                                    387
                                                                 (0.092)        (0.085)

Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                           ✓              ✓
Administrative and fall parent survey covariates                                  ✓
Fall literacy assessment covariates                                               ✓

Notes. All outcomes are standardized by year. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year
level. Included covariates are detailed in Table 4. + indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                 Page 50 of 53
Table A6: Composite Variable Components
Panel A. Global home literacy composite variable, first year of experiment
                                                                                             Scoring
Components:
                                                                                            coefficient
Pointed out letters in the home environment                                                  0.14504
Pointed out two words that begin with the same sound to your child                           0.16495
Pointed out two words that rhyme to your child                                               0.16637
Said & explained a new word to your child using household objects                            0.13605
Showed your child the different parts of a book (e.g., cover, title, author, and pages)      0.15588
Looked at pictures in a book with your child                                                 0.14262
Showed or helped your child write his/her name                                               0.12261
Read to your child                                                                           0.13943
Told your child a story                                                                      0.13814
Recited a nursery rhyme to your child                                                        0.13414
Eigenvalue: 4.74785 (47.48% of variance explained)


Panel B. Global home literacy composite variable, second year of experiment

                                                                                             Scoring
                                                                                            coefficient
Pointed out letters to your child                                                             0.1846
Practiced word sounds with your child                                                         0.2064
Practiced rhyming with your child                                                            0.18928
Helped your child learn new words                                                            0.19162
Showed your child the different parts of a book (e.g., cover, title, author, and pages)      0.17219
Showed your child we read from left to right                                                 0.17254
Worked on literacy skills during family activities (meals, kitchen, etc…)                    0.19908
Eigenvalue: 4.02786 (57.54% of variance explained)

Panel C. Global parental involvement composite variable
                                                                                             Scoring
Components:
                                                                                            coefficient
Parent asked about their child's interests                                                   0.14285
Parent asked about their child's friends                                                     0.14226
Parent asked about how the child gets along with others                                      0.13665
Parent asked about what their child is doing in school                                       0.14187
Parent asked about what their child is learning in school                                    0.14577
Parent asked about their child's understanding of early literacy skills like the ABCs        0.14249
Parent asked about things they can do to help their child learn to read                      0.14194
Parent asked for book recommendations                                                        0.12035
Eigenvalue: 6.42564 (80.32% of variance explained)




                                                                                          Page 51 of 53
Table A7: Randomization checks: Differential attrition by covariate (combined sample)
                                                                             Parent    Teacher
                                                                                                   Academic
Pre-treatment covariates                                                     Survey    Survey
                                                                                                    Sample
                                                                            Sample     Sample
Child female x treatment                                                      0.039      0.016        0.009
                                                                            (0.060)    (0.039)      (0.055)
Hispanic x treatment                                                         -0.018      0.031       -0.011
                                                                            (0.072)    (0.038)      (0.049)
Chinese x treatment                                                           0.022     -0.039       -0.007
                                                                            (0.073)    (0.036)      (0.040)
Black x treatment                                                            -0.026      0.067        0.103
                                                                            (0.088)    (0.078)      (0.081)
White x treatment                                                            -0.136      0.014        0.031
                                                                            (0.132)    (0.053)      (0.063)
Other Race x treatment                                                        0.114     -0.058       -0.064
                                                                            (0.105)    (0.052)      (0.090)
Child age in years x treatment                                                0.080      0.013        0.090
                                                                            (0.097)    (0.073)      (0.071)
Parent female x treatment                                                   -0.151+      0.064      -0.155*
                                                                            (0.083)    (0.052)      (0.065)
Parent age in years x treatment                                              -0.002     -0.002        0.000
                                                                            (0.005)    (0.003)      (0.004)
Less than bachelor's degree x treatment                                      -0.124      0.015       -0.068
                                                                            (0.075)    (0.042)      (0.066)
Parent rating of letter knowledge (fall) x treatment                         0.075*      0.010        0.018
                                                                            (0.035)    (0.018)      (0.027)
How often child ask to be read to per week (fall) x treatment                -0.006      0.007        0.036
                                                                            (0.036)    (0.014)      (0.029)
How many times per week parent reads for pleasure (fall) x treatment         -0.005      0.023        0.016
                                                                            (0.031)    (0.018)      (0.027)
How many times per week parent tells a story to child (fall) x treatment     -0.008      0.007        0.041
                                                                            (0.031)    (0.017)      (0.026)
How many times per week parent sings to child (fall) x treatment              0.024      0.024        0.032
                                                                            (0.032)    (0.021)      (0.028)
Child literacy assessment sum score (fall; max=126.0) x treatment             0.002      0.000        0.000
                                                                            (0.001)    (0.000)      (0.001)
Received texts in English x treatment                                        -0.011     -0.001        0.054
                                                                            (0.059)    (0.038)      (0.047)
Received texts in Spanish x treatment                                        -0.017      0.008       -0.032
                                                                            (0.070)    (0.046)      (0.056)
Received texts in Chinese x treatment                                         0.031     -0.008       -0.047
                                                                            (0.066)    (0.044)      (0.056)
Model inclusions:
Randomization site-by-year fixed effects                                        ✓           ✓          ✓
Notes. Fall parent survey responses are standardized. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-
by-year level. Sample size varies by covariate due to missing data. The average sample size is 989 and the
maximum sample size is 1,031. Standard errors are clustered at the randomization site-by-year level.
+ indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01.




                                                                                                 Page 52 of 53
Table A8: Effects of follow-up intervention on academic outcomes for students in the first year of original
experiment, by median of baseline skills distribution
                                                                       (1)                          (2)
                                                                 General Text               Personalized Text
                                                                  Treatment                    Treatment
   Panel A: Below Median of Baseline Skills (N=165)
   Reading level (ordinal logit)                                     0.5437                       0.6644
                                                                    (0.6224)                     (0.4397)
   Reading level (standardized point scale)                          0.1414                       0.1426
                                                                    (0.1316)                     (0.1253)
   Exceeds Expectations                                              0.0739                      0.1628*
                                                                    (0.0764)                     (0.0735)
   Meets or Exceeds Expectations                                      0.148                        0.148
                                                                    (0.1012)                     (0.1012)
   Approaches, Meets, or Exceeds Expectations                        0.1727                       0.0261
                                                                    (0.1415)                     (0.1114)
   Panel B: Above Median of Baseline Skills (N=166)
   Reading level (ordinal logit)                                     -0.6473                      0.4734
                                                                    (0.5700)                     (0.3280)
   Reading level (standardized point scale)                          -0.0168                      0.2114
                                                                    (0.2394)                     (0.2254)
   Exceeds Expectations                                              0.0045                       0.0645
                                                                    (0.1117)                     (0.0726)
   Meets or Exceeds Expectations                                     -0.1269                      0.0714
                                                                    (0.0909)                     (0.0664)
   Approaches, Meets, or Exceeds Expectations                         0.011                       0.0739
                                                                    (0.0847)                     (0.0555)
   Note: Each pair of cells represents the results of a separate regression of the treatment effect on the relevant
academic outcome. Column headers indicate the model components. The reference category is the control group.
Row headers indicate the academic outcome. Panel headers indicate the subsample. All models include site fixed
effects, control for text message language, factors of baseline survey questions, and administrative covariates.
Source data are district test files of the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System in fall of first grade.
Baseline skills were calculated from performance on the Phonological Awareness Literacy Screening administered
in fall of 2013. Standard errors are clustered by randomization site. +indicates p<0.10, *p<0.05, **p<0.01,
***p<0.001




                                                                                                   Page 53 of 53
