NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL POLICIES AND REAL EXCHANGE
RATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY

Jacob A. Frenkel

Assaf Razin

Working Paper No. 2065

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1986

This paper was prepared for the Macroeconomics Division, ORD, World
Bank. We thank Thomas Krueger and Kei-Mu Vi for efficient research
assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research programs in International Studies and Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2065
November 1986

Fiscal Policies and Real Exchange Rates in the World Economy

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effects of fiscal policies on the evolution of

real rates of interest and real exchange rates in the interdependent world
economy.

We construct an analytical framework suitable for a detailed examina-

tion of the various channels through which these variables are influenced by

government spending and by tax policies. The analytical framework employs a
general equilibrium approach highlighting the roles played by wealth effects and

by temporal and intertemporal substitution effects.

The general principle

illustrated by the analysis of the dynamic effects of budget deficits is that

the consequences of temporary tax policies stretch beyond the period during
which the temporary policies are in effect. The counterpart to these dynamic
implications is the rise in the economy's external debt induced by the budget
deficit the service of which stretches into the indefinite future. By series of

examples, allowing for both distortionary and non-distortionary taxes and for
various patterns of government spending, it is shown that the quantitative and

qualitative effects of fiscal policies on real exchange rates, real interest

rates, debt accumulation and the like depend critically on the commodity
composition of government spending and its intertemporal allocations on the one

hand, and on the details of government debt issue and tax structure, including

the timing of taxes and borrowing and the types of taxes used to finance the
budget, on the other hand.

Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
(312)962-8253

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Tel-Aviv University
Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv
Israel
(972)-3-420-733

This paper deals with the effects of fiscal policies on the evolution of

real rates of interest and real exchange rates in the interdependent world
economy.

The main purpose of the analysis is to construct an analytical

framework suitable for a detailed examination of the various channels through

which government spending and tax policies influence interest rates and real
exchange rates.

Such an analysis clarifies the mechanisms through which the

effects of fiscal policies are transmitted internationally.

Our analysis is motivated by developments occuring in the world economy

during the first half of the 1980's. During this period changes in national

fiscal policies were unsynchronized, real rates of interest were high and
volatile and real exchange rates exhibited diverging trends and were subject to

large fluctuations.

The course of fiscal policies undertaken by the major

industrial countries affected the rest of the world through the integrated goods

and capital markets and resulted in increased concern in each country over
policy measures taken in the rest of the world. In addition to the interactions

among the major economies, the debt-ridden countries faced with high world
interest rates adopted fiscal policy measures that influenced their competitive

position and external-debt accumulation.

Our analysis provides a framework

useful for interpreting such developments.

The analytical framework employs a general equilibrium intertemporal
approach.

One of its key implications is that a proper analysis of the effects

of fiscal policies on real exchange rates, real interest rates, debt accumula-

tion and other important macroeconomic variables must indicate the timing and

composition of fiscal policies.
details

of

the

commodity

Accordingly, the analysis must specify the

composition of government spending and its

intertemporal allocations on the one hand, and the details of government debt

2

issue and of the tax structure including the timing of taxes and borrowing and
the types of taxes used to finance the budget, on the other hand.

The emphasis on the intertemporal considerations underlying fiscal
policies permits the adoption of a long-term perspective in an evaluation of the

consequences of current policies. In this perspective the short, medium, and
long-term implications of policies are intimately linked to each other through
the forward-looking behavior of economic agents who are subject to intertemporal
budget constraints.

One of the implications of the analysis is that even though the real

rates of interest and real exchange rates which are at the center of our
analysis are influenced by fiscal policies, they are not policy instruments
directly manipulated by governments. Rather, these variables may be viewed as
useful indicators for macroeconomic policies.

The paper is divided into three main parts. Part I contains an analysis
of the effects of government spending. In this context we develop the analytical framework for the two-country model of the world economy. To high]ight the

key mechanisms and channels through which fiscal policies operate we abstract
from monetary considerations. The subsequent two parts deal with the effects of
budget deficits induced by tax policies. Accordingly, we analyse in Part II the
effects of distortionary taxes and in Part III the effects of non-distortionary
taxes.

The former operate primarily through temporal and intertemporal

substitution effects and the latter through wealth effects. In this context we

first examine the small country case with special emphasis on the dynamics of

the real exchange rate, and then turn to the two-country case with special
emphasis on the cross-country comovements of real exchange rates. The paper is
concluded in Part IV which contains a detailed summary of the key results.

3

I. Government Spending Policies
In this part of the paper we analyse the effects of government spending

on the real exchange rate. To focus on the unique role played by the temporal

and the intertemporal allocations of government expenditures, we specify the
model so as to ensure that the details of government finance, particularly the

timing of taxes and borrowing, are immaterial. Accordingly, we assume in this

part of the paper that all taxes are lump-sum and that the horizon governing
private and public-sectors' behavior coincide. Issues concerning the details of

government finance are dealt with in subsequent parts of this paper. We start
with an outline of the analytical framework for a two-country model of the world
economy.

This framework is then applied to an analysis of the effects of

government spending on the world rate of interest and on the real exchange rates
in the two countries.

-

1.1: The Analytical Framework

Throughout

we

assume

that

there

are two composite goods: an

internationally tradable good, denoted by x , and a non-tradable good, denoted
by

n.

To allow for intertemporal considerations we assume for simplicity a

two-period model, period 0 and period 1.1

The relative price of the non-

tradable good (the inverse of the real exchange rate) in period t

the exogeneously given output of that good is ?

of the non-tradable good are G1

,

,

denoted by

government purchases

and private-sector demand is c (t—O,l).

The private- sector life-time budget constraint is

(1.1)

is

(c0+p0c0) +

a111c1)

—

+

aXl(?,l+pfllIfll)

-

(l÷ri)B!i —

4
where axl

—

l/(l+rxO

denotes

)

the discount factor and where cxt and Yxt

denote, respectively, the levels of consumption and the exogeneously given level

of production of tradable goods, in period t (t—0,1), W0 denotes wealth, rxt
(t--l,0) denotes the world rate of interest and B denotes private-sector debt

in period t (t— -

1,0).

The values of wealth, debt, and the rates of interest

are measured in terms of tradable goods.

In addition to the private-sector life-time budget constraint the
economy's overall constraint incorporates the government budget constraint.
Accordingly, the government present-value intertemporal budget constraint is

(l+r1)Bi

(1.2)

(Go + pnO'n& + ai(G1 + p1G1) — T0 + a1Ti -

where

and Gnt denote respectively government purchases of tradable and non-

tradable goods, and where Tt and B denote, respectively, lump-sum taxes and

government debt in period t.

Consolidating the private sector 1ife-time

constraint (1.1) with that of the government (1.2) and imposing equality between

consumption and production of non-tradable goods in each period, yields the
economy's consolidated constraint:

c0 +

(1.3)

where

Bt —

B+B

—

(o-co)

+

-

denotes the economy's external debt in period t.

The individual maximizes life-time utility subject to the life-time
budget constraint (1.1). We assume that the life-time utility function can be

expressed as a function of two linearly homogeneous sub-utility functions

C0(c0,c0) and Ci(cxi,ci).

Hence, life-time utility is

U(C0,C1). The

maximization of this utility function subject to the life-time constraint (1.1)

5

is carried out in two stages where the first stage optimizes the composition of

spending within each period and the second stage optimizes the intertemporal
allocation of spending between periods.

The optimization of the intertemporal allocation of (the consumptionbased) real spending yields the demand functions for each period real spending

C — C((a1,W0)

where

ad

is the (consumption-based) real discount factor,

and where W0 is (the consumption-based) real wealth. Expressed in terms of
tradable goods, the level of spending in each period is PtCt where P is the
consumption-based price index (the "true" price deflator). Thus,
ad

axl P1/P0 and WcO — W0/P0.

Obviously, the price index in each period

depends on the temporal relative price p with an elasticity that equals the

relative share of expenditure on non-tradable goods, nt Within each period
the (sub) utility-maximizing allocation of spending between goods depends on the
relative price

The market for non-tradable goods must clear in each country during each
period.

Accordingly the market clearing conditions for the domestic non-

tradable goods are

'n

-

(1.4)

c0(p0P0C0(a1, W0)) —

(1.5)

c1(pl,P1C1(a1, Woo)) nl - G1

C0

where the left-hand-sides of these equilibrium conditions show the demand func-

tions and the right-hand sides show the supply net of government purchases. As
seen, the demand function depends on the relative price,
where

is the consumption-based price index, and

and on spending,
is (the con-

sumption-based) real spending. As indicated the level of real spending depends

6

on the (consumption-based) real discount factor,

a1.

We assume that the

utility function is homothetic so that the elasticity of consumption demand with
respect to spending as well as the elasticity of spending with respect to wealth
are unity.

Market clearing requires that in each period changes in the demand for

non-tradable goods (induced by various shocks) are equal to changes in the

supply net of government purchases.

Accordingly, differentiating equations

(I.4)-(I.5) for given levels of output and evaluating around C

0 (reflecting

the assumption that the initial level of government spending is zero) yields

(1.6)

(,

(L7)

+ '7p) n0 + hlC0aacl + WcO —

- nOn1

+

- 'nll

nlpl
where

r,

P11 nl

+

÷ WcO —

C1aacl

denotes the elasticity of the variable indicated by the first

subscript with respect to the variable indicated by the second subscript,

p

denotes the inverse of the value of private consumption of non-tradable goods in

l/ptc

period t, that is,

—

logarithmic derivative.

The intertemporal and the temporal allocations of

(t—0,l), and where a circumflex denotes a

government spending are governed by the government saving propensity, 1g
defined as the ratio of future government spending (in present value terms) to
the discounted sum of government spending, and by the relative share of govern-

ment spending on non-tradables in total government spending in period t,
The left-hand-sides of equations (I.6)-(I.7) show that private-sector demand is

altered through changes in temporal prices

intertemporal prices (ac1),

and real wealth (W0). The right-hand-sides of these equations show that the

7

net supply of non-tradable goods is altered through changes in output (supply
shocks) and through changes in government purchases.
In what follows we use the market clearing conditions in order to analyse

the international transmission of fiscal policies. In the present case, since
the only tradable good is a single composite commodity, the international price

which effects the transmission mechanism is the world rate of interest. The

analysis proceeds in two stages.

In the first, we determine the effects of

fiscal policies on the time paths of the real exchange rate and of private

consumption of tradable goods under the assumption that the world rate of
interest is given. Similarly, we also determine the effects of changes in the

world rate of interest on the paths of the real exchange rate and of private

consumption of tradable goods under the assumption that fiscal policies are
In the second stage we use a two-country framework and combine these

given.

partial results in order to determine the equilibrium relations between fiscal

policies, the world rate of interest, and the time paths of the domestic and
foreign real exchange rates.

1.2: Government Spending. the Rate of Interest and The Real Exchange Rate

In this section we analyse the effects of government spending on the

world rate of interest and on the paths of the domestic and foreign real
exchange

rates.

This analysis identifies the precise mechanism of the

international transmission of the effects of government spending on both
tradable and non-tradable goods.

The equilibrium value of wealth

,

is

obtained by substituting the

government present-value budget constraint (1.2) into the corresponding private-

sector budget constraint. Accordingly,

8

—

(1.8)

+

xoGxo)]

+

al[i-Gl) + (1G1)]
-

(l+r1)Bi

Starting from a zero level of initial government spending, consider a

rise in the discounted sum of government spending by dG. This change in
aggregate government spending falls in part on non-tradable goods as indicated

by the relevant terms on the right-hand-side of equations (I.6)-(I.7). For a
given value of the world rate of interest (measured in terms of tradable goods)

the effect of the rise in government spending on the time path of the real
exchange rate, nO'nl' is found by subtracting equation (1.7) from (1.6) and

using the Slutsky decomposition.

If the expenditure shares of the private

sector do not vary over time, this yields3

d log nO"nl
nOns
—
dG
+ (l-fl)a

a

where

a and anx

n

-

denote the intertemporal and the temporal elasticities of

substitution, and where

defined as the ratio of private sector future

consumption (in present-value terms) to the discounted sum of private-sector
spending, denotes the private-sector saving propensity.

Equation (1.9) reveals that the direction of the change in the path of
the real exchange rate depends on the temporal and the intertemporal allocations

of government demand for non-tradable goods relative to the corresponding al-

locations of private-sector demand.

If the ratio of the relative share of

government spending on non-tradable goods in the current period, (17g), to
the private-sector share,

exceeds the corresponding ratio in the

9

then a rise in government spending raises the per-

future period,

centage rate of change of the real exchange rate and vice versa.
This result can be interpreted in terms of a "transfer-problem" criterion

relating the temporal and the intertemporal spending patterns of the government

and the domestic private sector. Accordingly, the rise in government spending
raises the current price of non-tradable goods relative to its future price, if
the pattern of government spending is biased towards current non-tradable goods
in comparison with the pattern of private-sector spending.

We turn next to determine the effects of government spending on the path

of private-sector consumption of tradable goods. Analogously to the previous
specification, the demand functions for tradable goods are

(1.10)

c0 —

c0(p0

,

P0C0(a1

(1.11)

c1 —

c1(p1

,

P1C1(a1

,

W0))

,

We))

Obviously, in contrast to the markets for non-tradable goods, the consumption of

tradable goods in any given period is not limited by the available domestic
supply.

In determining the percentage change in the ratio c0/c1 we dif-

ferentiate equations (I.lO)-(I.ll) and use the Slutsky decomposotion. Accordingly,

d log (co/c1)
(1.12)

d log nO"nl

—

n(anx

-

a).

Equation (1.12) shows that the qualitative effects of a rise in the price

ratio nO'nl on the tradable-good consumption ratio, c0/c1 , depends only
on whether the temporal elasticity of substitutions, a

,

exceeds or falls

10

short of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution a. A rise in the relative price of non-tradable goods, nt induces substitution of consumption of
tradable goods for non-tradable goods within the period. The magnitude of this

temporal substitution is indicated by

a. Further, if p rises by more

than p1 (so that the ratio nni' rises), then the extent of the temporal
substitution within the current period exceeds the corresponding substitution
within the future period. As a result the ratio of current to future consumption of tradable goods rises. This is reflected by the positive term

equation (1.12).

$1a in

The same rise in the intertemporal price ratio

raises the (consumption-based) real rate of interest (and lowers the correspond-

ing real discount factor, aci). This rise in the real rate of interest induces
substitution of spending between periods: from the present to the future period.

The magnitude of this iritertemporal substitution is indicated by the negative

term n° in equation (1.12). Finally, we note that the change in the intertemporal consumption ratio does not depend on private wealth. This reflects the

homotheticity assumption which implies that the tax-induced fall in wealth
lowers current and future demand for tradable goods by the same proportion.
Combining equations (1.9) with (1.12) yields

(I

. 13

d log (cx0/cxl)
dG

nO

s)(n-a) [o(1)

nnnx (17)

-

nl1s

ns

Equation (1.13) shows that the direction of the effect of a rise in government

spending on the path of tradable-goods consumption, c0/c1 , depends on the
product of two factors. First, the government-induced temporal-intertemporal

bias in demand relative to the private sector (indicated by the term in the
squared brackets in (1.13)), and second, the temporal-intertemporal substitution

11

bias in private-sector demand (indicated by a-a). The first determines the

effect of the rise in

on the price ratio and the second translates the

C

change in the price ratio into changes in the consumption ratio.

We turn next to determine the effects of changes in the world rate of
interest (or equivalently the world discount factor) under the assumption that
government spending remains intact. Using equations (I.6)-(I.7) it can be shown
that the percentage changes in the periodic price of non-tradable goods arising
from a given percentage change in the world discount factor are

A

—

(1.14)

A

—

(1.15)

—

where

S

a

-(1-7

+ (l-fl)a]

a1
A

)a

+ (lPn)anx

A

+

(l-)a] ai

÷

+ cr1)

future net output to private consumption, and where

denotes the ratio of
denotes the private-

sector relative share of saving out of wealth.

It is seen that the link between nt and 1 operates through two

channels.

The first channel (indicated by the first term) is the intertemporal

substitution effect which is positive in its effect on the current price and

negative in its effect on the future price. Accordingly, a rise in the world
discount factor (that is, a fall in the rate of interest) induces substitution

of spending from the future towards the present. Part of the rise in current
aggregate demand falls on the non-tradable goods and drives up their current
price.

Likewise, the decline in future demand reduces the future price of non-

tradable goods.

12

The second channel (indicated by the second term in equations (1.14)-

(1.15)) is the wealth effect.

As is evident, the wealth effect induced by

changes in the world rate of interest may be positive or negative depending on

whether the country is a borrower or lender. Accordingly, if p1>l, that is if
in the future period GDP net of government spending exceeds private spending (so
that in the future period the private-sector runs a trade account surplus), then
the rise in the world discount factor (the fall in the rate of interest) induces

a positive wealth effect.

On the other hand, if zi<1, the same rise in the

discount factor induces a negative wealth effect. In this context it is relevant to note that the influence of the wealth effect on p

nO is identical to its

influence on p; this reflects the assumption that the wealth elasticity of
spending is unitary and that the expenditure share, fi

, and

the temporal elas-

ticity of substitution, a, do not vary over time.

The dependence of the wealth effect on whether the future value of GDP

net of government spending exceeds or falls short of future private spending

(that is on whether

exceeds or falls short of unity) is interpreted by

reference to the economy's consolidated budget constraint (1.3). This con-

straint implies that the discounted sum of the trade account surpluses,
(TA)0+ai(TA)1,

equals

(1+r1)Bi, where
(t—O,l).

the historically given external debt commitment,

(TA)t

denotes the trade-account surplus in period t

If p>l, then (TA)1>O and, therefore, the sum

of

the present-period

current account deficit [-TA0+rxiBi] and the amortization of the histori-

cal debt B1 must be positive. This sum is the private-sector's presentperiod borrowing needs, to which the current rate of interest applies. Thus,
the direction of the wealth effect induced by the fall in the current rate of
interest depends on whether the borrowing needs (current account deficit plus
amortization) are positive or negative.

13

Equations (I.14)-(I.15) show that if the current borrowing needs are
positive

(l>l), then the fall in the world rate of interest must raise

since in that case both the substitution and the wealth effects operate in the

same direction.

The two effects exert, however, conflicting influences on the

future price, nl If the current borrowing needs are negative (l<l), then
the fall in the world rate of interest lowers the future price ri (since both

the wealth and substitution effects operate in the same direction), but its
impact on the current price depends on the relative magnitudes of the (negative)

wealth and (positive) substitution effects. If the current borrowing needs are

zero (so that l=l) then the fall in the rate of interest does not exert any

wealth effect and, therefore, it must induce a rise in p and a fall in
through a pure intertemporal substitution.

The multitude of possibilities arising from alternative assumptions about

the sign and magnitude of the wealth effect does not impact on the analysis of
the time profile of the real exchange rate, nor does it influence the analysis
of changes in the (consumption-based) real rate of interest. The homotheticity
assumption together with the assumption that the expenditure share,

,

and the

temporal elasticity of substitution, a , do not vary over time, imply that the

intertemporal ratio, p/pfl ,

is

independent of wealth. Therefore, we proceed

by analysing the effects of changes in the world rate of interest on the timepath of the real exchange rate.
Subtracting equations (1.15) from (1.14) yields

(I.

ci log
)

dlogaxl

-

n

n nx

Equation (1.16) indicates that changes in the world rate of interest influence

the path of the real exchange rate only through the intertemporal substitution

14

effect.

Accordingly a rise in the world rate of interest (a fall in

induces intertemporal substitution of spending towards the future and, thereby,

lowers the current price of non-tradable goods relative to the future price
(that is, it decelarates the rate of increase of the real exchange rate from
period zero to period one). As before, the wealth-induced proportional change
in the current demand and, thereby, in the current price of non-tradable goods,

equals the corresponding changes in the future demand and price. Therefore, these wealth effects do not influence the price ratio
The induced change in the price ratio of non-tradable goods together with
the change in the world rate of interest influence the

intertemporal-consumption

ratio of tradable goods, c0/ci according to

'I

17'/

dlog(cxO/cxl)
d

xl

log a

C

nx

—

no + (1-fln)ctnx

fi

Equation (1.17) shows that the only factors governing the change in this
intertemporal-consumption ratio are pure temporal and intertemporal substitution
effects.

As before the wealth effects do not influence this ratio. In this

case, however, (and in contrast with the effects of the rise in government
spending analysed in equation (1.13)), both the temporal and the intertemporal
elasticities of substitution operate in the same direction. This is evident by

noting from the definition of the (consumption-based) real discount factor and
from equation (1.16) that

d log a

(1.18)

c

d log a1

—

n n

d log (p 0/p )

1-fln d log a1

(1-fln)nx

fl + (l-fl)C

15

Thus, a rise in the world discount factor raises the (consumption-based) real

discount factor (but by a smaller proportion in view of the rise in nO"nl
This rise induces intertemporal substitution of spending towards the present and

raises the consumption ratio c0/c1. Further, a rise in the price of nontradable goods induces within each period substitution in consumption towards

Since the rise in the discount factor raises nO'nl' the

tradable goods.

temporal substitution in consumption is stronger in the current period and,
therefore, also operates to raise the ratio co/ci.
Equations (1.13) and (1.17) summarize the results of the first stage of

the analysis.

They provide the ingredients for the second stage in which we

determine the equilibrium relation between the world rate of interest and the

level of government spending.

In order to determine the equilibrium in the

world economy we need to consider the factors governing world demand and world
supply of tradable goods. The foreign economy is assumed to be characterized by
a structure of demand and supply similar to that of the domestic economy. Thus,
the relative world supply of tradable goods net of government purchases, z, is

z—

(1.19)

The

(?oGo) + (i*0c*0)

x1xl

+

*

*

analysis of the equilibrium in the world economy is carried out with

the aid of Figure 1. Panel I of Figure 1 shows the relative intertemporal world

supply, S, and the relative intertemproal domestic, D, foreign, D*, and world,
demands for tradable goods. The world relative demand is a weighted average
of the domestic and foreign relative demands. That is,

S

/

1

/
N'/

/
a'

/
/

/

/
D

N

pill

z

c

xO

xl

C

The Effects of Government Spending on the World Rate of Interest
and on the Paths of the Real Exchange Rates.

g

Data:

xO

*
c
xl

*

nl

Figure 1:

C

pno

pno

nx

5

>

Is
Is

16

*

*
*
C +C

CxO+C xO

U

xl

cxo

— + (1-u)
C

xl

C

xO

-

C

xl

where

*

— c /(c +c ) .
xl xl
xl

The relative

xl

demand schedules relate the desired consumption ratio of tradable goods to the
rate of interest. Their slope reflects the negative relation embodied in equa-

tion (1.17).

These demand schedules are drawn for a given level of government

spending. The relative supply schedule is drawn with a zero interest elasticity

since we abstract from investment.

This schedule is also drawn for a given

level of government spending.

The schedules

N

and N* in Panel II of Figure 1 show the relation

between the world rate of interest and the internal relative price structure

(the path of the real exchange rate) in each country. The negative slope of
these schedules reflects the relation embodied in equation (1.16).

The initial equilibrium is described in Panel I by point A in which the

world rate of interest is r0. The periodic percentage changes of the domestic
and the foreign real exchange rates associated with the initial equilibrium are
shown in Panel II by points a and a*.

Consider the effects of a rise in the level of the domestic government
spending.

This change alters the domestic relative demand (and, thereby, the

world relative demand), as well as the world relative supply. As shown in
equation (1.13) the direction of the change in the relative demand schedules
depend on the government-induced bias in the interteniporal net supply of non-

tradable goods and on the bias in the teniporal-intertemporal substitution in
private-sector demand. In order to determine the direction of the change in the
relative supply schedule we differentiate equation (1.19). Accordingly,

(1.20)

d log z —
dG

xl (18g1)

-

17

where

denotes the reciprocal of the world output of tradable goods net of

government purchases of these goods in period t (t0,l). Thus,

xt

l/(xt-Gxt + *xtGxt). Equation

(1.20) indicates that the direction of

the change in the relative supply reflects the bias in the interternporal allocation of government spending on tradable goods.

Since the direction of the shift of the world relative demand and

supply

depends on the assumed magnitude of the various parameters, we cannot determine

on

a-priori grounds whether the rise in government spending raises or lowers

the equilibrium world rate of interest. Similar considerations apply to the
effects of government spending on the paths of the domestic and foreign real
exchange rates.

As indicated by equation (1.9), depending on the temporal and

intertemporal pattern of government spending, the rise in government spending

may induce a rightwards or leftwards shift of the N schedule in Panel II of
Figure 1.

In order to illustrate the working of the model we consider in Figure 1

the effects of government spending for a benchmark case in which the intertem-

poral elasticity of substitution, , exceeds the temporal elasticity,
ci, the
ratio of the shares of government spending to private spending in the current

period, (ly)/(l.y)

exceeds the corresponding ratio of future spending,

and government spending falls entirely on non-tradable goods (so that

1). As indicated by equation (1.13), in this benchmark case, the domestic

and, thereby, the world relative demand schedules shift leftwards from the

position indicated by
respectively.

D and

to the position indicated by D' and DW',

Further, as indicated by equation (1.20) with 8g — 1

the

relative supply of world tradable goods does not change. It follows that in
this case the equilibrium point shifts from point A to point A' in Panel I of
Figure 1, and the world rate of interest falls from r
to r'
xO
xO

18

In Panel II of Figure 1 we show the effects of the rise in government

spending on the paths of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates. As
indicated by equation (1.9), in this benchmark case, the N schedule shifts
leftwards and, given the new lower world rate of interest, the domestic and

*

foreign equilibrium points shift from a and a

*'

to a' and a

,

respec-

Accordingly the percentage change (per unit of time) of the real

tively.

exchange rates increases in both countries. In concluding the presentation of
this benchmark case we note that since the world rate of interest (measured in
terms of tradable goods) falls and since in both countries the time-paths of the

real exchange rates steepen, it follows that in both countries the consumption-

based real rates of interest fall (even though, in general, the magnitude of
this decline need not be the same for both countries).

It is important to note that we chose this specific benchmark case in
which the rise in government spending lowers the world rate of interest in order

to highlight the implications of government spending on non-tradable goods. In
fact, if government spending falls entirely on tradable goods, so that

— 0,

then the rise in spending does not alter the relative demand schedules in Figure
1

(as seen from equation (1.13) with

—

0) but it induces a leftwards shift

of the relative supply schedule (as seen from equation (1.20) for the case

—

0

and

[(1--)/(l-i)] > (-i/;). Thus, under such circumstances, the

rise in government spending raises the equilibrium rate of interest.

The more general configurations of the effects of government spending on

the world rate of interest, as implied by equations (1.13) and (1.19), are
summarized in Table 1. The Table demonstrates that if the commodity composition
of government spending is strongly biased towards goods that are internationally
tradable (so that

is small), then the key factor determining the direction of

the change in the world rate of interest is the intertemporal allocation of

TABLE 1

THE EFFECTS OF A RISE IN GOVERNMENT
SPENDING ON THE WORLD RATE OF INTEREST

Intertempora]. and Temporal Allocations of Government
Spending

Relation Between
Temporal and Intertemporal Elasticities
if Substitution

(1..1g)/(17) >

<

48O

fl—1

nx

>a

+

+

-

-

0
nx

—a

+

0

-

0

a

<a

+

-

-

+

nx

Note: The world rate of interest is measured in terms of internationally
tradable goods.

19

government and private-sector spending.

If government spending is biased

towards the current period relative to private-sector spending, so that
exceeds

then the world rate of interest rises and vice

versa. On the other hand if the commodity composition of government spending is

strongly biased towards non-tradable goods (so that p

is

close to unity),

then the direction of the change in the interest rate depends on the interaction

between the intertemporal allocation of government spending relative to the
private sector and the difference between the temporal and the intertemporal
elasticities of substitution of the domestic private-sector. In fact, since in
this case the effects of government spending operate only through changes in the
relative demand schedules, the rate of interest rises if

-a [(l--i)/(l-i5) -

is

positive, and vice versa.

The various possibilities concerning the relative magnitudes of the key
parameters also imply that the effects of government spending on the time-path
of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates are not clear cut. The possible

outcomes are summarized in Table 2. The results in the Table show that if the
commodity composition of government spending is strongly biased towards interna-

tionally tradable goods (so that

is about zero) then, as implied by equa-

tion (1.9), the change in government spending does not displace the N schedule

in Panel II of Figure 1.

Therefore, the induced change in the path of the

domestic real exchange rate mirrors only the change in the rate of interest
since it involves a movement along the given N schedule. It follows that, with

small, the change in the domestic time-path of the real exchange rate is
i9
inversely related to the change in the world rate of interest. This inverse
relation is verified from a comparison between the entries appearing in Tables 1
and 2 in the columns corresponding to the case of

TABLE 2

THE EFFECTS OF A RISE IN GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON THE PATHS OF
DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN REAL EXCHANGE RATES

Intertemporal and Temporal Allocations
of Government Spending

Relation Between

17g
7g
S
—S

Temporal and

1-7 S

Intertemporal

Elasticities of
Substitution

a >

a

a

— a

anx < a
Note:

The Real Exchange
Rate in the

>

7S

'-O
n fig_1
n

Domestic Economy
Foreign Economy

-

Domestic Economy
Foreign Economy

-

Domestic Economy
Foreign Economy

-

1-7 S

7S

g_0
g1
n
n
+
+

+

÷
0

+
+

0

+
+

+
+

-

-

-

17g
S 7g
____
—S

The paths of the real exchange rates are measured by nOnl and

7

20

In the other extreme case, in which government spending falls mainly on
non-tradable goods (so that

is close to unity) then, as long as the temporal

elasticity of substitution, a , does not exceed the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution, a

,

the key factor determining whether the path of the real

exchange rate steepens or flattens is the intertemporal allocation of government
spending.

If government spending is biased towards the current period relative

to private-sector spending, so that (l-)/(l--y) exceeds

,

then the rise

in spending accelerates the time-path of the real exchange rate and vice versa.

On the other hand if a exceeds a, then the time-path of the real exchange

rate is influenced by two conflicting forces, the one operating through a
movement along the N schedule (induced by the change in the rate of interest)

and the other operating through a shift of the N schedule (induced by the
direct effect of government spending on the relative supply of non-tradable
goods).

Finally, we note that since the foreign schedule, N*, is not affected by

domestic government spending, the time-path of the foreign real exchange rate,

is always related negatively to the world rate of interest. On the
other hand, since the correlation between the time-path of the domestic real
exchange rate and the world rate of interest may be positive, zero, or negative

(as may be varified by comparing the results reported in Table 1 and 2) it

follows that the cross-country correlations between the paths of the real
exchange rates and between the (consumption-based) real rates of interest may

also be negative, zero, or positive. The analysis underlying Tables 1 and 2
identifies the main factors governing the signs of the various cross-country
correlations.

21

II: Budget Deficits With Distortionary Tax Policies
In the previous part of this paper we analysed the effects of government
spending under the assumption that taxes are non-distortionary. We turn next to

examine the effects of changes in taxes under the assumption that government

spending remains intact.

Thus, we analyse the effects of a budget deficit

arising from a change in the time-profile of taxes. Such a tax policy influences the effective (tax adjusted) rate of interest and impacts on private-

sector behavior.

The altered behavior influences the equilibrium of the world

and, thereby, transmits the effects of the domestic tax policy to the rest of

the world.

In this part of the paper we analyse these mechanisms using an

extension of the formulation outlined in section 1.1.

Since the key mechanism through which the tax policy influences private-

sector behavior operates through alterations of the effective (tax adjusted)

discount factor, we start by incorporating taxes into the definition of the
discount factor. For this purpose we illustrate the mechanism by focusing on a-

specific tax:

the value added tax system (VAT) under which export is exempt.

Evidently, this tax

is

equivalent to a consumption tax. In the presence of such

a tax the effective (tax adjusted) discount factor is denoted by ax71 which is
related to the undistorted world discount factor, axl. according to

1

a1 l÷r a1
where

is the ad-valorem consumption tax rate in period t (t—O,l).

Correspondingly the effective (consumption-based) real discount factor is
denoted by a

cr1

where

22

a

cr1

-a

xrl P0

With such taxes, private-sector demands depend on acr1

rather than on aci

and, therefore, changes in the time profile of taxes alter private-sector
behavior.

To simplify we assume that foreign-government spending and taxes are

zero.

A budget deficit arising from a current-period tax cut (a reduction in
r0) must be accompanied by a corresponding rise in future taxes (a rise in r1)

so as to maintain government solvency as long as government spending policies

remain intact.

The effects of such a change in the time profile of taxes are

analysed with the aid of Figure 2. The initial equilibrium is described in

Panel I by point A in which the world rate of interest is r0. For convenience of exposition we assume that in the initial situation the time-profile

of taxes is "flat" (that is

r0 —

r1),

so that initially, the domestic and

foreign rates of interest (in terms of tradable goods) are equal to each other.

The time-paths of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates associated with

the initial equilibrium is indicated in Panel II by points a and a* along the
N and the N* schedules. Thus, the initial equilibrium is identical to the one
portrayed in Figure 1.

Consider the effects of a budget deficit arising from a tax cut. Given
the initial value of the world rate of interest rxO

the increase in

r1

the reduction in r 0

and

(implied by the government budget constraint) raise the

domestic effective discount factor, aX1, and induce an upwards displacement of

the domestic relative demand schedule from D to D'. The proportional vertical

displacement of the schedule equals the proportional change in the effective
discount factor.

This displacement is necessary in order to offset the effect

of the tax-induced reduction in the effective rate of interest on the desired

S

//

/

/
/

/

/

/

B

a?$

\ D'

N

*
c

pno
fl1

Pfl1

Figure 2:

xO
*
c
xl

z CxO
C

xl

The Effects of a Budget Deficit Arising From a Cut in a Value Added
Tax on the World Rate of Interest and on the Paths of the Real Exchange Rates.

23

domestic consumption ratio. Corresponding to the new domestic schedule D', the

world relative-demand schedule shifts from DW to DW. The new equilibrium is

described by point

A'

in Panel I of Figure 2. Hence the world rate of in-

terest rises from r0 to r0. The proportional vertical displacement of the
world relative-demand schedule, DW, (indicated by the distance AA'), is smaller

than the corresponding displacement of the domestic schedule, D (indicated by
the distance BC) since the world schedule is a weighted average of the domestic
and the given foreign schedules. It follows that the domestic effective rate of

interest must fall from r
xO

to a lower level such as

xO

The change in the time-profile of taxes which (for any given level of the

world rate of interest) raises the effective discount factor, also alters the

position of the domestic schedule N in Panel II of Figure 2. In analogy to
the previous analysis of the displacement of the relative demand schedule, the

proportional vertical displacement of the N schedule equals the percentage
change in the effective discount factor. As indicated by equation (1.16), this

displacement is necessary in order to offset the effects of the tax-induced
reduction in the effective rate of interest on the time-path of the domestic

real exchange rate.

Hence, given the new domestic effective rate of interest

the rate of increase of the domestic real exchange rate from period zero to

period one accelerates (as nO'nl rises). Likewise, given the new world rate

of interest, r0, the rate of increase of the foreign real exchange rate

decelarates (as p0/p1 falls).

These changes are indicated in Panel II of

Figure 2 by the displacement of the equilibrium points a* and a to a* and
a' ,

respectively.
The foregoing analysis implies that the budget deficit arising from the

cut in taxes raises the world rate of interest and lowers the domestic effective

rate of interest (both measured in terms of tradable goods). Further, the

24

deficit raises the periodic percentage change of the domestic real exchange rate

and lowers the corresponding foreign percentage change. These changes in the
time-paths of relative prices imply front equation (1.18) that the foreign (con-

sumption-based) real rate of interest rises and that the domestic (consumption-

based) effective real rate of interest falls. Further, the magnitudes of the

changes in the rates of interest are smaller if the rates of interest are
measured in terms of the consumption baskets than if they are measured in terms

of internationally tradable goods (the absolute difference between the two
magnitudes rises with the ratio of the temporal to the intertemporal elasticities of substitution, /a). We conclude that the budget deficit results
in a negative cross-country correlation between changes in the domestic and the
foreign (consumption-based) real rates of interest.

III: Budget Deficits with Non-Distortionary Tax Policies

In this part of the paper we analyse the effects of budget deficits for
situations in which taxes are non-distortionary. In contrast with the analysis

contained in the previous part in which budget deficits influence the economy
primarily through temporal and intertemporal substitution effects induced by the
distortions, here the main mechanism operates through wealth effects.
To

generate the wealth effects of budget deficits we allow for

differences between the time horizons relevant for individual decision making
and for the society at large. These differences result in discrepancies between
the

private and public-sectors' cost of borrowing and, thereby, render

importance to the timing of taxes. Thus, we introduce a "myopic" element as in

Blanchard (l985).

Accordingly, there are overlapping generations of rational

individuals but due to mortality each individual has a finite horizon. The
coefficient of "myopia" reflects the finiteness of the horizon. Suppose that

y

25

is the probability that an individual survives from one period to the next and
let

-y < 1.

The magnitude of -y

influences savings in two ways. First, it

introduces a risk premium which raises the rate of interest applicable to individuals above the world rate. Hence, if the world rate of interest measured

in terms of tradable goods is r —

R-l,

then the effective (risk adjusted) rate

of interest is (R--y)/-y. This impacts on wealth through the heavier discounting

of future disposable incomes. Second, it lowers the effective saving propensity.

For example, assuming a logarithmic utility function and denoting the

(constant) subjective discount factor by 6, it can be shown that the saving
propensity in the absence of mortality risk is 6 which is reduced to -y6

in

the presence of such a risk.

The subsequent analysis is divided into two sections. In the first we
examine the small-country case and focus on the dynamics of the real exchange
rate.

In the second we examine the two-country case with special emphasis on

the consequences of budget deficits on the cross-country comovements of the real
exchange rates.

111.1: The Small Country Case
Consider a small country facing a constant world rate of interest,

r.

The assumption that the utility function is logarithmic implies that aggregate

private-sector spending in period t, Z, is related to private-sector wealth,

W, according to

(111.1)

Z (l--y&)W

26

where

76 denotes the constant effective saving propensity, and where spending

and wealth are measured in terms of tradable goods. The value of wealth can be
expressed as

t

(111.2)

R-1 x

÷

-

0[jv n,t+v

1]v

-

t-l

Equation (111.2) defines wealth as the discounted suni of disposable income net

of debt commitment.

As seen; CDP in period t (measured in terms of tradable

goods) is Yx + pntn
Y where Y xand Vn are

respectively the fixed levels of

production of tradable and non-tradable goods, and

is the relative price

of non-tradable goods--the inverse of the real exchange rate.
is

Disposable income

GDP minus taxes and the discounted sum of disposable income is obtained by

employing the effective discount factor -y/R (where R

l+r).

Total private-sector spending is composed of purchases of tradable and
non-tradable goods.

Thus

Z

—
t

C

xl:

+ pntnt
C
where C
and C
xt
nt denote

respectively, consumption of tradable and non-tradable goods. The assumed form
of the utility function implies that these quantities are proportional to total
spending according to

(111.3)

C

(111.4)

pntCnt —

where as before

denotes the expenditure share of non-tradable goods.

Equilibrium in the market for non-tradable goods requires that in each

period, t, private-sector demand for non-tradable goods equals the value of
output net of government purchases of these goods, G. Thus, using equations
(111.1) and (111.4) the equilibrium condition is

27

(111.5)

-

(l--&)w

Got)

Private-sector debt in each period reflects the debt commitment in the
recent past plus the flow of new debt arising from the excess of spending over

disposable income.

Accordingly, using equations (111.1) and (111.5), the

dynamic evolution of private-sector debt implies that

B — RB1 +

(111.6)

pn -

Got)

-

x

+

nt Vn -

Tt)

For given paths of government spending and taxes, the system of equations
(111.2), (111.5) and (111.6) supplemented by the solvency condition according to

which at the limit all debt is repaid, can be solved to yield the equilibrium

paths of the real exchange rate and of private-sector debt. Once these paths
are known the rest of the model can be solved to yield the equilibrium paths of
spending on tradable and non-tradable goods as well as for the evolution of the
current account of the balance of payments.

It can be shown that the equilibrium paths of the price of one-tradable
goods (the inverse of the real exchange rate) and of private-sector debt are

—

(111.7)

+

-

and
(111.8)

where

nitudes of

—

B1' +

(B1'1

BP)At+l

is a positive fraction and i is a negative expression. The mag-

A1, i, j and

B1' depend on the parameters of the model.5 To

facilitate the subsequent analysis of budget deficits we assume that the conditions necessary for the existence of steady-state equilibrium are satisfied. In

28

that case

is positive and the sign of B depends on whether SR exceeds

or falls short of unity. Suppose that SR falls short of unity. In that case
the economy is a net debtor in the steady state. If the initial debt

is

smaller than the steady-state debt then, as indicated by equation (111.8), the

economy keeps on borrowing along the path to the steady state until its net
debtor position reaches B. Along this path, as indicated by equation (111.7),
the relative price of non-tradable goods falls monotonically until it reaches

the steady-state level, .

The

monotonic rise in the economy's net-debtor

position lowers wealth and reduces spending. As a result along the path, the

current account of the balance of payments improves. The reduced demand for
non- tradable goods

downwards trend of

consequent on the reduced wealth reflects itself in a
the relative price of these goods, that is, a rise in the

real exchange rate.

The foregoing analysis concludes the specification of the dynamics of the

key economic variables in the small open economy. We turn next to analyse the

dynamic response of these variables to a budget deficit resulting from an
unanticipated change in the time-profile of taxes. Consider an initial steady
state disturbed by a tax cut, occuring in period zero, that is accompanied by a

corresponding tax hike in period one, and suppose that in all other future

periods taxes remain at their initial level of zero. Following the usual
mechanism, the current-period budget deficit raises the existing population's
wealth and stimulates spending. This raises the relative price of non-tradable
goods.

On the other hand, once the rise in period-one taxes occurs, the wealth

of the population existing in period one falls. The level of wealth in period
one is lower since the segment of the population that enjoyed the initial tax
cut raised its spending in period zero and, thereby, consumed part of its wealth
while the newly-born segment of the population inherited a larger tax liability.

29

The reduction in period-one wealth induces a fall in spending and lowers the

relative price of non-tradable goods.

Finally, throughout the periods sub-

sequent to period one, the relative weight of these two segments in the total
population declines due to mortality while at the same time the relative weight

of the new born not subject to the higher taxes of period one rises. The
changes in the composition of the population occuring with the passage of time

are associated with an upwards trend in aggregate wealth, spending and the
relative price of non-tradable goods. Ultimately, since the relative weight of

those subject to the change in the tax profile approaches zero, the initial
steady-state equilibrium is restored.

The pattern of response discussed above is illustrated in Figure 3 which

shows the dynamic effects that an unanticipated fall in taxes in period zero
accompanied by a fully anticipated corresponding rise in taxes in period one
exert on the relative price of non-tradable goods and on consumption. We also
note that since total spending is related positively to the relative price of

non-tradable goods, the general pattern exhibitied by the path of p also
applies to the path of spending in Figure 3.

In Figure 4 we show the path of the economy's external debt. Since by
assumption government debt in the initial equilibrium was zero, and since the
tax profile ensures that from period two onward government debt is also zero, it

follows that during these periods private-sector debt, B ,

coincides with the

economy's external debt, B. In this context we note that since the steadystate value of the economy's external debt remains intact, the discounted sum of

current and prospective trade surpluses (adjusted for the initial debt commit-

ment)--all evaluated at the long run--also remains unchanged. Further, since
the levels of output are fixed it follows that the discounted sum of current and

future consumption- -evaluated at the same long run- -also remains intact. It

Ct,pnt

C
C

pn

t

nt

—l

0

1

2

3

t

Figure 3: The Effects of an Unanticipated Government—Budget Deficit
on Consumption and on the Relative Price of Non—tradable
Goods.

30

follows that if we truncate the path of consumption in Figure 3 at any arbitrary

period short of the steady state, the discounted sum of the post-deficit con-

sumption exceeds the corresponding quantity obtained along the benchmark path
with no taxes.

Having analysed the path of debt during period two onward, we return to

elaborate on the evolution of the economy's external debt during periods zero
and one- -the periods during which the tax policy is in effect. In period zero,

the rise in total spending consequent on the budget deficit must be financed
through external borrowing as reflected in the increased size of the economy's

external debt.

This change in the economy's net debtor position reflects

primarily the rise in government debt necessary to finance the budget deficit.

In fact private-sector debt in period zero falls (since only a fraction of the
rise in wealth is spent). The rise in government debt exceeds the reduction in
private-sector debt and, therefore, the economy's external debt in period zero
rises.

In period one the economy's external debt can be written as

(111.9)

Equation

—

R2B1 + (1-fl )(RZ0 + Z1)

-

(RV

+

(111.9) expresses the value of external debt in period one as the

present value of the initial debt commitment plus the excess of consumption of
tradable goods over the production these goods, all evaluated in present value

as of period one. Our previous arguments imply that the post-deficit external
debt in period one (a period that falls short of the steady state) exceeds the

corresponding value along the benchmark path with no taxes since the value of

RZ0 + Z1 along the post-deficit path exceeds the corresponding quantity along

B

t

B=B

—l

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 4: The Dynamic Effects of an Unanticipated Government—
Budget Deficit on the Economy's External Debt.

31

the benchmark path with no taxes. This completes our analysis of the dynamic
effects of budget deficits as they operate in the small open economy.

111.2 The Two-Country World
In this section we extend the analysis to the two-country case. Such an
extension illuminates the nature of the international transmission mechanism of

tax policies.

In our analysis we continue to assume that all taxes are non

distortionary.

As a result the mechanism responsible for the real consequences

of budget deficits operates through the wealth effects.

To simplify the exposition we divide the horizon into two: the current
period and the furure period. All quantities pertaining to the current period
are indicated by a zero subscript and the paths of the exogenous variables are
assumed stationary across future periods.6

Equilibrium necessitates that in the current period world output of
tradable goods is demanded and the discounted sum of future outputs of tradable

goods equals the discounted sums of furure domestic and foreign demands.
Likewise, in each country current and future period outputs of non-tradable

goods must be demanded.

In what follows we outline the complete two-country

model. The aggregate consumption functions at home and abroad are
—

(l-y6)Wt

76 and

—

and

(ll6*)W

where as before the saving propersities are

(where the survival probability, y, is assumed to be equal across

countries). Domestic and foreign wealth are defined as

(111.10)

W0 —

xO

+ nOnO

-

T0) +

(Y

+

PVT)

+

(l+rx1)(B1B..1)

and
(111.11)

—

(1o

+

- T)

+

(Y +

pY T +
-

(l+rx -l (B+B1).

32

As seen, equations (III.lO)-(III.ll) express wealth as the suni of the present

values of current and future disposable incomes plus net asset positions.

Also in these equations the term

-y/(R-) denotes the present value of an

annuity (commencing at period t—l) evaluated by using the discount factor
relevant for private decision making, -y/R.

The market clearing conditions for the domestic non-tradable goods
require that

(111.12)

(l--y6)W0 —

and
(111.13)

where,

fi

p[o

[.isw +

as before,

C

-

(

+p

-

T)]

—

j

[p - .YG]

denotes the discounted sum of government spending and

where 5g and 1g indicates the government's temporal and intertempora]. spending
patterns. Equation (111.12) specifies the equilibrium condition in the currentperiod market while equation (111.13) states that the discounted sum of domestic

demand for future non-tradable goods equals the discounted sum of future supply
net of government absorption.
Analogously,

equations (III.14)-(III.15) describe the corresponding

equilibrium conditions in the foreign markets for non-tradable goods.

(111.14)

**

*

* —*

*g (l--y*g)G*

)W0 no nO -

and

(111.15)

*

*

—*
1P.
i— (Y
nL6 w0 +

+

*—*

nn

-

*1

T

)j

1 1 *_*

— TLnn

-

**
n C

Finally, the equilibrium conditions in the world market for tradable
goods are specified in equations (III.16)-(III.l7) where the first of the two

33

pertains to the current period and the second pertains to the discounted sums of
demand and supply in all future periods.

n5O + (lfi(l7&*)W —

(111.16)

-

-

+

and
(111.17)

(l)[76W0 ÷

+p

(

R-l

(+

÷ (1p) [** +

-

T)]

- T*)]

—

- (i).g + - (l1*G*]
The system of equations (III.l0)-(III.17) can be solved for the equili-

brium values of the domestic and foreign current-period wealth, W0 and
current and future prices of non-tradable goods (the inverse of the corresponding real exchange rates),

Po.

and for the world rate of interest,

R-l. As usual, the eight-equations system (III.l0)-(III.17) is linearly depend-

ent and thus, by Wairas's Law one of these equations can be left out. In what

follows we leave out equation (111.10) specifying the equilibrium value of
domestic wealth.

The system can be reduced to two basic equilibrium conditions. These
conditions state that the world markets for tradable goods clear in both the
current period as well as in the (consolidated) future period. These equations,

derived explicitely in the Appendix, are reduced-form equations- -they incorporate the requirement that in each country and in all periods the markets for
non-tradable goods clear. Accordingly,

34
*
*)W0* —
(l-8)(l-6
—

(111.18)

(l.8)(l-y&)W0 +

(111.19)

(1$)[-SW0 + (R-l)(R-'y) I (R,w,T) +

(l-) [**

+

+

(R-l)(R-y) 1(R)] —

_*

(; +

Equation (111.18) states that the sum of world private demand for current
tradable goods equals world supply. In this equation (l-8)(l--)'&)W0 is the
home country's private demand and
demand.

is the corresponding foreign

The foreign wealth is expressed as a negative function of the rate of

interest reflecting the role of the latter in discounting future incomes and in

influencing the real exchange rate used to evaluate the income streams. It is
noteworthy that this reduced-form functional dependence of wealth on the rate of

interest is not shown explicitely for the domestic wealth since we have ommited

the explicit domestic-wealth equation (111.10) by Wairas's Law. This choice
makes the equilibrium determination of domestic wealth (along with the world
rate of interest) the focus of the subsequent analysis.

The second reduced-form equation (111.19) states that the discounted sum
of domestic and foreign demands for future tradable goods equals the discounted

sum of future world supply. The first term is the product of the consumption

share of tradable goods (l-) and total domestic future consumption. The
latter equals the sum of the savings of those alive in period zero,

-y&W0 ,

and

the discounted sum of the demand for future goods of those who will be born in
the future and whose disposable income in each period is I.

This reduced-form

future disposable income (in terms of tradable goods) is expressed as a negative

function of future taxes, T, and a positive function of the future relative

price of non-tradable goods.

The latter, in turn, depends negatively on R

35

(through its effect on future wealth of those yet unborn) and positively on

(through its effect on the demand of those alive). An analogous interpretation

applies to the foreign disposable income, 1*. The dependence of 1* on R
only reflects the assumption that foreign taxes are zero and incorporates the

on R.

negative dependence of

Equations (III.l8)-(III.19) yield the equilibrium values of the home
country's initial wealth, W0, and the world rate of interest, r=Rl, for any

given values of the parameters.

In equilibrium the demand for non-tradable

goods (l-&)W0 equals the value of the supply,

Hence, the

equilibrium price (the inverse of the real exchange rate) is

(111.20)

pn0 —

(l-1&)W

n

The equilibrium of the system is analysed by means of Figure 5. The PP

schedule drawn in panel I of Figure 5 shows combinations of r and

that

clears the market for present tradable goods. It is positively sloped since a
rise in the rate of interest lowers foreign demand (by lowering W) and a rise
in

raises domestic demand (br raising W0). Future tradable-goods market

clears along the FF schedule. This schedule is negatively sloped since a rise
in the rate of interest creates an excess demand for future tradable goods which

must be offset by a fall in W0 (and therefore

Panel II of the figure

shows the negative relation between the equilibrium rate of interest and the

foreign relative price of non-tradable goods.

This relation is based on

equation (111.21) which is the foreign-country analogue to equation (111.20).
Thus,

x

R=l+r

F

K

P

*
w

R' = l+r'x

b

a
R=l+r

x

\
*

w

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

*
pno

P

I

F'

F

*
pno

pno

II

I

Figure 5: Budget Deficits, Real Exchange Rates and the Real Rate of Interest.

pno

36

(111.21)

*

(ly6*)
—
Yn

*
W0(R)

The equilibrium of the system is shown by point A in panel I and point a
in panel II of Figure 5. Accordingly, the current equilibrium relative price of

domestic tradable goods is p0, the foreign equilibrium relative price is

and the corresponding equilibrium rate of interest is r. In what follows we
analyse the effects of a domestic budget deficit on the world rate of interest
and on the equilibrium real exchange rates.

A domestic budget deficit arising from a current tax cut necessitates a
corresponding rise in future taxes, T. As seen from equation (111.19) the rise
in future taxes lowers future domestic disposable income, I, and thereby lowers

the demand for future goods. For a given world rate of interest the fall in
demand can be eliminated by a rise in W0. As implied by equation (111.20) the

rise in W0

is associated with a rise in p
nO

.

Thus the FF schedule shifts

to the right to F'F'. As is evident the horizontal shift of the FF schedule
is proportional to (l-); if -y—i the position of the schedule as well as the
characteristics of the initial equilibrium remain intact (the Ricardian equiv-

alence case).

In general, as indicated in panel I the new equilibrium obtains

at point B with a higher rate of interest, a higher domestic relative irice of

non-tradable goods.

and a higher level of domestic wealth and consumption.

The new ecuilibrium is indicated in ane1 II by oint b where it is seen that
the higher rate of interest lowers foreign wealth and consumition and reduces

the foreign relative price of non-tradable goods. Thus, on the basis of the
correlations between domestic and foreign private-sector spending and between
domestic and foreign real exchange rates, the international transmission of the

budget deficit is negative.

As an interpretation we note that the wealth

37

effects induced by the domestic budget deficit arises from the redistribution of

income across generations.

Since the deficit transfers income from future

generations (whose propensity to consume present goods is zero) to the current
generation (whose propensity to spend on present goods is positive) it creates

an excess demand for present tradable goods resulting in a rise in their
intertenrporal relative price- -the rate of interest. Likewise, it creates an
excess demand for domestic non-tradable goods and an excess supply of foreign
non-tradable goods. These excess demand and supply alter the tenmoral relative
prices of these goods--the real exchange rates.

IV: Summary
In this part of the paper we provide a detailed summary of the key resuits emerging from the analysis of the effects of government spending and tax

policies on the equilibrium in the interdependent world economy. This summary
focuses on the induced changes in the real exchange rates and in the rates of
interest.

In analyzing the effects of government spending it was shown that these
effects depend critically on two biases: the bias in the intertemporal allocation of government spending relative to the domestic private sector and the bias

in the commodity composition of government purchases relative to the domestic
private sector. If government spending is strongly biased towards purchases of
tradable goods, then the key factor determining whether the world rate of inter-

est rises or falls is the intertemporal pattern of government spending relative
to the private sector: if the latter is biased towards current spending then the

38

rate of interest rises, and vice versa. These adjustments in the rate of inter-

est reflect the changes in the country's borrowing needs that arise from the
intertemporal pattern of government spending.

The analysis also provides information about the time-paths of the
domestic and foreign real exchange rates. If the relative share of government
spending on tradable goods is high, then a rise in government spending decelerates the rate of change of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates if the
intertemporal allocation of government spending (relative to the private sector)

is biased towards the present. On the other hand if the interteinporal allocation of government spending (relative to the private sector) is biased towards
the future, then the rates of change of the real exchange rates accelarate. It

follows that in this case government spending induces positive cross-country
correlations between the time-paths of the real exchange rates as well as between the (consumption-based) real rates of interest.

In contrast, if the commodity composition of government spending is
strongly biased towards purchases of non-tradable goods, then the interest-rate
effects depend on the interaction between the bias in the intertemporal alloca-

tion of government spending relative to the private sector and the temporalintertemporal substitution bias of the domestic private-sector. Accordingly, in

the absence of knowledge of the magnitudes of the saving propensities of the
government and of the private sector, as well as on the private-sector temporal

and intertemporal elasticities of substitution, there is no presumption as to
whether a rise in government spending raises or lowers world rates of interest.

The lack of an a-priori presumption is even more pronounced when we
consider the effects of government spending (that are strongly biased towards

non-tradable goods) on the time-paths of the real exchange rates. We showed
that the correlation between the domestic and foreign paths of the real exchange

rates is positive if the intertemporal elasticity of substitution exceeds the

39

temporal elasticity, and is zero if the temporal and intertemporal elasticities

of substitution are equal to each other. This correlation may be positive,
zero, or negative if the temporal elasticity of substitution exceeds the inter-

temporal elasticity.

Since there is no presumption about the cross-country

correlations between the paths of the real exchange rates, it follows that there

is also no presumption about the cross-country correlation between the (consumption-based) real rates of interest.

The sharpest contrast between the implications of alternative biases in
the commodity-composition of government spending arises in situations in which

the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the domestic private sector
exceeds the temporal elasticity of substitution. In that case the direction of

the effects of government spending on the world rate of interest and on the
time-paths of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates is reversed as the

commodity composition of government spending changes from one extreme to the
other.

For example, if the intertemporal allocation of government spending

relative to the domestic private sector is biased towards the present, then a
rise in government spending on tradable goods raises the world rate of interest,

and decelerates the rates of change of the domestic and foreign real exchange
rates.

On the other hand, if the rise in government spending falls on non-

tradable goods, then it lowers the world rate of interest and accelerates the
rates of change of the domestic and foreign real exchange rates. These results
demonstrate the important insights obtained from a disaggregation of the spectrum of commodities into those that are internationally tradable and those that

are non-tradable. Indeed, such a disaggregation modifies some of the clear-cut
results

obtained in Frenkel and Razin (1985) in which all goods were

internationally tradable.

40

1t is important to emphasize that once tradable and non-tradable goods
are present, then even though there is no a-priori presumption concerning the
precise effects of government spending on the world rate of interest and on the

time-paths of the real exchange rates, our analysis identified the key
parameters whose relative magnitudes determine these effects.

In this context it is relevant to note that the analytical framework

which allows for tradable and non-tradable goods, can be reinterpreted and
applied to the analysis of the effects of fiscal policies on real wages in a

model with variable labor supply.

The reinterpretation of the model treats

leisure as the non-tradable good, the real wage as the real exchange rate, and
the temporal elasticity of substitution as the (compensated) elasticity of labor
supply.

With this interpretation, government hiring of labor is viewed as

government purchases of non-tradable goods, and the relative share of government

expenditure on non-tradable goods, ,

corresponds to the relative share of

wages in the government budget. Likewise, the private-sector expenditure share,
fi,

is

viewed as the relative share of leisure in private-sector total spending

(inclusive of the imputed value of leisure). This interpretation suggests that
the effects of government spending on the rate of interest and on the time-path

of real wages depend critically on the relative importance of wages in the
government budget.

Our analysis implies that this dependence is especially

pronounced in cases in which labor is inelastically supplied.
The second part of the paper was devoted to the analysis of distortionary
tax

policies.

In this context we examined the effects of a budget deficit aris-

ing from a current cut in value-added taxes followed by a corresponding rise in

future taxes.

It was shown that the budget deficit raises the world rate of

interest and lowers the domestic effective interest rate. In addition, the
deficit accelerates the rate of change of the domestic real exchange rate and

41

de- celerates the corresponding foreign rate of change.

Thereby, the deficit

lowers the domestic (consumption-based) effective real rate of interest, and
raises the corresponding foreign real rate of interest. These changes result in

a negative cross-country correlation between the (consumption-based) real

effective rates of interest.

It was also shown that with high intertemporal

elasticities of substitution the budget deficit raises domestic spending and
lowers the contemporaneous domestic real exchange rate; at the same time the

deficit lowers foreign spending and raises the contemporaneous foreign real
exchange rate.

These effects result in negative cross-country correlations

between spending as well as between real exchange rates.

In the third part of the paper we analyzed the consequences of budget
deficits on the real exchange rate operating through the mechanism of the pure

wealth effect.

To focus on this mechanism rather than the mechanisms of sub-

stitution effects we assumed that all taxes are non-distortionary and that the
temporal and intertemporal elasticities of substitution are unity. The wealth
effects of budget deficits stem from the assumption that, due to mortality, the
individual's horizon is finite.

Our analysis of the small-country case focused on the dynamic conse-

quences of budget deficits.

In general, alterations in the time profile of

taxes induce modifications of the intertemporal patterns of private-sector
spending which reflect themselves in the time-profile of the real exchange rate.

Specifically, a budget deficit arising from a current tax cut that is accompanied by a subsequent tax hike raises current wealth, stimulates current con-

sumption and lowers the relative price of tradable goods- -the real exchange
rate.

The corresponding tax hike that follows exerts the opposite influence:

it lowers private-sector spending and raises the real exchange rate.

42

The changes occurring during the period of the tax hike more than offset

the changes occurring during the period of the tax cut. As a result, the stage

is set for the dynamics of private-sector spending as well as of the real ex-

change rate during all subsequent periods.

Accordingly during the periods

following the tax hike the path of private-sector spending lies below the path

obtained in the absence of the tax policy but, over time it converges back to
the initial path. Correspondingly, throughout the period following the tax hike

the path of the real exchange rate lies above the path obtained in the absence
of the tax policy but it converges to it over time.

These dynamic effects of the budget deficit illustrate a general
principle: the consequences of temporary tax policies stretch beyond the period

during which the temporary policy is in effect. The counterpart to these
dynamic implications is the rise in the economy's external debt induced by the
budget deficit the service of which stretches into the indefinite future.

Our analysis of the two-country focused on the consequences of budget
deficits on the domestic and the foreign real exchange rates. In this case the
international transmission mechanism operates through the effects of the budget
deficit on the world rate of interest. With non-distortionary taxes, the wealth

effect induced by the budget deficit raises the domestic demand for presentperiod goods and thereby lowers the domestic real exchange rate and raises the

world rate of interest. The rise in the world rate of interest transmits the

effects of the domestic deficit to the rest of the world: it lowers foreign

spending and raises the foreign real exchange rate. Accordingly the budget
deficit induces negative cross-country correlations between private-sector
spending and between the real exchange rates.

43

The analysis in Part II of the paper illustrated the mechanism of
temporal-intertemporal substitution induced by distortionary finance of govern-

ment spending by considering the implications of a specific tax
value-added tax system.

system- - the

With this illustration the qualitative effects of a

budget deficit on the world rate of interest were similar to those obtained in

Part III in which the key mechanism was that of the wealth effect:

in both

cases a current budget deficit raises the world rate of interest. It is
important to emphasize, however, that this similarity is not general.

Indeed,

as shown in Frenkel-Razin (l986c) there is a class of distortionary taxes (such

as taxes on labor income and on capital income) that yield opposite interestrate effects.

We conclude by stating that one of the more

general implications

demonstrated by this paper is that a proper analysis of the effects of fiscal
policies on the world economy must specify on the one hand the details of the
commodity composition of government spending and its intertemporal allocations

and, on the other hand, the details of the tax structure, including the timing
of taxes and the types of taxes used to finance the budget.

44

APPENDIX

REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN A TWO-COUNTRY WORLD

In this Appendix we derive the reduced form equations (III.18)-(III.19)

of the text. Throughout we omit equation (111.10) of the text by Wairas's Law.

Using equations (111.3) and (111.5) of the text and solving for the future
values of production of non-tradable goods yields

(A-i)

n'n —

(A-2)

—

where

+

A[(Rl))f6W0

A*[(Rl)y&*W

0— ns—

pY
nfl

A

(l--v)R

+

9

(V - T)]

(l-i')R

*

_________________

(V - T*)]

n S
*_*

pY
nfl
*
A

*
__________________

(1-9)-(1--y)R/(R--y)

The requirement that in equilibrium there is positive consumption of nontradable goods which command a positive price impose the feasibility conditions
according to which

(A-3)

A0 ,

45

Substituting (A-2) along with equation (111.14) of the text into equation
(111.11) of the text yields

(A-4)

*

W0 —

*r_

-

D IY

Lx

*
T ÷

0 R7

R--y
(1...y)RJ

(*x

*

-

T ) +

(l+rx, -l-1 + Br)]

where
D

*

*
2*
(R-1)y 6
1-iS
— (1-6 *
+
) {(1e)fl*[
1-9
(1-0 )(Ry)fl*(l7)R

1

The requirement that in equilibrium there is positive wealth imposes the
additional feasibility constraint according to which

(A-5)

D

O

*

Substituting equation (A-4) into equation (111.16) of the text yields

(A-6)

* )D*1IY* - T* +
0 R-y1hl+A*
jx

*

(1-fl )(l-16)W0 +

(1-fln )(l-y6

(l÷rx,-1 )(*g
-1
—

Substituting

x - (1-fln

-

+

B

y)R' —*

*

RlJxT)+

-l)]

)C +

—*

yx

-

*

(1-fln

*—*

equations (A-1)-(A-2) for pnfl
Y and p Y into equation (111.17)
nfl

of the text yields

46

(A-7)

(ls)[7sw0 +

+

(l*)[lf6*W

(Rl)(R)

+

1_

+

-

*

T)}]

(1 + A* (lRY)R)(Y -

(R-l)(R--y) {A*Rl-.6*w +

— :i [ - ('--)i'
1

{A(Rl)lsw0 + (1 ÷ A (lY)R)(V -

T*)}]

**
C

(A-6) and (A-7) can be used to solve for the

The system of equations (A-4),
equilibrium values of W0, W and R.

To derive the more compact formulation of the reduced-form equilibrium
conditions of the text we focus on the role of domestic tax policy by assuming
that C—C *—T *—0. We first note that for a given value of the parameters the

equilibrium value of foreign wealth shown in equation (A-4) can be expressed
iniplicitely as

(A-8)

W — W(R)

,

8W/3R < 0

Equation (A-8) expresses foreign current wealth as a negative function of the
rate of interest. This reduced-form relationship incorporates the equilibrium

conditions in the markets for current and future non-tradable goods. The
negative dependence on the rate of interest reflects the role of the rate of

interest in discounting future incomes and in influencing the real exchange
rates used to evaluate the income streams.. Next, we define the domestic and
foreign reduced-form future disposable incomes

(A-9)

I(R, W, T) — (R-l)ky6W0 + (1 +

and

(A-b)

I*(R) —

(R-l)A-y6W(R) ÷ (1 +

- T)

47

Equation (A-9) expresses disposable income (in terms of tradable goods)

as a negative function of future taxes, T, and a positive function of the
relative price of non-tradable goods, p1.. The latter in turn depends negatively

on R (through its effect on future wealth of those yet unborn) and positively

on W0

(through its effect on the demand of those alive). An analogous

interpretation applies to the foreign disposable income, 1*, where in (A-b) we

incorporate the functional dependence of W on R and the assumption that
foreign taxes are zero.

Substituting equations (A-9)-(A-bO) into (A-6)-(A-7) together with the

assumption that G_G*_T*_O yields

(A-il)

(i-)(l-75)w0 +

(A-12)

(1-)[i5W0 +

(lfi*) [**
Equations

(l)(l7S*)w(R)

(Rl)(R)
+

+

I(R, W0, T)] +

(Rb)(R..7)

I*(R)] —

+

(A-ll)-(A-12) are the reduced-form equilibrium conditions (111.18)-

(111.19) of the text. These equations underlie the diagrammatical analysis of
the text.

48

FOOTNOTES

1The

analysis in this part of the paper supplements the two-country

model in Frenkel and Razin (1985) in which all goods were internationally
tradable.

For a related analysis of fiscal policies and the real exchange

rate within a small-country model see Buiter (1986).
similar procedure is developed in Svensson and Razin (1983).

3An Appendix containing the derivation of this and of some other
formulae used in this paper can be obtained from the authors upon request.

4Blanchard's approach extends and applies Yaari's (1965) uncertain
lifetime model to an overlapping generations macroeconomic model.
5This result is based on Helpman and Razin (1985).

6The procedure of time-aggregation is developed in Frenkel and Razin
(l986a).

The extension of the model incorporating non-tradable goods draws

on Frenkel and Razin (1986b).

7A similar figure linking real interest rates to real exchange rates
is used also by Branson (1986) and Dornbusch (1983).

49

REFERENCES

Blanchard, Olivier J.

"Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons," Journal of

Political Economy 93, No. 2, (April 1985): 233-47.

Branson, Willian H. "Causes of Appreciation and Volatility of the Dollar,"

in the U.S. Dollar-Recent Development. Outlook and Policy Options,
Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1986.

Buiter, Willem.

"Structural and Stabilization Aspects of Fiscal and

Financial Policies in the Dependent Economy," Part I, unpublished
manuscript, Macroeconomics Division, DRD, The World Bank, August 1986.

Dornbusch, Rudiger.

"Floating Exchange Rates After Ten Years, Comment,"

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No. 1, 1983: 79-85.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, (1985).

"Goverrinient Spending, Debt and

International Economic Interdependence," Economic Journal 94,

(September 1985): 619-36.
(l986a). "Fiscal Policies in the World Economy," Journal
of Political Economy 94, No. 3, (June 1986): 564-594.

(1986b). "The International Transmission and Effects of

Fiscal Policies,"

American Economic Review 76, No. 2, (May 1986):

330-35.
(l986c).

"Budget Deficits and Distortionary Taxes in a

Two-Country Model of the World Economy,"

NBER Summer Institute,

August 1986.

Helpman, Elhanan and Assaf Razin. "Exchange Rate Management: Intertemporal

Tradeoffs," Revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 1590, 1985,
forthcoming, American Economic Review.

50

Svensson Lars E. and Assaf Razin.
Account:

The

"The Terms of Trade and the Current

Harberger-Laursen-Metzler

Effects,"

Journal of

Political Economy 91, No. 1, (February 1983): 97-125.

Yaari, Menachem. E., (1965).

Theory of the Consumer,"
(April 1965): 137-50.

"Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance and the

Review of Economic Studies 32, No. 25,

