                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IS IT ALL WORTH IT? THE EXPERIENCES OF NEW PHDS ON THE JOB MARKET,
                                 2007-2010

                                       Brooke Helppie McFall
                                        Marta Murray-Close
                                          Robert J. Willis
                                            Uniko Chen

                                        Working Paper 20654
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20654


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




We gratefully acknowledge support from the Sloan Foundation's Scientific & Engineering Workforce
Program, the Eva L. Mueller New Directions in Economics and Demography Fund, and the A. Regula
Herzog Young Investigators' Fund. We are thankful for feedback from Charlie Brown, David Lam
and Miles Kimball about the Job Seekers Project and its surveys, and we thank Martha Bailey, Trivellore
Raghunathan, Jeffrey Smith, and Matthew Shapiro for comments and feedback about this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article forthcoming in The Journal
of Economic Education, 2014.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20654.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 Taylor & Francis LLC, http://www.tandfonline.com/. Reprinted by permission. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is it all worth it? The experiences of new PhDs on the job market, 2007-2010
Brooke Helppie McFall, Marta Murray-Close, Robert J. Willis, and Uniko Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 20654
November 2014
JEL No. J24,J4

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper describes the job market experiences of new PhD economists, 2007-10. Using information
from PhD programs' job candidate websites and original surveys, the authors present information about
job candidates' characteristics, preferences and expectations; how job candidates fared at each stage
of the market; and predictors of outcomes at each stage. Some information presented in this paper
updates findings of prior studies. However, design features of the data used in this paper may result in
more generalizable findings. This paper is unique in comparing pre-market expectations and preferences
with post-market outcomes on the new PhD job market. It shows that outcomes tend to align with
pre-market preferences, and candidates' expectations are somewhat predictive of their outcomes. Several
analyses also shed light on sub-group differences.


Brooke Helppie McFall                              Robert J. Willis
Survey Research Center                             3254 ISR
Institute for Social Research                      University of Michigan
University of Michigan                             P. O. Box 1248
426 Thompson Street                                426 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48104                                Ann Arbor, MI 48106
bhelppie@umich.edu                                 and NBER
                                                   rjwillis@isr.umich.edu
Marta Murray-Close
Department of Economics                            Uniko Chen
University of Massachusetts                        Mercer
200 Hicks Way                                      1255 23rd St NW, Suite 500
Amberst, MA01003                                   Washington, DC 20037
martam@econs.umass.edu                             unikochen@gmail.com
              The Job Market Experience of New PhD Economists, 2007-2010

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper describes the job market experiences of new PhD economists, 2007-10. Using

information from PhD programs’ job candidate websites and original surveys, the authors

present information about job candidates’ characteristics, preferences and expectations; how job

candidates fared at each stage of the market; and predictors of outcomes at each stage. Some

information presented in this paper updates findings of prior studies. However, design features of

the data used in this paper may result in more generalizable findings. This paper is unique in

comparing pre-market expectations and preferences with post-market outcomes on the new PhD

job market. It shows that outcomes tend to align with pre-market preferences, and candidates’

expectations are somewhat predictive of their outcomes. Several analyses also shed light on sub-

group differences.

JEL Codes: J4: Particular Labor Markets, A2: Economic Education and Teaching of Economics

Key Words: economics PhD, job market, salary, preferences



   The new PhD job market in economics is of great interest to both job candidates and hiring

institutions. Both sides of the market naturally seek information about what they can expect. In

this paper, we present findings from an original study, the Job Seekers’ Project, which uses

information found on PhD programs’ job candidate websites as well as longitudinal data from

original surveys. Data from this project allow us to provide hard numbers describing the

characteristics, preferences and experiences of job seekers who were on the “new PhD” job

market in economics between 2007 and 2010. In particular, we examine interactions between job

seekers and potential hiring institutions at each stage of the job market, job seekers’ outcomes
and success rates at each stage of the market, and which factors— including some that are

unobservable to researchers, hiring and dissertation committees— are predictive of outcomes on

the job market.

   Formal studies of the new PhD job market in economics have illuminated several aspects of

the job-market experience. A number of studies have described the employment outcomes of

recent job-market participants and identified characteristics of the job candidates that predict

successful job outcomes (Carson and Navarro 1988; Barbezat 1992; Siegfried and Stock 1999;

Duncan et al. 2000; List 2000; Stock et al. 2000; Stock and Alston 2000; Siegfried and Stock

2004; Hilmer and Hilmer 2007; Holmes and Colander 2007). As in our study, some have also

incorporated information about outcomes during the job market, including experiences with

applications, interviews, fly-outs, and job offers (Carson and Navarro 1988; Duncan et al. 2000;

List 2000; Stock et al. 2000; Stock and Alston 2000; Ehrenberg 2004; Deck et al. 2011). Finally,

at least one study has examined the preferences of job candidates with respect to different

employment outcomes and the association between preferences and outcomes (Barbezat 1992).

This paper extends research on the new PhD job market in economics in several ways.

   First, we use original data from a representative sample of new entrants to the job market to

provide the first summary of outcomes during the job market, including outcomes related to

applications, interviews, fly-outs, and job offers. Unlike prior studies, information about the

various stages of the market were asked close to real-time, with questions about applications

asked prior to the interview stage for many individuals. One finding derived from examining

outcomes during the market is that, as the job market progresses, factors that are easily measured

using information from CVs and other publicly-posted information begin to matter less, while




                                                 1
factors that are unobservable based on such information begin to matter more. That is, once

candidates make it through early screening, subjective factors take on more weight.

   Second, we provide comprehensive information about the job-market experiences and

outcomes of job candidates in three relatively recent job-market cohorts, 2007-08, 2008-09, and

2009-10. Prior studies characterize the job-market experiences of job candidates through the

2001-02 job-market cohort (Siegfried and Stock 2004); this study characterizes the experiences

of job candidates in the 2007-10 job-market cohorts using a slightly different, but largely

comparable sample. Siegfried and Stock’s findings are largely consistent with our own, or match

up well after adjustment by historical trends, such as increasing proportions of female and

international PhD students, or inflation-adjusting earnings.

   Our results from examinations of outcomes during and at the end of the job market suggest

that, in addition to the fact that most candidates do receive a job offer of their preferred type by

the end of the market, outcomes are also good in terms of satisfaction ratings and salary. We see

no evidence that women do worse than men on most measures, but candidates who completed

their undergraduate educations in Asia and those from lower-ranked PhD programs do worse on

a variety of measures.

   Finally, we exploit the structured timing of the new PhD job market in economics to assess

the preferences and expectations of job candidates before they know what their job placements

will be. We find that job market candidates’ preferences are predictive of job type, and that pre-

market expectations of job prestige are predictive of accepted job prestige.

                                               DATA

   The primary job market for new economists in the United States unfolds in stages around the

annual meetings of the Allied Social Science Associations (ASSA).ii Each year, in the months



                                                  2
leading up to the meetings, hundreds of recent and soon-to-be graduates of doctoral programs in

North America and Europe submit thousands of applications for jobs throughout the world. In

early January, job candidates and employers travel to the meetings to complete first-round job

interviews, and in the months following the meetings, job candidates travel to prospective job

sites to complete second-round interviews and to give presentations of their research. Within

months of the meetings, most employers have extended job offers and most job candidates have

accepted an offer or made alternate plans for the following year (Siegfried and Stock 1999,

2004). Because a majority of graduates from the most prestigious doctoral programs participate

in the job market organized around the ASSA meetings, many hiring institutions that do not

interview at the meetings also conform to this schedule.

   The standardized timing of the new PhD job market in economics, together with the nearly

universal practice of job candidates posting their contact information and CVs on publicly

accessible job-placement websites, presents an opportunity to study the job searches of new

economists as they unfold. To leverage this opportunity, the data collection procedures for the

Job Seekers’ Project parallel the timeline of the job market. This project, a joint effort by Brooke

Helppie McFall, Marta Murray-Close, and Robert J. Willis, aims to gather data about many

aspects of job candidates, including their preferences, CV content, job market experiences, job

outcomes, and what happens to individuals in this sample over time. Results presented in this

paper use only data from publicly-posted information and surveys from the job market year.

   The sample frame for this paper comprises job candidates whose names and contact

information appeared on the job-placement websites of their graduate departments between

2007-08 and 2009-10. In 2007-08 and 2008-09, it included job candidates from graduate

departments in the United States and Canada whose departments were listed on the Job



                                                 3
Candidates website of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).iii The vast majority

of these departments are in economics, but the list also includes some business schools,

agricultural economics departments, and other closely related fields whose PhD recipients

frequently participate in the job market for economists. In 2009-10, we expanded our sample

frame to include several graduate departments in Europe, as well as several departments in the

United States and Canada whose departments were not listed on the website of the NBER,

increasing the number of institutions from 105 in 2007-08 to 134 in 2009-10. There were 880 job

candidates in our 2007-08 list, 892 in our 2008-09 list, and 984 in our 2009-10 list. We believe

that the Job Seekers’ sample comprises nearly the universe of job candidates who expected to

participate in the primary job market for new economists in 2008, 2009 and 2010.iv Unless

otherwise noted, regression results presented in this paper are substantively robust to exclusion

of job candidates from institutions outside the United States.v Where qualitative or interesting

quantitative differences occur, we document these in endnotes.

   In late November and early December, as job candidates submitted their applications, the

project compiled a sample list, plus posted contact, CV and supplementary information about

each individual on the list, from the job-placements websites. We used the information from the

websites and CVs to code a number of background characteristics of the job candidates,

including program rank,vi gender,vii country of undergraduate education, research fields,viii

research productivity, and teaching experience. The contact information was used to invite

candidates to surveys.

   In late December, just before job candidates traveled to their first-round interviews at the

ASSA meetings, the project sent invitations for the “pre-market” survey. The pre-market survey

gathered information about demographic characteristics, pre-market preferences, and decisions



                                                 4
during the application stage of their job search. A particularly unique feature of the 2009-10

survey was a question asking respondents how prestigious (“impressive”) they expected their job

market outcome to be. Most job candidates in 2007-2010 who completed the pre-market survey

submitted responses before the meetings, and a vast majority (88 percent) submitted responses

within one month of receiving the invitation to participate.

   Finally, in late summer or fall, as job candidates prepared for or settled into their new jobs,

the project sent invitations for the “post-market” survey.ix The post-market surveys gathered

information about the application, interview, fly-out, offer and job acceptance stages of the

market, as well as detailed information about accepted jobs, including satisfaction and

compensation.

Sample selectivity and weighting

   Between 2007-08 and 2009-10, the response rate for the pre-market survey was 53 percent,

and the response rate for the post-market survey was 39 percent. Response rates for the Job

Seekers surveys are comparable or superior to the response rate for a typical web survey (Cook

et al. 2000), and that reported for the graduate survey by Siegfried and Stock (2004). However,

sample selectivity is still a concern, as it may bias estimates in our analyses. A unique strength of

this project is that our combination of data from web surveys and publicly-accessible websites

allows us to create weights to adjust for sample selectivity. Using information available for both

respondents and non-respondents from the CV and placement website data,x we created

smoothed, regression-based propensity weights to adjust for non-response. We created three

different sets of weights for this paper: one set of weights for analyses that use only pre-market

survey data (referred to hereafter as “pre-market weights”), one set for those that use only post-

market survey data (“post-market weights”), and one set for those that use data from both survey



                                                  5
waves (“two-wave weights”). Based on comparisons of the raw inverse probability weights with

the smoothed weights and goodness-of-fit tests, there is no evidence that our weights are

misspecified. Aided by our weights, we believe that our results are generalizable to nearly the

universe of job candidates who expected to participate in first-round job interviews at the ASSA

meetings in 2008, 2009 and 2010.

                                            RESULTS

Characteristics of job candidates

   Table 1 presents means and standard errors of key demographic, educational, and professional

variables coded from the websites and CVs. The statistics are calculated using data from all of

the job candidates in the 2007-10 Job Seekers sample for whom we obtained complete

background information, whether or not they responded to the surveys.

                                         [Table 1 about here]

   Just under one third of job candidates in the sample were women, a slight increase since 2001,

when just twenty-eight percent of PhDs in economics in the United States were awarded to

women (Siegfried and Stock 2004). Approximately one third had obtained their undergraduate

education in each of the three locations we coded: the United States, countries in Asia, and

countries elsewhere in the world.xi More than nine in ten job candidates had obtained their

doctoral training in the United States, and an equally large majority had obtained their training

from departments of economics.xii

   The distribution of job candidates across graduate departments indicates that job-market

participants come disproportionately from highly ranked departments. This is not surprising,

since these tend to be larger programs. More than one quarter of the job candidates in the Job

Seekers sample had obtained their doctoral training from economics departments ranked in the



                                                 6
top ten by U.S. News and World Report (2009). Another quarter had obtained their training from

departments ranked between 11 and 30, while less than one fifth had obtained their training from

departments ranked between 41and 50.xiii

   Information from the CVs suggests that job candidates are more likely to enter the job market

with teaching experience than a publication record. On average, a job candidate in the Job

Seekers sample had served as a teaching assistant for more than three courses and had served as

a primary instructor for between one and two courses. In contrast, just 28 percent of job

candidates had published an article in a journal by the time they entered the job market, and most

of those who had published an article had published only one.

   Job candidates listed a wide range of fields on their CVs. We classified the fields into 28

categories, using listings that appeared frequently on the CVs as the category names and

grouping listings that appeared less frequently with the larger categories whenever possible. The

average job candidate listed three of the twenty-eight fields on his or her CV. Twenty of these

fields are listed in table 1. The five most frequently-listed fields are labor economics,

macroeconomics, industrial organization, applied microeconomics, and applied econometrics,

each of which was listed by between 21 and 23 percent of job candidates. In consideration of

space, we have omitted fields listed by fewer than 5 percent of job candidates from the table.

   The pre-market survey provides information about the private characteristics of job seekers,

including their work-related preferences and expectations. For example, in all survey years we

asked respondents to rank several types of jobs in order of their preference.xiv Table 2 reports the

percentage of job candidates who ranked jobs in each category as their most-preferred outcome.

A large majority (72 percent) of job candidates preferred assistant professorships at universities

over jobs in all other categories. Relatively few (11 percent or less) preferred jobs in each of the



                                                  7
other categories: research positions at non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental

organizations; assistant professorships at four-year colleges; research positions at business or

industry establishments; or postdoctoral fellowships.

                                            [Table 2 about here]

   The 2009-10 pre-market survey asked job candidates how “impressive” they expected their

initial placement to be, relative to the placements of their peers in the same graduate department.

In particular, the survey asked job candidates to place themselves in the appropriate decile of the

placement distribution under the following scenario:

   Imagine that, next year, the faculty in your department compile a list of the job placements of

   their graduates over the last five years. They put the placements they consider to be most

   impressive at the top of the list. Thinking about the kind of job you expect to obtain, where do

   you think you would fall in this list?

   On average, job candidates are very optimistic about their prospects prior to the job market.

As in Lake Wobegon, more than 80 percent of the job candidates who answered this question

expected to place in the top half of the distribution for their graduate department (table 3). There

is no apparent relationship between rank of respondent PhD program and expected placement

ranking.xv

   Despite unrealistically optimistic expected “impressiveness” rankings overall, pre-market

expected placement rankings are strongly related to post-market rankings of respondents’

accepted jobs. A univariate regression of post-market placement ranking on expected placement

ranking yields a coefficient on expected placement ranking of 0.48 (s.e. 0.07).xvi The R-squared

statistic for this regression is 0.23. So, although job candidates generally think they will place

unrealistically well relative to others in their departments, their pre-market expectations of



                                                   8
relative placement rank do have some predictive power about their post-market relative

placement rank.

                                           [Table 3 about here]

Applications, interviews, and fly-outs

   In this section, we examine ways in which the economics job market for new PhDs operates

to match job seekers with employers through a series of screens. Results from the Job Seekers

surveys suggest that new economists apply to a large number of jobs, but that most of the

applications they submit do not lead to offers from employers at later stages of the job market.

Table 4 presents the mean number of applications job candidates submitted, the mean number of

invitations they received for interviews and fly-outs, and the mean number of job offers they

received. During the job-market seasons covered by this study, job candidates submitted 107

applications, completed 17 interviews and 6 fly-outs, and received 3 job offers on average. Our

findings show a dramatic increase in applications compare to List (2000), who found the average

job seeker in his convenience sample had scheduled just seven interviews prior to the AEA

meetings in 1997.xvii It is likely that the decreased cost of finding openings and submitting

applications associated with of the growth of internet job listings and web-based applications

have changed norms since the late 1990s.

                                         [Table 4 about here]

   The table also summarizes the yields of applications, interviews, and fly-outs, where these

yields are defined as the proportion of job applications that lead to interview invitations, the

proportion of interview invitations that lead to fly-out invitations, or the proportion of fly-out

invitations that lead to job offers, respectively.




                                                     9
    By the time the average job candidate traveled to first-round interviews, just 19 percent of the

jobs to which he or she had applied remained in play. Just 8 percent of the jobs to which the

average job candidate applied resulted in a fly-out, and just 4 percent resulted in a job offer.

While most of the applications new economists submit do not lead to offers from employers at

later stages of the job market, the subset of applications that lead to an interview are reasonably

likely to lead to a fly-out (37 percent chance) and, eventually, a job offer (20 percent chance). By

the time the average job candidate reached the fly-out stage of the job market, his or her choice

set contained a small number of promising options, 57 percent of which resulted in a job offer.

    At each stage of the job market, some job candidates enjoy better success than others. Table 5

presents results from regressions of the percentage yields at the application, interview, and fly-

out stages on a variety of job seeker characteristics. Research fields are also included in these

regressions; in the interest of space, these estimates are located in appendix table 1. The

estimates in table 5 suggest that characteristics associated with lower success rates at the earlier

stages of the job market need not be associated with lower success rates in the final stage of the

job market. In particular, the fly-outs of job candidates from lower-ranked departments and job

candidates with more teaching experience are no less likely than the fly-outs of job candidates

from top-ten departments and job candidates with less teaching experience to result in a job

offer.xviii

                                          [Table 5 about here]

    Column 1 displays results from a regression of the percentage yield of interviews per

application on a variety of demographic and background variables from the CV data. At this

stage, coming from a PhD program in economics is associated with a 7 percentage point lower

yield of interviews per application, compared to PhD programs in economics-related fields other



                                                 10
than economics. Less prestigious PhD-granting departments are also associated with 2 to 7

percentage point lower yields relative to the most prestigious departments, though only the ranks

of 21 to 30 and 41 to 50 are statistically-significantly different from those ranked 1 to 10.

Number of publications also predicts higher yields at this stage: having three or more journal

publications on one’s CV is associated with a 7 percentage point higher yield of applications to

interviews. Gender, undergraduate location, coming from a PhD program in the US, and teaching

experience all have relatively small and imprecisely measured relationships to this yield.

   Column 2 examines predictors of fly-outs per interview. Here, a PhD program in economics

is still associated with a much lower yield at this stage, but the effect is not statistically-

significant. As in the predictors of application-to-interview yield, less prestigious PhD programs

are associated with lower interview-to-fly-out yield. Effect sizes range from 1.4 percentage

points for programs ranked 11 to 20 to 9.8 percentage points for programs ranked 31 to 40, but

only the coefficients on programs ranked 21 to 30 and 31 to 40 are statistically significant at the

5 percent level or better. Gender, undergraduate location, PhD program location, journal

publications, and teaching experience all have small and imprecisely estimated coefficients.

   Column 3 examines the predictors of job offers per fly-out. At this stage, job candidates who

earned their undergraduate degrees in Asia and those from less-prestigious institutions make up

some, but not all, of their disadvantage from earlier stages of the market.xix Gender, PhD

program location, journal publications, and teaching experience all have relatively small and

imprecisely-estimated coefficients.

   Following table 5 from left to right, we notice that the R-squared statistics of the regressions

decrease monotonically. That is, as the job market progresses from applications to interviews to

fly-outs to job offers, the observable characteristics in these regressions explain less and less of



                                                   11
the variation between job candidates, while factors that are unobservable or unmeasurable based

on CV content, begin to matter more. These latter factors may become more observable to hiring

committees and job candidates at the later stages of the market, as each position or candidate is

examined in more detail. They may include fit of research interests or training with a particular

job, interview skills, personality, or quality assessments of the reference letters, job-market

papers, and presentations of job candidates.

   Job candidates may wonder whether larger application, interview, or fly-out sets tend to yield

more job offers. Data from the Job Seekers project suggest that they do, but that the marginal

return to an additional application, interview, or fly-out decreases with the size of the existing

set. Table 6 presents results from regressions of the number of job offers on quadratics in the

number of applications, interviews, and fly-outs. The regressions include all background

characteristics of job candidates from table 1 as control variables. In each column of table 6, the

estimated coefficient on the quadratic term is negative and statistically significant, consistent

with decreasing marginal returns in job offers to prospective jobs at earlier stages of the market.

                                          [Table 6 about here]

   In column 1, number of applications is the explanatory variable of interest. At the mean

number of applications in this sample (109), the marginal effect of an application on the number

of job offers is 0.007 (s.e. 0.002). By contrast, around the 50th application, an additional

application yields an additional 0.010 job offers (s.e. 0.002), and around the 150th application

yields an additional 0.004 job offers (s.e. 0.001). The marginal effects of additional interviews

(column 2) and fly-outs (column 3) follow similar patterns. However, at each successive stage of

the job market, an additional option in one’s choice set yields a greater chance of an additional

job offer.



                                                 12
   While the results in table 6 show a positive association between the number of job offers and

the number of applications, interviews, and fly-outs in the cross section of new economists, they

do not imply that individual job candidates can obtain more job offers by submitting more

applications. The number of applications a job candidate submits may reflect idiosyncratic

strategies for success on the job market, but is almost certainly responsive to demand-side factors

as well. Job candidates who submit a large number of applications, and who receive a

correspondingly large number of interviews, fly-outs, and job offers, may be job candidates

whose skills are in demand by many employers.xx

Job outcomes

   The job market for new PhDs in economics and related fields remained quite strong between

2007 and 2010, despite the downturn. At the end of the market each year, almost all job

candidates reported that they had accepted a position. Approximately 92 percent of job

candidates accepted a job (s.e. 1 percent), while 1.9 percent rejected all offers (s.e. 0.4 percent).

Just 6 percent had received no job offers at all (s.e. 0.9 percent). These results are broadly

consistent with other available estimates. For example, Deck et al.(2011) recorded an 89 percent

success rate among new PhDs seeking jobs in 2011 whose PhD-granting departments completed

surveys, and Siegfried and Stock projected a 2 percent unemployment rate for the population of

graduates (Siegfried and Stock 2004). This is unsurprising, as the National Science Foundation’s

Survey of Doctorate Recipients reported only 200 out of 27,600 total economics PhD

respondents unemployed in 2013, indicating a very low unemployment rate of economics PhDs

as a population (National Science Foundation 2014).

   Table 7 presents statistics about the jobs candidates accepted. The placements of the majority

of job candidates who accepted jobs mirrored the preferences they expressed at the beginning of



                                                  13
the job-market season. In the end, most job candidates accepted a job of their preferred type.

Panel A of table 7 displays the proportion of job placements by type, reported by job candidates

at the post-market survey. By far the most common outcomes were assistant professorships at

universities,xxi with 62 percent of placements falling into this category. In contrast, less than 20

percent of placements fell into each of the remaining categories: assistant professorships at four-

year colleges,xxii research positions at non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental

organizations, research positions in business or industry establishments,xxiii and postdoctoral

fellowships.xxiv These outcomes align surprisingly closely with the preferred job types shown in

table 2. The main departures were in jobs at universities and non-profit, governmental, or quasi-

governmental organizations. Candidates were less likely to end up with positions at universities

than would be expected if all candidates received their most-preferred type (62 percent accepted

a university job, while 72 percent ranked this job type as most preferred). They were more likely

to end up with positions at non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental organizations than

would be expected if all candidates received their most-preferred type (19 percent accepted such

a job, while only 11 percent ranked this job type as most preferred).

                                          [Table 7 about here]

   A direct test of how well preferences reported in the pre-market survey align with outcomes

reported in the post-market survey is to examine alignment at the level of the individual job

candidate. Panel B of table 7 shows that almost two-thirds of job candidates placed into their

first-choice job types (64 percent), while 20 percent placed into their second-choice job types

and 9 percent placed into their third-choice job types. Just 7 percent of job candidates placed into

job types that they had ranked as their fourth- or fifth-most preferred out of the five job types.




                                                  14
   Most jobs reported by job candidates were also on the tenure track (panel C), though those

with positions at four-year colleges were a bit less fortunate in this regard than those with

university positions (78 percent versus 86 percent on the tenure track).

   While placing into one’s preferred pre-market job type is one indicator of success in the job

market, it is also possible that preferences might change throughout the process, or that

idiosyncratic characteristics may make preferences for particular jobs different from general

preferences. To provide a subjective measure of success on the job market that is robust to these

concerns, the post-market survey asks respondents to rate their satisfaction with their accepted

job on a six-point scale, from “extremely dissatisfied” (1) to “extremely satisfied” (6). Table 8

shows that candidates are on average “very satisfied” with the outcomes of their job search. The

mean ratings are very similar across categories asking about satisfaction with the job, “overall,”

in terms of intellectual fit, social fit, compensation, and work load. Examining the overall

satisfaction ratings in terms of the proportion of candidates giving each rating, more than two-

thirds of job candidates who accepted jobs were “very” or “extremely” satisfied with their

placements in the end (69.1 percent). Another quarter were “somewhat” satisfied (24.4 percent).

Very few (just 7 percent) of job candidates who accepted jobs reported being “extremely,”

“very,” or even “somewhat” dissatisfied with the outcome.

                                         [Table 8 about here]

   Another important outcome measure is compensation. While compensation is not an

extremely important factor in most junior PhD economists’ job choices,xxv jobs do tend to be

well-paid. Table 9 displays mean salary in 2010 dollars for all cohorts together, both overall and

by job type. The average base salary among all accepted jobs is just under $93,000. At $88,600,

the median base salary is quite close to the mean and almost exactly at the midpoint of the



                                                 15
interquartile range ($68,900 to $109,000), indicating a distribution that is relatively symmetric.

The mean and median are extremely similar to inflation-adjusted figures from the 2001 job

market presented by Siegfried and Stock (2004), in which the mean salary works out to about

$92,600 in 2010 dollars, and the median to $89,500.xxvi

                                          [Table 9 about here]

   Salaries vary dramatically by job type; this might suggest compensating differentials related

to lifestyle or prestige, or simply indicate different norms across types of institutions and

positions. Positions in business and industry tend to be the highest paid, at $110,100 on average,

while postdoctoral fellowships, the lowest-paid category, average just $57,500. The average

salary for a four-year college position is $72,400, while the average new assistant professor’s

salary at a university is $96,500 per year. The estimates for university jobs are quite similar to

inflation-adjusted reports presented in Deck, et al. (2011). There are broad interquartile ranges

for all job types, indicating that salaries vary dramatically from job to job even within job

categories.xxvii

Predictors of job characteristics

   While summary statistics provide a nice overview of job outcomes, outcomes vary across

subgroups. Tables 10, 11 and 12 provide some insight into predictors of job type, salary and job

satisfaction.

   To examine the predictors of job type, we conducted multinomial logistic regressions with job

types as the outcome variables. Assistant professorships at universities, being the modal

preferred and actual outcomes, are the base category against which the relative risk ratios (that is,

the exponentiated coefficients, eβi) for other outcomes are estimated.




                                                 16
   Overall, table 10 highlights the importance of preferences in predicting job outcomes. With

respect to job-type preferences, job candidates who do not prefer university jobs are more likely

to end up with other types of jobs. Additionally, measures of teaching experience, which might

be thought of as providing measures of revealed preference or aptitude for teaching versus

research activities, are related to job outcomes in expected ways. Candidates who were primary

instructors during graduate school revealed a strong preference to teach or aptitude for teaching,

and, indeed were more likely to end up at teaching-oriented colleges over universities, and less

likely to end up in business or industry establishments over university jobs, relative to candidates

without primary instruction experience. Candidates whose graduate studies were funded by

teaching assistantships, presumably an alternative to research assistantships, are less likely to end

up in research-oriented academia. Below, we elaborate on the factors that are predictive of the

likelihood of ending up in each job type, relative to a job at a university.xxviii

                                          [Table 10 about here]

   Column 1 of table 10 displays the relative risk ratio estimates of assistant professorships at

four-year colleges over assistant professorships at universities. For example, the estimate on the

indicator variable for whether a job candidate’s most preferred job type is assistant professor at a

four-year college is statistically different from zero at the 1 percent level. It indicates that job

candidates who prefer college jobs are 5 times more likely than otherwise comparable candidates

to end up with a job at a college over a job at a university. The estimates show that candidates

who prefer non-university jobs relative to university jobs, and candidates with more experience

as a primary instructor, are more likely to end up with a job at a college over a job at a

university. In contrast, those with an undergraduate education from outside of the United States

and Asia are less likely to end up at a college over a job at a university. Gender, undergraduate



                                                   17
education in Asia, PhD program in economics, institution rank, journal publications and number

of courses as a teaching assistant are not statistically significant predictors of having college jobs

over university jobs.

   Estimates in Column 2 reflect the relative risk ratios of jobs at non-profits, governmental, and

quasi-governmental organizations over university job outcomes. In this column, the relative risk

ratio estimates show that a preference for jobs in non-profit, governmental, or quasi-

governmental organizations and a preference for jobs at business or industry establishments are

associated with a greater likelihood of the former job over a university. In contrast, a preference

for a postdoctoral fellowship relative to other types of jobs is associated with a reduced chance of

a job at a non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental organization over a university job.

   Column 3 displays the relative risk ratios of research positions at business or industry

establishments over assistant professorships at universities. Here, the estimates show that a

preference to end up in any type of job other than a university job or postdoctoral fellowship is

associated with a greater chance of ending up in job at a business or industry establishment over

a university job. This might be reflective of the common perception that it is harder to move

back into academia from business than from other types of jobs: job candidates who might ever

want to work in academia may have a stronger preference to avoid this type of job.

   In Column 4, preferring postdoctoral fellowships relative to other types of jobs increases the

relative risk of a postdoctoral fellowship, relative to a university job.

   Table 11 presents estimates from linear regressions of salary on our base set of covariates and

additional predictors of salary, where salary is measured in thousands of 2010 dollars. The R-

squared statistic from this regression (0.50) reveals surprisingly good predictive power.

                                          [Table 11 about here]



                                                  18
   It can be seen that gender is not a statistically significant predictor of salary, holding other

variables constant. However, an undergraduate education outside the United States is associated

with a significantly lower salary, compared to an undergraduate education in the United States.

These differences are quite large: almost $15,000 for those with undergraduate degrees from

Asia, and $5,800 for those from other countries.xxix This finding may reflect two effects. First,

job candidates from outside the United States may be more likely to accept jobs outside of the

United States, where salaries are lower. Second, lower English fluency is likely correlated with

having pursued undergraduate studies outside the United States, and may therefore be associated

with poorer job outcomes.

   Candidates whose job-market information was posted on the website of an economics

department earn around $25,000 less than other candidates. This is likely due to the fact that

some of the other candidates are from business schools, where jobs in business schools or private

industry (and the accompanying large paychecks) are common job outcomes.

   Rank of PhD program is strongly associated with salary. Holding all else constant, job

candidates from programs ranked in the top ten reported the highest salaries. Compared with job

candidates from programs ranked in the top ten, job candidates from programs ranked 11-20

reported salaries that were almost $6,000 lower, on average; job candidates from programs

ranked in 21-30 reported salaries that were $11,000 lower; and job candidates from programs

ranked below 30 reported salaries that were between $18,000 and $20,000 lower.

   Job type is, not surprisingly, related to salary even after holding other factors constant.

Compared with assistant professorships at universities, postdoctoral fellowships are associated

with salaries that are $25,000 lower, on average, and college jobs are associated with salaries that




                                                  19
are $9,000 lower. In contrast, jobs at business or industry establishments are associated with

salaries that are $15,000 higher.

   In addition to job type, the number of job offers a job candidate receives may influence salary

for several reasons. First, receiving more job offers increases the chance of a particularly good

job outcome. If a high salary is desirable, a larger choice set should be associated with increased

salary. Second, the number of job offers a job candidate receives is likely a strong indicator of

quality, so should be associated with better job outcomes, including higher salary. Third, job

candidates with multiple job offers have more bargaining power with which to negotiate higher

salary offers, and so more job offers may actually result in higher salary offers. The coefficients

on the number of job offers indicate that the greater the number of job offers, the higher the

salary. However, the negative coefficient on the number of job offers squared indicates that the

marginal effect of job offers on salary is largest for the first few job offers. Overall, the average

marginal effect of an additional job offer is $5,600 (s.e. $600). At the second job offer, the

average marginal effect of an offer is $6,400 (s.e. $800), while at the fifth job offer the average

marginal effect is $4,500 (s.e. $500).

   Because salary is not the only characteristic job candidates care about, we have also examined

job candidates’ satisfaction with their job outcomes. As shown in table 8, candidates tend to be

satisfied with their job outcomes. Table 12 presents estimates of average marginal effects from a

probit regression using the base set of covariates plus the preference ranking of the accepted job

and a quadratic in number of job offers. The dependent variable in this regression, “highly-

satisfied,” is an indicator variable that is equal to one if a job candidate reported being

“extremely” or “very” satisfied with the accepted job. This variable is equal to zero if the

candidate reported being less than “very” satisfied.



                                                  20
                                         [Table 12 about here]

   Overall, the descriptive analysis of satisfaction, together with this regression, shows that job

candidates tend to be quite satisfied with their job outcomes. Just over two-thirds of candidates

reported being highly satisfied (68 percent, s.e. 3 percent). Variation in satisfaction between

subgroups of the job candidate population is mostly fairly small, and tends to run in the expected

direction.

   We expect the number of job offers to be positively related to satisfaction, since a larger

number of offers may include better draws from the distribution of jobs. Indeed, the number of

job offers is positively associated with satisfaction, with an additional job offer associated with

about a 4 percentage point increase in the chance a job candidate is “very” satisfied. Another

measure of a “good draw” of job options is the preference-ranking of the type of job the

candidate eventually accepted. Here, the less-preferred the type of the job, the less likely the

respondent was to be highly satisfied, though the estimates are mostly relatively imprecisely

estimated.

   Job candidates from undergraduate institutions in Asia are also 14 percentage points less

likely to rate themselves as “very” satisfied than others. Additionally, candidates from lower-

ranked programs tend to report lower satisfaction with their job placements; candidates from

PhD programs ranked between 21 and 30 are 16 percentage points less likely than those from the

top ten programs to rate themselves as “very” satisfied.xxx

                                         CONCLUSIONS

   This paper updates existing work about the new PhD job market in economics by presenting

findings about the 2007-2010 job market years. Results from the Job Seekers Project confirm




                                                 21
prior findings that, even in lean years, new PhD economists can expect to be successful on the

job market that functions around the ASSA meetings each January.

   This paper takes advantage of longitudinal features of the Job Seekers Project to examine how

pre-market preferences and expectations align with outcomes. We show that the job candidates

who most want a given type of job are more likely than others to secure that type of job, and

nearly two thirds of job candidates secure jobs of their first-choice type of job. At the beginning

of the job market, few job candidates report that they expect to do poorly; at the end, few report

that they are dissatisfied with key aspects of their placement. Furthermore, job candidates’

expectations at the beginning of the market are somewhat predictive of outcomes at the end.

   The detailed data from a representative sample frame also allow us to draw conclusions about

subgroups of the population. While some characteristics of job candidates, such as receipt of

undergraduate training in Asia and receipt of doctoral training at lower-ranked departments, are

associated with smaller choice sets, lower salaries, and lower levels of satisfaction, job

candidates in all groups generally achieve positive outcomes.




                                                 22
NOTES

ii
    The structure of the market is described in detail in annual job market guides by John Cawley (see, for example,
Cawley 2014).
iii
    The Job Candidates website of the National Bureau of Economic Research is accessible at
http://www.nber.org/candidates/.
iv
    For example, our numbers line up favorably with Coles et al. (2010, 191-192), who recorded 978-1,022
individuals who used the AEA signaling mechanism between 2007 and 2009. Their surveys show that about 2/3 of
current PhD students on the job market (similar to the sample frame in this paper) reported signaling, and that
about 2/3 of those who signaled were students. Thus, if about 1,000 per year signaled, then 667 were students.
These 667 were approximately 2/3 of the number on the market, so the total market is around 1,000.
v
    Excluding non-US institutions holds the sample size virtually unchanged from cohort-to-cohort. Sample sizes are
832 in 2007-08, 845 in 2008-09, and 826 in 2009-10. Excluding “unranked” institutions makes the samples yet
more similar. Throughout the paper, we report results using all possible data.
vi
    Program rank comes from the U.S. News and World Report (2009) rankings of graduate programs in economics.
vii
     Identified from photographs or using the Baby Name Guesser at http://www.gpeters.com/names/baby-
names.php to assign the most likely gender based on first name.
viii
      Research fields are hand-coded into 28 categories. The greatest number of fields coded for any one candidate
was eight. Ninety-one percent of candidates have four or fewer fields.
ix
    The 2007-08 and 2009-10 post market surveys were fielded beginning in August. The project sent invitations for
the 2008-09 post-market survey in November rather than August.
x
    Variables used in creating all or some of the weights include: gender, PhD program rank, region of undergraduate
education, age, additional degrees, teaching experience, number of journal publications, undergraduate field,
whether CV was posted on website, country of PhD institution, field, and citizenship.
xi
    Results from the surveys indicate that location of undergraduate institution is a good proxy for citizenship. We
identify Asian countries following the classification scheme of the Population Reference Bureau (2008).
xii
     The only qualitative difference when we exclude non-US PhDs is that a greater proportion of the US PhD sample
is from US undergraduate institutions, and slightly more in each ranking level of institutions. The latter is
mechanical, since rankings are based on US programs only, and the former is intuitive. Other than these
differences, all estimates are within one percentage point of those presented in the table.
xiii
      Most (66 percent) job candidates from unranked departments were from lower-ranked economics departments
in the United States. A sizable minority (30 percent) were from departments outside the United States, and a small
number (4 percent) were from departments in fields closely related to economics, such as business or public
policy.
xiv
      The job type preference variable was not identical from year to year. Specifically, in the 2007-08 pre-market
survey, we asked about preferences over job setting (university, 4-year college, postdoctoral fellowship, non-
academic research and non-academic non-research), while in later years we asked about job types more
specifically (Assistant professor at four-year college, Assistant professor at university, postdoctoral fellow, non-
academic researcher (e.g., researcher at a think tank, government research unit, central bank, or international
financial organization), private sector researcher). However, the descriptions were relatively similar, and a chi-
square test of distribution in most-preferred job types between cohorts does not reject the null hypothesis that
the distributions are identical (p-value 0.45).
xv
     Pearson Chi-squared test statistic is 30.34 (36 d.f), p=0.734. Correlation coefficient is -0.0074. Coefficient from
OLS regression of expected rank on rank of PhD institution is 0.009 (s.e. 0.09).
xvi
      Regression conducted using two-wave weights. N=247.
xvii
     It is possible that the job seekers who had time to participate in a survey during the AEA meetings had less busy
interview schedules than other job seekers.
xviii
       Excluding non-US PhD programs, significance patterns and signs from Table 5 are all the same, with one
exception: courses as Primary Instructor became statistically significant at the 5% level in column 3. The coefficient
is 1.83 (s.e. 0.91).



                                                          23
xix
   Despite higher yields from fly-outs to job offers, the average number of job offers to job candidates with Asian
undergraduate degrees (2.5 job offers, s.e. 0.2) remains below that of those with degrees from other countries (3.2
job offers, s.e. 0.1). Given that job candidates from Asian undergraduate institutions apply to more jobs on average
(110.6 applications, s.e. 5.3) than those from other locations (106.7 applications, s.e. 2.4), these job candidates
have lower success rates than others between the application and fly-out stage.
  Despite higher yields from fly-outs to job offers, the average number of job offers to job candidates from PhD
programs ranked 21-50 (2.5 job offers, s.e. 0.1) remains below that of those from the top 20 programs (3.9 job
offers, s.e. 0.2). Given that job candidates from lower-ranking programs apply to more jobs on average (120
applications, s.e. 4.5) than those from higher-ranking programs (97.6 applications, s.e. 3.6), these job candidates
have lower success rates than others between the application and fly-out stage.
xx
    For example, if the job postings in a given year disproportionately seek health economists, health economists are
likely to respond by applying to a large number of jobs. Then, because demand for their skills is high, the
applications of health economists are likely to be successful.
xxi
     We have included visiting assistant professor and lecturer positions at universities in this category. The “tenure
track” statistics in Panel C provide some insight into this.
xxii
      We have included visiting assistant professor and lecturer positions at colleges in this category. The “tenure
track” statistics in Panel C provide some insight into the fraction who are on the tenure track. Stock and Siegfried
(2001) found that 6 percent of new PhDs about whom they received information about the 1996-97 market were
employed in full-time permanent US positions at Carnegie B.A./B.S. institutions. This is close to our estimate of 8
percent. It should be noted that they only include “full-time permanent” positions, which excludes adjunct,
lecturer, and visiting positions, whereas we include these positions here if the candidate so classified him/herself.
xxiii
       Includes positions with consulting firms.
xxiv
       Restricting to the candidates from US PhD institutions only, the only notable difference is that in table 7 a
slightly lower percentage of job candidates prefer postdocs (3% versus 5% in the full sample), while 9% prefer
colleges and 63% prefer universities. One possible explanation for this is that, for foreigners who want to get into
the US job market, a postdoctoral fellowship is one way to make connections and improve English skills.
xxv
      Indeed, more than 2/3 of job candidates in 2008-09 and 2009-10 reported that “a high personal income” was
either “not important,” “a little important,” or “moderately important.” Only a quarter rated high income as being
“very important,” and 7 percent rated it “extremely important.”
xxvi
       Calculated using the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ CPI-U for June 2001 and June 2010 (CPI 2014).
xxvii
        All quantiles are virtually identical when excluding those from non-US PhD institutions. Means are $1,500 to
$2,000 higher when restricting to US PhDs. However, even the overall mean, which is $2,000 different and has the
largest sample size, is not statistically significantly larger than that of the main sample (p-value=0.12).
xxviii
        Results do change when excluding non-US PhDs. In this discussion, I only discuss results that changed the take-
aways from this table. In column 1, the estimate for “Preferred job type: NGQO” dropped to 4.68 (s.e 2.89,
significant at the 1% level). That is, for candidates who preferred a job at an NGQO, they were about 5 times more
likely to end up at a college than a university. This is half the effect size as is presented in the table, but in the same
direction. Additionally the relative risk ratio for unranked PhD programs increased to 3.48 (s.e. 2.14), becoming
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Column 2 was virtually identical. In column 3, the estimate on
“Preferred job type: NGQO” more than doubled, to 117, and the coefficient on “Preferred job: Postdoc” tripled (to
38.45, s.e. 62.9) and became significant at the 5 percent level. These findings lend more support to our finding that
an openness to jobs outside traditional academia greatly increases the chances of ending up in a non-academic
job. In column 4, the estimate on “Preferred job type: NGQO” changed to almost zero, and is statistically
significant, indicating that US PhDs who prefer NGQO jobs virtually never end up in postdoctoral fellowships. The
estimate on “Preferred job: Postdoc” also increased fivefold (to 105.9, s.e. 175.11), indicating that a US PhD who
prefers a postdoc is many, many times more likely to end up in a postdoc over a university job. This is statistically
significant at the 0.1 percent level. The estimates on lower-ranking PhD programs also increased. Additionally,
three or more journal publications was associated with close to no chance of ending up at a postdoc over a
university (0.00, s.e. 0.00).




                                                            24
xxix
    The coefficient on “Undergraduate location: Other” decreased in magnitude, to -4.64 (s.e. 2.59) and lost its
statistical significance when using only the US PhD sample. There are no other changes in significance level, and all
statistically-significant coefficients are within 10 percent of the value shown in Table 11.
xxx
    Excluding the non-US PhDs, the coefficients on “PhD program rank: 21-30” and “Three or more journal
publications” both declined by less than 10 percent, and lost their marginal statistical significance.




                                                         25
                                       REFERENCES
Barbezat, D. A. 1992. The Market for New Ph.D. Economists. Journal of Economic
      Education 23(3):262-276.

Carson, R. and P. Navarro. 1988. A Seller’s (& Buyer’s) Guide to the Job Market for Beginning
Academic Economists. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2):137-148.

Cawley, J. 2014. A Guide and Advice for Economists on the U.S. Junior Academic Job
      Market. https://www.aeaweb.org/joe/pdfs/Job%20Market%20Guide%20and%20Advice
      %20--%202014-15%209-3-14.pdf.

Coles, P., J. Cawley, P. B. Levine, M. Niederle, A. E. Roth and J. J. Siegfried. 2010. The Job
       Market for New Economists: A Market Design Perspective. Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 24(4): 187-206.

Cook, C., F. Heath, and R. L. Thompson. 2000. A Meta-Analysis of Response Rates in Web- or
      Internet-Based Surveys. Educational and Psychological Measurement 60:821-836.

CPI Detailed Report Data for July 2014. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Table 24. Accessed
      September 26, 2014. http://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1407.pdf.

Deck, K. A., M. J. Jebaraj, and W. P. Curington. 2011. Survey of the Labor
       Market for New Ph.D. Hires in Economics 2011-12. Center for Business and Economic
       Research and Department of Economics, University of Arkansas Sam M. Walton College
       of Business. http://cber.uark.edu/2011-12_New_PhD_Labor_Market_Survey_Report.pdf

Duncan, K., D. Yandell, and D. Kokila. 2000. Job Search Strategies and Outcomes for
      Academic Economists: A Middle-Market View. Eastern Economic Journal 26(3):345-
      361.

Ehrenberg, R. G. 2004. Prospects in the Academic Labor Market for Economists. Journal
      of Economic Perspectives 18(2):227-238.

Hilmer, M. J. and C. E. Hilmer. 2007. Dissertation Advisors and Initial Placements
       for Economics PhD Recipients. Applied Economics Letters 14(4-6):311-314.

Holmes, J. and D. Colander. 2007. The Hiring of an Economist: A Case Study. The
      American Economist 51(1):54-62.

List, J. A. 2000. Interview Scheduling Strategies of New Ph.D. Economists. Journal of
         Economic Education 31(2):191-201.

National Science Foundation. 2014. Survey of Doctorate Recipients, 2013.
       http://ncsesdata.nsf.gov/doctoratework/2013/html/SDR2013_DST1.html
Population Reference Bureau. 2008. 2008 World Population Data Sheet. Washington, D.C.

Siegfried, J. J. and W. A Stock. 1999. The Labor Market for New Ph.D. Economists.
        Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(3):115-134.

Siegfried, J. J. and W. A. Stock. 2004. The Market for New Ph.D. Economists in 2002.
        American Economic Review 94(2):272-285.

Stock, W. A. and R. M. Alston. 2000. Effect of Graduate-Program Rank on Success
       in the Job Mark. Journal of Economic Education 31(4):4.

Stock, W. A., R. M. Alston, and M. Milkman. 2000. The Academic Labor Market
       for Economists: 1995-96. Atlantic Economic Journal 28(2):164-185.

Stock, W. A. and J. J. Siegfried. So You Want to Earn a Ph.D. in Economics: How Much Do
You Think You’ll Make? Economic Inquiry 39(2): 320-335.

U.S. News and World Report. 2009. Best Graduate Schools, Economics Rankings. Accessed
       August 2010. http://grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-
       schools/top-humanities-schools/economics-rankings.




                                              1
APPENDICES

Appendix Table 1: Excluded rows from Table 5: Predictors of percent yield by stage of the market
                           Interviews      Fly-outs     Job offers                           Interviews       Fly-outs     Job offers
                               per           per         per Fly-                                per            per         per Fly-
                           Application    Interview        out                               Application     Interview        out
                                                                       Industrial
Applied econometrics          0.795         -0.225        3.296        organization             -1.516         -2.133        2.321
                             (1.350)        (2.128)      (2.788)                               (1.215)        (2.131)       (2.736)
Applied
microeconomics                -1.735         3.338        0.602        Int'l economics          -0.559         -2.754        -1.75
                             (1.000)        (2.068)      (2.589)                               (1.608)        (2.567)       (4.052)
                                                                       International
Behavioral economics          2.233          5.725        -2.104       finance                  -2.951         -1.669        -0.838
                             (3.659)        (3.760)      (4.761)                               (2.109)        (2.919)       (4.040)
Computational                                                          International
economics                     -0.117         7.207        2.172        macro                    2.184          6.562         -9.158
                             (2.192)        (4.230)      (5.644)                               (4.609)        (5.637)       (6.036)
Development
economics                     -1.153        -1.936         4.11        International trade      -1.422         0.417         -4.988
                             (1.353)        (2.097)      (2.860)                               (1.812)        (3.057)       (3.466)
Econometrics                  0.113          -1.75        1.161        Labor economics          -1.854         -1.134        -1.701
                             (1.487)        (2.027)      (3.195)                               (1.154)       (1.924)        (2.668)
                                                                       Law and                                  -
Economic history             -4.215*        -0.877        -5.583       economics              -6.729***     10.554***        1.909
                             (2.137)        (4.888)      (6.177)                               (2.035)        (2.908)       (6.305)
Economic theory               -1.892        -1.001       11.700*       Macroeconomics           0.834        -5.790**         5.86
                             (2.378)        (5.194)      (5.742)                               (1.496)        (2.241)       (3.265)
Economics of                                                           Microeconomic
education                     -0.86          0.359       10.940*       theory                 -3.981**         -2.961        0.887
                             (2.525)        (3.688)      (4.580)                               (1.489)        (2.623)       (4.048)
Environmental
economics                     3.516          0.968        -0.964       Microeconomics           2.756           4.83         -2.177
                             (2.166)        (3.605)      (4.381)                               (2.714)        (3.542)       (5.352)
Experimental                                                           Monetary
economics                     -4.016         2.307        5.153        economics                0.063          -6.015      -12.903**
                             (2.412)        (3.457)      (4.852)                               (1.969)        (3.100)       (4.619)
Financial economics           1.749         -2.492        -5.629       Political economy        1.843          3.736         4.238
                             (1.472)        (2.559)      (3.375)                               (1.695)        (3.079)       (3.716)
Game theory                   1.061          -1.51        1.848        Public economics         -0.674         -2.73         -0.348
                             (1.945)        (3.076)      (4.739)                               (1.133)        (2.149)       (2.743)
Health economics              -0.401         3.774        4.858        Urban economics          -2.914         -1.802        4.975
                             (1.419)        (2.718)      (3.670)                               (1.843)        (3.258)       (6.738)

Notes: Results from OLS regressions. Dependent variables are percent (0 to 100) of: applications resulting in an interview
invitation (column 1), interviews resulting in a fly-out invitation (column 2), and fly-outs resulting in a job offer (column 3).
Results are weighted using post-market weights.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                   2
Appendix Table 2: Excluded rows from Table 6: Marginal return in job offers from an additional
application, interview or fly-out
Explanatory Variable                 Applications              Interviews               Fly-outs
Female                                  0.17024                 0.07038                 -0.12113
                                       (0.16950)                (0.14614)              (0.10426)
Undergrad: Asia                        -0.45794*                -0.06546                0.23113
                                       (0.20000)                (0.16686)              (0.12521)
Undergrad: Other                       -0.19189                 0.09846                 0.04392
                                       (0.19344)                (0.15855)              (0.12400)
PhD in US                              -0.17203                 -0.03941                -0.07499
                                       (0.32325)                (0.24738)              (0.17794)
PhD in economics                       -0.03045                  0.0058                 0.20486
                                       (0.31881)                (0.22194)              (0.20068)
Rank: 11 to 20                         -0.59889*                -0.42773                -0.18964
                                       (0.26685)                (0.23329)              (0.17127)
Rank: 21 to 30                        -1.32259***             -0.99804***               -0.2864
                                       (0.26433)                (0.22231)              (0.18294)
Rank: 31 to 40                        -1.24653***              -0.56149*                0.08831
                                       (0.28714)                (0.24945)              (0.17440)
Rank: 41 to 50                        -1.40560***              -0.53774*                0.02807
                                       (0.28920)                (0.25151)              (0.18349)
Rank: Unranked                        -1.61116***             -0.76829***               -0.22263
                                       (0.23903)                (0.19670)              (0.15781)
1 Journal Pub.                          0.17668                 0.04553                 0.05368
                                       (0.19666)                (0.16313)              (0.12423)
2 Journal Pubs.                         0.14227                 -0.05558                0.01822
                                       (0.28985)                (0.26026)              (0.21809)
3+ Journal Pubs.                        0.45752                 0.36069                 0.13984
                                       (0.35198)                (0.29774)              (0.20416)
TA Courses, topcoded at 10             -0.04098                 -0.02698                0.00504
                                       (0.03219)                (0.02555)              (0.02122)
PI Courses, topcoded at 5              -0.09149                 -0.05301                -0.00604
                                       (0.04768)                (0.04134)              (0.02988)
Constant                              3.18530***                0.98541*                0.05088
                                       (0.50800)                (0.39581)              (0.33393)




                                                    3
Appendix Table 2 (cont): Excluded rows from Table 6: Marginal return in job offers from an additional application,
interview or fly-out
Explan. Variable       Applications    Interviews      Fly-outs                         Applications     Interviews    Fly-outs
Applied                  0.36533         0.07625       0.06341        Industrial          -0.03789        0.03425       0.10547
econometrics            (0.20501)       (0.17187)     (0.12708)       organization        (0.19400)      (0.16199)     (0.11287)
Applied                  0.28626         0.22426       0.17267        International        0.20704        0.03856       0.12472
microeconomics          (0.18710)       (0.16340)     (0.12491)       economics           (0.27989)      (0.24306)     (0.16847)
Behavioral               -0.17869       -0.14647      -0.31877        International        0.28492        0.21374       0.31477
economics               (0.35159)       (0.25867)     (0.20960)       finance             (0.35467)      (0.29347)     (0.21818)
Computational            0.74345         0.67565       0.17699        International        -0.0855       -0.21509      -0.52293
economics               (0.50592)       (0.39260)     (0.34062)       macro               (0.48078)      (0.42560)     (0.38595)
Development              -0.09398       -0.01923       0.11453        International        0.11083       -0.07922      -0.26407
economics               (0.18805)       (0.16267)     (0.11960)       trade               (0.27806)      (0.23526)     (0.18169)
Econometrics             0.05724        -0.11015      -0.10205        Labor                0.15576        0.10402       0.10398
                        (0.20878)       (0.17217)     (0.12388)       economics           (0.19297)      (0.16515)     (0.11778)
                                                                                                             -
Economic                 -0.68423       -0.43641      -0.34338        Law and            -0.98365**      0.68584**     -0.25382
history                 (0.35808)       (0.25800)     (0.20604)       economics           (0.33895)      (0.25515)     (0.17566)
Economic                 0.82687         0.76492      0.89241*        Macroeconomics      -0.03658       -0.30297      -0.04692
theory                  (0.72992)       (0.64773)     (0.40583)                           (0.23604)      (0.19909)     (0.13476)
Economics of               0.173         0.3231        0.44548        Microeconomic        0.03652        0.12933       0.21005
education               (0.36404)       (0.31397)     (0.23739)       theory              (0.26271)      (0.22989)     (0.16860)
Environmental            -0.05562       -0.12152      -0.06857        Microeconomics       0.05381        0.17708      -0.06294
economics               (0.27127)       (0.22128)     (0.17939)                           (0.35120)      (0.30641)     (0.20970)
Experimental              0.0853         0.2986        0.25454        Monetary            -0.27844       -0.43018      -0.27435
economics               (0.31842)       (0.26861)     (0.20200)       economics           (0.35037)      (0.28207)     (0.21307)
Financial                0.15054        -0.24027       -0.0975        Political            0.40987        0.31556       0.13345
economics               (0.22723)       (0.20105)     (0.14590)       economy             (0.24527)      (0.19266)     (0.14391)
Game theory              -0.27103       -0.28781       -0.1272        Public              -0.00292       -0.26622      -0.06244
                        (0.26977)       (0.23421)     (0.18961)       economics           (0.19317)      (0.17416)     (0.12650)
Health                  0.98259**       0.68524*       0.34297        Urban                0.14792        0.14535       0.06308
economics               (0.31594)       (0.27782)     (0.20927)       economics           (0.43734)      (0.38370)     (0.34280)
Notes: Results from OLS regressions. Dependent variable in all columns is number of job offers. In column 1, the explanatory
variable of interest ("X variable") is number of applications, in column 2 it is number of fly-outs, and in column 3 it is number
of fly-outs. Squared terms are included for explanatory variables of interest in each regression. Estimates are weighted using
post-market survey weights.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                  4
Appendix Table 3: Excluded rows from Table 10: Multinomial logistic regression: Predictors of accepted job type
                   College NGQO       Business Postdoc                         College NGQO Business Postdoc
Applied             0.56      0.53       0.58      0.94    International         0.58      0.29    0.00***      1.72
econometrics       (0.26)    (0.20)     (0.40)    (0.60) economics              (0.44)    (0.19)    (0.00)     (1.45)
Applied             1.09      1.04       1.24      0.51    International         2.69      3.58      5.13       2.36
microeconomics     (0.55)    (0.38)     (0.71)    (0.35) finance                (2.24)    (2.55)    (4.32)     (2.32)
Behavioral          1.25      0.19       0.19      0.14    International         0.91      1.17    0.00***      0.76
economics          (1.42)    (0.19)     (0.34)    (0.19) macro                  (1.00)    (0.64)    (0.00)     (0.79)
Computational       2.25      0.12    33.32*** 0.00*** International             1.35     0.06**      0.4       2.52
economics          (3.80)    (0.15)    (31.46)    (0.00) trade                  (1.00)    (0.06)    (0.46)     (2.98)
Development          1.2      0.72       0.47      1.09    Labor                  1.5      0.86      1.65       0.53
economics          (0.57)    (0.31)     (0.34)    (0.74) economics              (0.75)    (0.30)    (0.96)     (0.44)
Econometrics        3.87*     1.07       0.62      1.11    Law and               0.87      0.39      1.85     0.00***
                   (2.02)    (0.44)     (0.53)    (0.75) economics              (0.82)    (0.27)    (1.74)     (0.00)
Economic            3.09      0.84       2.42    0.00*** Macroeconomics          1.18      1.58       0.9       2.92
history            (2.67)    (0.64)     (2.99)    (0.00)                        (0.75)    (0.79)    (0.67)     (2.57)
Economic          0.00*** 0.00*** 0.00***           4.4    Microeconomic         1.03      1.31      0.34       0.87
theory             (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (6.36) theory                 (0.89)    (0.69)    (0.73)     (0.80)
Economics of        0.45      1.69       0.45      6.63    Microeconomics        1.83       0.8    0.00***      2.13
education          (0.36)    (0.86)     (0.49)    (9.60)                        (1.56)    (0.56)    (0.00)     (2.62)
Environmental       2.45      0.82       0.33      7.34* Monetary                 1.1      1.21      0.25       0.39
economics          (1.55)    (0.40)     (0.33)    (6.40) economics              (0.68)    (0.55)    (0.23)     (0.51)
Experimental        1.14      0.26       0.93      2.66    Political             0.83      1.46      1.08       0.65
economics          (0.94)    (0.21)     (1.12)    (2.59) economy                (0.38)    (0.50)    (0.77)     (0.54)
Financial           0.26      1.45       3.99      1.41    Public              0.00***     0.22      0.92     15.93**
economics          (0.24)    (0.71)     (3.07)    (1.19) economics              (0.00)    (0.28)    (0.83)    (13.92)
Game theory       0.00***     1.21       1.93      0.17    Urban                 0.67      1.17     0.13**      2.4
                   (0.00)    (0.73)     (2.02)    (0.17) economics              (0.34)    (0.48)    (0.09)     (1.49)
Health              1.03      0.81       1.08      2.58    Constant            0.00***      0.2     0.00**      0.1
economics          (0.67)    (0.34)     (0.78)    (2.73)                        (0.01)    (0.20)    (0.01)     (0.14)
Industrial          0.25*      0.7       1.1       2.54
organization         (0.15) (0.27)        (0.74)     (1.63)
Notes: Regression uses 661 observations. Base outcome category is "Assistant professor at university." Relative risk
ratios are reported. Excluded categories are: "Undergraduate location: US," PhD program rank "1 to 10," and "0"
journal publications. Regression also includes a constant and indicator variables for 28 research fields as additional
controls; these are omitted in the interest of space. Estimates are weighted using survey weights to correct for non-
response to one or both surveys. "NGQO" refers to a non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental organization.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                           5
Appendix Table 4: Excluded rows from Table 11: Predictors of salary
                                               Salary                                                  Salary
Applied econometrics                             -3.2       Industrial organization                     0.64
                                               (2.45)                                                  (2.35)
Applied microeconomics                          -0.67       International economics                     1.87
                                               (2.39)                                                  (3.42)
Behavioral economics                             7.5        International finance                       3.61
                                               (5.25)                                                  (4.55)
Computational economics                         4.73        International macroeconomics               -10.4
                                               (7.99)                                                  (5.80)
Development economics                           -4.51       International trade                        -0.21
                                               (2.53)                                                  (3.31)
Econometrics                                    -3.49       Labor economics                             -2.4
                                               (2.70)                                                  (2.40)
Economic history                                -0.66       Law and economics                           9.26
                                               (5.54)                                                  (5.69)
Economic theory                                  -8.6       Macroeconomics                             -0.36
                                               (6.64)                                                  (3.01)
Economics of education                         -7.40*       Microeconomic theory                       -2.69
                                               (3.51)                                                  (3.69)
Environmental economics                        -6.36*       Microeconomics                             -5.03
                                               (2.95)                                                  (3.65)
Experimental economics                          -5.39       Monetary economics                         -8.44*
                                               (4.32)                                                  (4.18)
Financial economics                           19.40***      Political economy                          -5.51
                                               (3.76)                                                  (3.70)
Game theory                                     1.65        Public economics                            1.43
                                               (4.72)                                                  (2.64)
Health economics                                -6.39       Urban economics                            -3.14
                                               (3.30)                                                  (4.88)

Notes: Results from OLS regression. Dependent variable is salary in thousands of 2010 dollars. Estimates are
weighted using survey weights to correct for non-response.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                        6
Appendix Table 5: Excluded rows from Table 12: Predictors of high satisfaction with
job outcome
                                         Highly                                         Highly Satisfied
                                     Satisfied (0/1)                                         (0/1)
Applied econometrics                      -0.03      Industrial organization                 -0.04
                                         (0.06)                                             (0.06)
Applied microeconomics                     0.1       International economics                 0.08
                                         (0.06)                                             (0.09)
Behavioral economics                      -0.11      International finance                   -0.12
                                         (0.13)                                             (0.11)
Computational economics                   -0.04      International macroeconomics            0.25
                                         (0.12)                                             (0.18)
Development economics                     0.01       International trade                     0.11
                                         (0.06)                                             (0.09)
Econometrics                              -0.09      Labor economics                         -0.06
                                         (0.07)                                             (0.06)
Economic history                          -0.14      Law and economics                       0.19
                                         (0.10)                                             (0.14)
Economic theory                           -0.18      Macroeconomics                          -0.04
                                         (0.15)                                             (0.07)
Economics of education                    0.18       Microeconomic theory                    -0.03
                                         (0.12)                                             (0.09)
Environmental economics                   -0.16      Microeconomics                          -0.14
                                         (0.09)                                             (0.11)
Experimental economics                    0.15       Monetary economics                      0.22
                                         (0.13)                                             (0.12)
Financial economics                       -0.07      Political economy                       0.01
                                         (0.07)                                             (0.09)
Game theory                               0.16       Public economics                        0.02
                                         (0.10)                                             (0.06)
Health economics                          0.14       Urban economics                         0.16
                                         (0.08)                                             (0.12)

Notes: Results from probit regression, average marginal effects reported. Dependent variable is equal
one if job candidate reported being "extremely" or "very" satisfied with the accepted job. Estimates are
weighted using survey weights to correct for non-response.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                   7
TABLES

Table 1: Means of Background Variables
                                             CV Sample           Survey Sample
                                                    Standard               Standard
                                         Mean          error   Mean          error
Female                                   0.321        0.009    0.313        0.017
Undergraduate location
         US                              0.356        0.010    0.370        0.017
         Asia                            0.335        0.009    0.319        0.019
         Other                           0.309        0.009    0.311        0.017
PhD program in US                        0.913        0.006    0.907        0.012
PhD program in economics                 0.909        0.006    0.916        0.011
Journal publications
         0                               0.727        0.009    0.727        0.016
         1                               0.161        0.007    0.159        0.013
         2                               0.062        0.005    0.064        0.009
         3 or more                       0.049        0.004    0.050        0.008
Courses as teaching assistant            3.813        0.048    3.943        0.098
Courses as primary instructor            1.346        0.030    1.372        0.058
Rank of PhD program
         1-10                            0.288        0.009    0.292        0.017
         11-20                           0.134        0.007    0.135        0.011
         21-30                           0.123        0.007    0.115        0.011
         31-40                           0.091        0.006    0.086        0.011
         41-50                           0.101        0.006    0.100        0.011
         Unranked                        0.263        0.009    0.273        0.017




                                                 8
Table 1: Means of Background Variables (continued)
                                                         CV Sample                      Survey Sample
                                                                Standard                          Standard
                                                     Mean          error              Mean          error
PhD fields
         Applied econometrics                        0.208            0.008           0.193           0.015
         Applied microeconomics                      0.214            0.008           0.212           0.015
         Behavioral economics                        0.054            0.005           0.053           0.008
         Development economics                       0.187            0.008           0.182           0.014
         Econometrics                                0.171            0.008           0.161           0.014
         Environmental economics                     0.059            0.005           0.058           0.008
         Financial economics                         0.163            0.007           0.172           0.016
         Game theory                                 0.080            0.005           0.085           0.010
         Health economics                            0.088            0.006           0.069           0.009
         Industrial organization                     0.221            0.008           0.231           0.016
         International economics                     0.090            0.006           0.099           0.012
         International finance                       0.058            0.005           0.063           0.010
         International trade                         0.062            0.005           0.071           0.010
         Labor economics                             0.230            0.008           0.237           0.015
         Macroeconomics                              0.231            0.008           0.227           0.016
         Microeconomic theory                        0.086            0.006           0.096           0.011
         Microeconomics                              0.059            0.005           0.051           0.008
         Monetary economics                          0.069            0.005           0.070           0.010
         Political economy                           0.073            0.005           0.074           0.009
         Public economics                            0.167            0.007           0.168           0.013
Observations                                                      2506                            850
Notes: Column 1 contains statistics for the full sample of individuals for whom we have background data.
Column 2 is restricted to respondents who provided information about all stages of the job markets and had non-
missing values for each of the variables included in this table. Results weighted using post-market survey
weights. Courses as teaching assistant is top-coded at 10. Courses as primary instructor is top-coded at 5. Job
candidates may have more than one field; the typical candidate in our data has two fields. Fields excluded from
table (<5% of sample): computational economics, economic theory, economic history, economics of education,
experimental economics, international macroeconomics, law and economics, and urban economics.




                                                              9
Table 2: Preferred job type
                                                     Mean             Standard error
Assistant professor at four-year college             0.081                0.008
Assistant professor at university                    0.719                0.013
Researcher at NGQO                                   0.111                0.009
Researcher in business or industry                   0.068                0.008
Postdoctoral fellow                                  0.020                0.004
Observations                                                     1333
Notes: Table pools observations from pre-market surveys from the 2007-10 job markets
and uses pre-market weights. “NGQO” stands for “non-profit, government, or quasi-
governmental organization.”




                                           10
Table 3: Expected prestige relative to others in
PhD-granting department
                                          Mean      Standard error   Proportion at this decile or better
1st decile (most impressive)              0.173          0.018                      0.17
2nd decile                                0.224          0.019                      0.40
3rd decile                                0.221          0.019                      0.62
4th decile                                0.105          0.015                      0.72
5th decile                                0.113          0.015                      0.84
6th decile                                0.046          0.010                      0.88
7th decile                                0.040          0.009                      0.92
8th decile                                0.028          0.007                      0.95
9th decile                                0.019          0.007                      0.97
10th decile                               0.032          0.008                      1.00
Observations                                       495
Notes: Results from 2009-10 pre-market survey only. Weighted using pre-market weights.




                                                            11
Table 4: Mean number and success rates by job market stage
                                                Applications       Interviews      Fly-outs       Job offers
Number                                              107.0             16.8            5.7             2.9
                                                    (2.3)            (0.4)           (0.2)           (0.1)
Observations (N)                                     905              905            905             905


                                                Applications       Interviews      Fly-outs       Job offers
Proportion resulting in interview                   0.194
                                                   (0.006)
Proportion resulting in fly-out                     0.076            0.366
                                                   (0.004)          (0.009)
Proportion resulting in job offer                   0.040            0.200          0.573
                                                   (0.002)          (0.006)         (0.011)
Observations                                         904              898            863


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Mean number applications, interviews, fly-outs and job offers are
estimated for respondents who provided information about outcomes at all four stages. Mean success rates are
estimated for respondents who provided information about outcomes at all four stages and had at least one
choice at the stage for which the success rate is calculated. Estimates use post-market survey weights. Sample
size is larger than survey sample column of table 1 because no additional covariates are included here.




                                                     12
Table 5: Predictors of Percent Yield by Stage of the Market
                                              Interviews per        Fly-outs per       Job offers per
                                               Application           Interview            Fly-out
Female                                             0.344                3.028               -3.511
                                                  (1.162)              (1.697)             (2.357)
Undergraduate Location
  Asia                                             -1.878               -1.373            9.677***
                                                  (1.579)              (2.181)             (2.853)
  Other                                            -2.136               2.081               3.926
                                                  (1.184)              (1.864)             (2.573)
PhD program in US                                  2.622                -1.916              2.597
                                                  (2.844)              (4.433)             (5.193)
PhD program in economics                          -7.300*               -6.718              -1.904
                                                  (2.935)              (3.764)             (4.620)
PhD Program Rank
  11 to 20                                          -2.303             -1.427               -1.633
                                                   (1.416)            (2.304)              (2.775)
  21 to 30                                        -4.399**           -9.701***              -4.369
                                                   (1.473)            (2.447)              (3.754)
  31 to 40                                          -3.739           -9.830***              8.155
                                                   (1.985)            (2.697)              (4.302)
  41 to 50                                       -7.405***             -4.667              8.696*
                                                   (1.928)            (2.994)              (3.978)
  Unranked                                          -3.864             -4.882                 3.1
                                                   (2.570)            (2.559)              (4.127)
Journal Publications
  One                                             1.547                -1.015              4.621
                                                 (1.167)              (2.108)             (2.742)
  Two                                             5.095                -0.332              -4.041
                                                 (3.915)              (3.293)             (5.378)
  Three or more                                   6.584*               1.498                0.03
                                                 (3.207)              (3.401)             (4.735)
Courses as TA, topcoded at 10                     -0.367                -0.65              -0.449
                                                 (0.209)              (0.337)             (0.495)
Courses as PI, topcoded at 5                      -0.823               -0.332              1.315
                                                 (0.453)              (0.636)             (0.850)
Constant                                        30.691***            52.651***           49.424***
                                                 (3.968)              (5.836)             (7.593)
R-squared                                          0.17                0.122               0.093

Observations                                          849                844                   811
Notes: Results from OLS regressions. Dependent variables are percent (0 to 100) of: applications
resulting in an interview invitation (column 1), interviews resulting in a fly-out invitation (column
2), and fly-outs resulting in a job offer (column 3). Excluded categories are: "Undergraduate
location: US," PhD program rank "1 to 10," and "0" journal publications. All regressions also
include indicator variables for 28 research fields as additional controls; field coefficients can be
seen in the appendix. Uses post-market weights.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001



                                                        13
Table 6: Marginal return in job offers from an additional application, interview or fly-out
                                                         (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Explanatory variable of interest:                   Applications             Interviews               Fly-outs
X variable                                           0.01327***             0.20306***              0.55425***
                                                      (0.00251)              (0.01945)               (0.03943)
X variable squared                                  -0.00003***             -0.00210***            -0.00933***
                                                     (0.00001)               (0.00049)              (0.00261)

Mean of X variable                                       109                     17                     5.8
Marginal effect at mean                                 0.007                   0.132                  0.446
                                                       (0.001)                 (0.006)                (0.015)

R-squared                                                0.20                   0.42                    0.67
Observations                                             850                    850                     850

Notes: Results from OLS regressions. Dependent variable in all columns is number of job offers. All regressions
include all variables from Table 1 as controls. See appendix for regression variable estimates excluded from this
table. In column 1, the explanatory variable of interest ("X variable") is number of applications, in column 2 it is
number of fly-outs, and in column 3 it is number of fly-outs. Squared terms are included for explanatory
variables of interest in each regression. Uses post-market survey weights.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                        14
Table 7: Characteristics of accepted jobs
  Panel A: Accepted job type                                    Mean        Standard error
     Assistant professor at four-year college                   0.08             0.01
     Assistant professor at university                          0.62             0.02
     Researcher at NGQO                                         0.19             0.01
     Researcher in business or industry                         0.07             0.01
     Postdoctoral fellow                                        0.05             0.01
  Panel B: Preference rank of accepted job type                 Mean        Standard error
     1st choice job type                                        0.64             0.02
     2nd choice job type                                        0.20             0.02
     3rd choice job type                                        0.09             0.01
     4th choice job type                                        0.04             0.01
     5th choice job type                                        0.03             0.01
  Panel C: Accepted jobs on the tenure track                    Mean        Standard error
     All accepted jobs                                          0.59             0.02
     Jobs at colleges, excluding postdocs                       0.74             0.05
     Jobs at universities, excluding postdocs                   0.86             0.02

Notes: All estimates weighted. Panels A and C use post-market survey sample weights, while
panel B uses sample weights based on response to both surveys. Observations used are: 935
(panel A); 708 (panel B); 941, 83 and 569 (panel C, top to bottom).




                                                15
Table 8: Satisfaction with accepted job
                                                     Mean rating          Standard error
Overall                                                  4.79                  0.05
Intellectual fit                                         4.74                  0.05
Social fit                                               4.69                  0.05
Compensation                                             4.62                  0.05
Workload / work-life balance                             4.80                  0.04
Observations                                                        565

Notes: Table pools observations from 2007-09 post-market respondents and uses post-market
survey weights. Respondents weighted their satisfaction on a six-point scale where 1 was
"extremely dissatisfied," 2 was "very dissatisfied," 3 was "somewhat dissatisfied," 4 was
"somewhat satisfied," 5 was "very satisfied," and 6 was "extremely satisfied." The 2007-08
survey asked about "salary," while the 2008-09 survey asked about "compensation." The
2007-08 survey asked about "work load," while the 2008-09 survey asked about work/life
balance.




                                            16
Table 9: Base salary in thousands of 2010 dollars
                                                                 Percentile
                                              Mean     25           50          75        Observations
All jobs                                       92.9   68.9         88.6       109.9            859

Assistant professor at four-year college       72.4   59.1         70.9        78.8            77
Assistant professor at university              96.5   68.9         91.1       114.2            514
Researcher at NGQO                             92.5   73.8         90.9       105.9            170
Researcher in business or industry            110.1   88.6         103.4      142.0            49
Postdoctoral fellow                            57.5   47.3         55.4        67.5            41

Notes: Table pools observations from 2007-10 post-market respondents and uses post-market weights.
"NGQO" refers to a non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental organization.




                                                            17
Table 10: Multinomial logistic regression: Predictors of accepted job type
                                                                            (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                                        College           NGQO              Business           Postdoc
Preferred job type: College                                              5.04**            1.01              8.59*               1.1
                                                                         (2.69)            (0.48)            (7.76)             (0.91)
Preferred job type: NGQO                                               10.83***          17.65***           49.06***             1.24
                                                                         (6.22)            (7.53)            (40.76)            (1.27)
Preferred job type: Business or industry                                 9.59*            6.95**            30.07***             3.33
                                                                         (8.93)            (4.32)            (23.39)            (3.60)
Preferred job type: Postdoctoral fellowship                             16.23**          0.00***             12.27              19.32*
                                                                         (15.42)           (0.00)            (18.94)           (24.49)
Female                                                                    0.82             1.29               1.93               1.67
                                                                         (0.34)            (0.43)            (1.20)             (1.03)
Undergraduate location: Asia                                              1.16             0.51               1.27               0.31
                                                                         (0.56)            (0.18)            (1.04)             (0.31)
Undergraduate location: Other                                            0.19*           0.22***              1.92               1.94
                                                                         (0.12)            (0.10)            (1.40)             (1.33)
PhD program in US                                                         1.37             0.36               2.18              0.04**
                                                                         (1.11)            (0.28)            (2.90)             (0.04)
PhD program in economics                                                 10.91             2.44               0.92               0.6
                                                                         (14.38)           (1.79)            (0.86)             (0.40)
PhD program rank: 11 to 20                                                0.42             1.44               0.32              7.73**
                                                                         (0.33)            (0.60)            (0.25)             (6.05)
PhD program rank: 21 to 30                                                1.35             3.09*              1.37               1.41
                                                                         (0.86)            (1.58)            (1.03)             (1.36)
PhD program rank: 31 to 40                                                1.67             1.91               0.68            20.99***
                                                                         (1.10)            (1.06)            (0.89)            (16.13)
PhD program rank: 41 to 50                                                1.11             2.43               3.05               5.3
                                                                         (0.90)            (1.32)            (2.39)             (5.04)
PhD program rank: Unranked                                                2.64             1.57               2.05               1.77
                                                                         (1.60)            (0.94)            (1.47)             (1.89)
One journal publication                                                   0.98             0.59               0.48               1.77
                                                                         (0.51)            (0.25)            (0.44)             (1.07)
Two journal publications                                                    1.5            0.77               0.17               0.22
                                                                         (1.10)            (0.39)            (0.18)             (0.23)
Three or more journal publications                                        0.31             0.56               0.67               1.13
                                                                         (0.36)            (0.34)            (1.26)             (1.00)
Courses as TA, topcoded at 10                                             0.98             1.16*             1.31*               0.99
                                                                         (0.08)            (0.07)            (0.14)             (0.11)
Courses as PI, topcoded at 5                                             1.47**            0.96               0.71               1.25
                                                                         (0.20)            (0.10)            (0.14)             (0.19)
Notes: Regression uses 661 observations. Base outcome category is "Assistant professor at university." Relative risk ratios are reported.
Excluded categories are: "Undergraduate location: US," PhD program rank "1 to 10," and "0" journal publications. Regression also
includes a constant and indicator variables for 28 research fields as additional controls; estimates for these variables can be seen in the
appendix. Uses survey weights for response to both surveys. "NGQO" refers to a non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental
organization.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                       18
Table 11: Predictors of salary
                                                    Salary                                                                   Salary
Female                                               -1.11               Journal publications
                                                    (2.03)                  One                                               -0.51
Undergraduate location                                                                                                       (2.74)
  Asia                                            -14.70***                 Two                                               2.43
                                                    (2.60)                                                                   (3.23)
  Other                                             -5.84*                  Three or more                                     -3.66
                                                    (2.47)                                                                   (4.33)
PhD program in US                                    2.03                Accepted job type
                                                    (4.05)                  Assistant professor at four-year college        -8.99**
PhD program in economics                          -24.85***                                                                  (2.93)
                                                    (4.92)                  Researcher at NGQO                                0.94
PhD program rank                                                                                                             (2.21)
  11 to 20                                           -5.71                  Researcher in business or industry              15.13**
                                                    (3.50)                                                                   (4.73)
  21 to 30                                         -11.23**                 Postdoctoral fellow                            -25.23***
                                                    (3.53)                                                                   (3.17)
  31 to 40                                        -20.07***              Job offers                                         7.70***
                                                    (3.74)                                                                   (1.27)
                                                                                      2
  41 to 50                                        -18.21***              (Job offers)                                        -0.33*
                                                    (3.59)                                                                   (0.13)
  Unranked                                        -18.61***              Constant                                          111.39***
                                                    (3.64)                                                                   (7.17)
Courses as TA, topcoded at 10                        0.33
                                                    (0.40)
Courses as PI, topcoded at 5                         -0.22               R-squared                                            0.51
                                                    (0.74)               Observations                                         804

Notes: Results from OLS regression. Dependent variable is salary in thousands of 2010 dollars. Excluded categories are:
"Undergraduate location: US," PhD program rank "1 to 10," and "0" journal publications. Regression also includes indicator
variables for 28 research fields as additional controls; estimates for these variables can be seen in the appendix. Uses post-market
survey weights. "NGQO" refers to a non-profit, governmental, or quasi-governmental organization.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                       19
Table 12: Predictors of high satisfaction with job
outcome
                                     Highly satisfied                                                            Highly satisfied
                                          (0/1)                                                                       (0/1)
2nd-ranked job type                           0.00                Courses as TA, topcoded at 10                       -0.03**
                                             (0.06)                                                                    (0.01)
3rd-ranked job type                           -0.05               Courses as PI, topcoded at 5                          0.03
                                             (0.09)                                                                    (0.02)
4th-ranked job type                          -0.26*               PhD program rank: 11 to 20                            0.02
                                             (0.12)                                                                    (0.07)
5th-ranked job type                           -0.18               PhD program rank: 21 to 30                           -0.16*
                                             (0.16)                                                                    (0.08)
Job offers                                   0.04**               PhD program rank: 31 to 40                           -0.08
                                             (0.01)                                                                    (0.09)
Female                                        -0.07               PhD program rank: 41 to 50                            0.01
                                             (0.05)                                                                    (0.08)
Undergraduate location: Asia                 -0.14*               PhD program rank: Unranked                           -0.11
                                             (0.06)                                                                    (0.09)
Undergraduate location: Other                 0.03                One journal publication                              -0.02
                                             (0.05)                                                                    (0.06)
PhD program in US                             -0.03               Two journal publications                              0.02
                                             (0.12)                                                                    (0.09)
PhD program in economics                      -0.04               Three or more journal publications                   -0.21*
                                             (0.10)                                                                    (0.10)
                                                                  Observations                                          399
Notes: Results from probit regression, average marginal effects reported. Dependent variable is equal one if job candidate reported
being "extremely" or "very" satisfied with the accepted job. Regression includes quadratic in job offers. Excluded categories are:
"Undergraduate location: US," PhD program rank "1 to 10," and zero journal publications. Regression also includes indicator
variables for 28 research fields as additional controls; estimates for these variables can be seen in the appendix. Estimates use
survey weights for response to both surveys.
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                      20
