NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAMBRIDGE HISTORY OF "CAPITALISM"
Peter Temin
Working Paper 20658
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20658
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Literature. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Peter Temin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cambridge History of "Capitalism"
Peter Temin
NBER Working Paper No. 20658
November 2014
JEL No. N14,O57,P12
ABSTRACT
This review essay of the two-volume Cambridge History of Capitalism (2014), edited by Larry Neal
and Jeffrey G. Williamson, is divided into three parts. First, I describe three chapters from the second
volume that I recommend for all economists to add depth to their understanding of the world economy
today. Robert C. Allen analyzes the world distribution of income; Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung
discuss the history of business groups; and Peter Lindert surveys private and public programs to help
the poor. In each case, they analyze historical backgrounds that illuminate current issues. Second,
I criticize the definition of capitalism used in these volumes as too expansive to be useful. I argue
that this definition mars the essays in first volume by stimulating a fruitless search for capitalism in
the millennium before the Industrial Revolution. Third, I describe the essays in this reference work
starting from the most recent and ending with those about antiquity.
Peter Temin
Department of Economics, E18-276
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ptemin@mit.edu

Introduction
What is an economist to make of two volumes containing one thousand pages on the
history of capitalism? Is it another Non-Communist Manifesto, echoing Rostow (1960)? The
two volumes divide history at 1848, the date of Marx’s Communist Manifesto. Or is it an
attempt by Cambridge University Press to expand current interest in the history of American
capitalism? Harvard has a Program on the Study of Capitalism (Beckert, et al., 2014). Since
most readers of the JEL do not spend their days worrying about these questions, I start by
describing three chapters in this collection that I recommend to all economists. Only then do I
confront the question of intent and describe the volumes as a whole.
The first volume ranges in time from the 6th century BCE to the 19th century CE and
surveys areas around the world. The second volume treats only the last two centuries, but its
chapters utilize the available data to delve deeply into a variety of economic aspects of the
economies surveyed. The 34 contributions are written by senior economic historians, and the
bibliographies that follow each chapter assist readers to find more information about the research
behind the essays. The chapters provide good introductions to myriad subjects.
Volume 2 of The Cambridge History of Capitalism is appropriately subtitled, “The
Spread of Capitalism from 1848 to the Present.” Volume 1 is subtitled, “The Rise of Capitalism
from Ancient Origins to 1848,” and appears to claim that capitalism, described as spreading in
the second volume, took more than a millennium to go from birth to adolescence. This program
suggests a teleological view of history that looks at the past only to discover the seeds of the
present, a view that flattens history into a series of anticipatory examples. Sound economic
history requires more than searching for ancient practices that anticipate more modern ones.
2

Perhaps the largest of the questions raised in and by this Cambridge History is whether
economists can learn from history. To encourage this communication, I recommend a few
noteworthy chapters, discuss the definition of capitalism and then survey the content of these
volumes in reverse, from the most modern to the most ancient. Only those few economists
interested in the ancient world will be attracted to a collection that starts with three papers on
antiquity. I instead follow the lead of Wassily Leontief, who argued long ago that we should
write history backwards when it is divergent (Leontief, 1963). However we write it, perhaps
backwards is the best way for economists to read it.

Papers of interest to all economists
The first paper I recommend for all economists is by Robert C. Allen; it is the first
substantive paper in the second volume of this collection. Allen explains why the international
economy looks like it does today. He starts with a short summary of his theory of the Industrial
Revolution: “[T]he new technology substituted capital and cheap energy for expensive labor.”
(II, 25) This is indeed short, but a longer version can be found in the essay on the Industrial
Revolution by Knick Harley in Chapter 16 of the first volume or in Allen (2009).
While simple, this theory is substantive in that it could be refuted. This can be seen
clearly by differentiating it from several other theories. Allen’s theory differs, for example, from
that by Oded Galor. Galor (2011) explained the transition from Malthusian to modern economic
growth in models that start from maximizing individuals in closed economies that contain one
undifferentiated good but no money or credit. Economies exit from a subsistence-consumption
regime when potential income exceeds a critical level.
3

Galor asserted that technological progress is a function of education and population size.
Since education is endogenous in this model, the driver of this function is population size. When
the population gets large enough to make technology advanced enough, then parents decide to
educate their children, and modern economic growth replaces Malthusian stagnation. Education
in industrializing Britain however was limited because the government “passed up high rates of
return,” as documented by Peter Lindert in Chapter 14 of volume 2 (II, 484), and Allen’s model
does not require it.
Allen’s theory also differs from the argument by Joel Mokyr. Mokyr (2009) argued that
the Industrial Revolution was caused by the Enlightenment, that is, by the growth of science and
analytic thinking. This view has two problems for present purposes. First, the mechanism that
leads from the Enlightenment to the Industrial Revolution is not spelled out carefully enough to
provide tests of its power. Second, this view may explain why Europe industrialized before the
Middle or Far East, but it cannot explain why Britain rather than France initiated the process.
That gives us only a few data points, albeit important ones, with which to test this view in the
large.
Finally, Allen’s view differs from the classic view of Thomas Ashton (1948, p. 11):
“[T]he importance of the lowering of the rate of interest in the half-century before the industrial
revolution has never been properly stressed by historians. If we seek—it would be wrong to do
so—for a single reason why the pace of economic development quickened about the middle of
the eighteenth century, it is to this we must look.” This view was reiterated by Ashton’s friend,
John Hicks in his Theory of Economic History, to which I return in the next section of this
review. Hicks (1969, p. 144) states it like this: “It is not simply that rates of interest had fallen
(as they had). What is more important is the greater availability of funds, of which the fall in
4

interest was a symptom, but no more than a symptom.” We do not need to parse the difference
between these two expressions of this theory; it is enough to acknowledge that they concern a
different set of relative prices than Allen’s theory. Allen focused on the ratio of wages to power,
while Ashton and Hicks focused on the cost of capital. There is overlap, but Allen considered
the price of a particular kind of capital good rather than the general cost of investment. Allen
also discussed the incentive to innovate, to invent and adopt new machinery, while Ashton and
Hicks only discussed the incentive to invest in current technology. The former was more
important in the Industrial Revolution.
Allen’s theory can be clarified by the data in Figure 1, taken from Allen (2001) to
become Figure 14.4 in the first volume of this collection (I, 496). This graph shows real wages
in selected European cities from 1200 to 1900. It is clear that London and Amsterdam had
higher real wages than other European cities in the eighteenth century. According to Allen, this
was half of the incentives that led to the Industrial Revolution. The other half was the cost of
power, which differed between Britain and Holland. The former country drew its power from
coal, while the latter drew it from peat. Mining of coal was far less labor intensive than
harvesting peat, and the ratio of real wages to the cost of power was higher in Britain. Allen’s
theory thus explains why the Industrial Revolution started in eighteenth-century Britain rather
than anywhere else or anytime else.
Another aspect of Figure 1 is important for discussion later in this review. Note the peak
in real wages in the fifteenth century. It was due to the Black Death that swept through Europe
in the fourteenth century and devastated the population. The century-long delay in the effect of
high mortality on real wages shows that the Malthusian system worked slowly in the world
before industrialization. There was room in a Malthusian world for real wages to rise quite
5

dramatically without the change in technology we call the Industrial Revolution. Previous
examples of early high real wages are described in the first volume of this collection.
The effects of the Black Death also were very durable, at least in London and
Amsterdam. Recent research has shown how this happened. Voitländer and Voth (2013) argue
that the Black Death gave rise to the European Marriage Pattern described by Hajnal (1965) that
set in motion a process that led to the Industrial Revolution. This pattern had three components:
the age of female marriage was high, in their twenties; many women did not marry at all; and
married women did not automatically join the household of their husbands. According to Hajnal,
this contrasted with an Asian marriage pattern where almost all women married at menarche and
moved into extended households of their husbands’ families. But while Hajnal observed this
European pattern in the early modern period, he offered no clues where it came from.
Voitländer and Voth argue that the scarcity of labor after the Black Death led to a change
of agricultural technology. Moving along the wage-rental isoproductivity line, farmers changed
from growing crops to tending animals, from arable farming to husbandry. The movement along
a smooth production-possibility curve was a sharp change in the underlying technology. Sir
Thomas More expressed it most colorfully over a century after the Black Death in his Utopia
(2012 [1516]): “Your sheep that were wont to be so meek and tame, and so small eaters, now, as
I hear say, have become so great devourers and so wild, that they eat up and swallow down the
very men themselves. They consume, destroy, and devour whole fields, houses and cities.”
The result of this adaptation of agricultural technology changed the role of women in
medieval society. Switching from crops to husbandry reduced the demand for strength to push
plows and expanded the scope of work that women could do. The result was a change in the
6

status of women in society that Alesina, Giulano and Nunn (2013) observed at other times and
places as well. The reduction in plowing reduced the demand for men’s labor and increased it
for women’s labor. Women’s wages rose and their opportunity for work expanded. They
delayed marriage, entered service and became more independent. This in turn led to the
European Marriage Pattern and the family pattern described by Hajnal.
It was a massive change in the structure of society. Holland shared in this history, but
lacked the abundant coal in Britain. The Dutch used peat for fuel, as noted above, and the
Industrial Revolution began in Britain, fueled by the cheap power of Allen’s model. Dennison
and Ogilvie (2014) recently presented a more nuanced version of this story based on local
observations of the elements of the European Marriage Pattern.
Allen notes in his chapter that this created two problems for other countries. The British
innovations were only profitable with British factor prices. In addition, Britain’s comparative
advantage in manufactures increased sharply. Countries in Europe that had factor prices near the
British adopted what Allen calls the Standard Model, consisting of legal equality, extensive
education, free trade within countries, and tariffs for external trade. This created a favorable
climate for industrial development, and industrialization spread within Europe and the countries
of British settlement.
Other countries in Asia and Africa were unable to raise their wages enough and impose
high enough tariffs to make their own manufactures profitable. They de-industrialized while
industrialization spread, giving rise to the Great Divergence of the current world economy.
There were of course variations in colonies and other countries, as described in Allen’s chapter
and in Allen (2011).
7

An important policy conclusion emerges from this historical analysis. In order to raise
wages in poor countries to make modern industry profitable, it is not enough to have education.
It is necessary to reduce the rate of population growth to make labor scarcer. The best way to do
this is to educate women and provide occupations that enable them to work, rather like
husbandry after the Black Death. Of course, this is easier said than done, but it reveals religious
and cultural problems about the role of women that need to be an integral part of economic
development theory today.
Before you accept these implications, you might take a look at another chapter that is
worth the attention of general economists. Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung discuss the
history of “business groups” in Chapter 7 of Volume 2. These groups are defined as distinct
companies all controlled by a single decision maker (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
(1999). Morck and Yeung count two or more such listed companies as business groups. They
find that business groups are legion and can be found in rich and poor economies alike. As with
the essay by Allen, they provide ample references to the extensive literature on their topic at the
end of their chapter.
The chapter argues that business groups are active around the world, in all sorts of
countries. The most famous ones are the Robber Barons in late nineteenth-century America,
zaibatsu in Japan and chaebol in Korea. They are mentioned prominently in economic-history
classes, and perhaps in some industrial-organization ones as well. They typically are not
included in our exposition of the theory of the firm.
Morck and Yeung survey an extensive literature about business groups, which appears to
be extensions of Berle and Means (1932). The cited papers discuss agency problems and other
8

limitations of business groups; they do not explain why they exist. It could be for market power
or more likely for political power. It could be to deal with limitations of the capital market.
There seems to have been less research into the advantages of business groups, perhaps because
data needed for hypothesis tests are hard to find.
Morck and Yeung report that business groups are associated with rapid growth among
poor economies, but with slow growth in rich economies. This seems to be a statement about
correlation rather than causation, judging from a footnote that suggests there may be
bidirectional causality. Nonetheless, Morck and Yeung (II, 212) reach a striking conclusion:
“These findings suggest that countries might become trapped in a ‘middle income trap,’ a stable
and prolonged situation in which a few large business groups dominate an institutionally
deficient economy and protect their dominance by capturing regulators.”
This brings us to the question posed by the contrasts between these two chapters. Allen
discussed factor prices in a world populated by independent firms. The ownership of these firms
was not relevant to his story. Morck and Yeung talk of ownership and control without much
reference to factor prices. Which is more relevant for policy? If poor countries control their
birth rate and raise wages, will they still be stuck mid-way in their development by business
groups? Or is the evidence about business groups in poor countries picking up factor-price
effects that impede economic growth?
This then is a problem posed by these essays on economic history. One way to read the
chapters is as guides to current policy. Normally, there is little enough overlap to pit one chapter
against another, although other collections of essays sometimes adopt that strategy. In this case,
two very distinct chapters overlap in their policy provisions. It would be very helpful if this
9

conflict generated research designed to answer questions like those just posed. If we want to
bring the residents of all countries up to decent incomes, should we look primarily to factor
prices or primarily to business ownership?
The third paper I recommend to general economists confronts the question of helping less
fortunate people within rather than between countries. Peter Lindert surveys private and public
programs to help the poor over the century before 1980 in Chapter 14 of Volume 2. He supplies
a short history of poor relief since the Industrial Revolution and some predictions for the future.
This chapter provides any economist interested in current debates about the future of Medicare,
Medicaid, Social Security, and smaller cousins of these massive programs with historical
perspective on these debates.
Lindert starts his exploration by surveying theories of social insurance to find hypotheses
that can be tested with rougher data but longer series of observations than the typical test in
economic journals. These theories can be grouped into three types. First, relative prices. As it
becomes cheaper to furnish social insurance and deal with free riders, then price theory suggests
nations will respond to outward shifts in the supply curve to offer more social assistance.
Second, the “warm glow” theory suggests people help those like themselves. This view harks
back to Adam Smith, who asserted in The Theory of Moral Sentiments that we have more
sympathy with family, community, and even nation than with foreign people, particularly farflung people. And third, larger perceived needs, as in the Great Depression, will shift the
demand curve for social assistance outward.
He supplies evidence for the first type of theory in Figure 2, which reproduces Figure
14.4 in the second volume of this collection (II, 487). This is not the cost of computing or
10

similar technical advancement; it is the cost of raising tax revenue. The cost of tax collection fell
dramatically after 1850, spurring the use of tax revenues to provide social assistance to the poor.
This figure, however, also poses the central question of Lindert’s chapter, because the growth of
public social assistance only began a century later. What was going on?
Lindert surveys the literature on opportunities for social assistance in the intervening
century and argues that there were high social returns to be gained from schooling, nutrition
supplements and health care in this time. He concludes that the “barrier that had to be removed
was the concentration of political power into the hands of elites opposed to taxation for growthenhancing public investment (p. II, 485).” Only after the political scene changed in the world
wars and the Great Depression were these opportunities exploited. Public investment in the poor
is largely a phenomenon of the second half of the twentieth century.
But we should not think of this dramatic change as permanent. Lindert notes that
increased medical care has led to longer life spans. While children do not vote; old people do.
There recently has been a switch to care for the elderly rather than the young. The arguments
that these newer policies are growth-enhancing public investment are considerably less secure
than the arguments for the policies implemented in the last century. In addition, the increasing
inequality emphasized by Piketty (2014) threatens to turn back the political clock as well. With
greater wealth, elites naturally seek greater political power. These two forces combine to make
the question of social assistance today a difficult and tangled issue.
Lindert and Piketty are on the Morck and Yeung side of the debate about the barriers to
economic development I alluded to above. They focus on the ownership of assets rather than
factor prices, emphasizing capital as wealth. Their arguments appear indirect as they discuss the
11

structure of economies rather than their growth, but strategy follows structure (Chandler, 1962;
Lamoreux, Raff and Temin, 2003). In this formative stage of the discussion, it is necessary to
get the underlying model right, which brings us to the title of this collection.

How old is capitalism?
Larry Neal opens the first volume of the Cambridge History of Capitalism by identifying
a common aim in the essays: “to determine what features of modern capitalism were present in
each time and place, and … why the various precursors of capitalism did not survive (I, 2).” I
suggest that this is a limited approach to economic history, and present another approach,
paradoxically also described in Neal’s introduction. Let us start by seeing how he defined
capitalism.
Neal provides a checklist of the four elements of capitalism (I, 2):
1. Private property rights
2. Contracts enforced by third parties
3. Markets with responsive prices
4. Supportive governments
Over half of the chapters include capitalism in their titles, and many of them referred back to
this list approvingly.
One question we might ask is how independent these four elements are. Hicks argued in A
Theory of Economic History that they were connected. Describing the origin of trade, Hicks

12

said, “The merchant must have property in the things in which he trades; his right to that
property must be identifiable. … Disputes will … arise, and there must be means of settling
them, in order that contracts should be reliable. Legal (or at least quasi-legal) institutions are
therefore required (Hicks, 1969, pp. 34-35).” Hicks added that early rules were supported by
nascent merchant associations, often at odds with general governments.
In other words, almost all the elements will be observed if there is trade in an economy. As
trade is observed as early as we have economic records, this makes capitalism ubiquitous. The
only issue is how pervasive these rules were, which is very hard to judge from early evidence.
The relations between merchants and governments have been complex and variable over time,
and it is hard to disentangle them from other information.
Neal refined his definition to mitigate this problem by stating that the list referred to the
treatment of capital, which he defined as follows: “a factor of production that is somehow
physically embodied, whether in buildings and equipment, or in improvements to land, or in
people with special knowledge (I, 3).” This list is very expansive. Including land improvements
in capital is useful in modern economies, but these improvements—like trade—are observed
starting very early. Neolithic farmers separated their fields from the forests of hunter-gatherers;
did that make them capitalists?
When economists began to analyze growth, they distinguished only land and labor as factors
of production. Both Malthus and Ricardo discussed the complexities introduced by the presence
of limited land. Not until Marshall wrote almost a century later do we find simple models
switching from land and labor to capital and labor. This change clearly was a response to the

13

industrialization described in the second of these volumes. Including land improvements in
capital muddies the intellectual waters.
Including human capital also is useful in the analysis of modern economies but confusing
when referred to older ones. As noted already, education was extremely limited before the
Industrial Revolution, although skills of various kinds were ubiquitous. Including them in the
definition of capital broadens capitalism to become ubiquitous.
Neal then invoked Douglass North’s views of capitalism as an institution. This gets the
discussion away from lists at the cost of complicating the analysis. What is an institution? North
has been criticized for arguing that institutions impose limits on human freedom, and others have
tried to give a more balanced view. Bromley (2006, Chapter 3) for example proposed a neutral
definition: “Institutions define and specify opportunity sets, or fields of action, for the members
of a going concern.” They order our existence, providing “collective restraint, liberation, and
expansion of individual action.” They do this through ethics—enforced by moral sanctions of
collective opinion—economizing and jurisprudence. In other words, institutions operate through
private, economic and legal pathways.
Institutions therefore cannot be identified by a simple checklist. It is necessary to pay
attention to behavior, private and public, to identify a capitalistic society. The first step in this
process is to examine modes of behavior introduced by Hicks in A Theory of Economic History
and summarized by Neal at the end of his introduction, appearing almost like an afterthought.
They are cited in several chapters of Volume 1. The second step is to differentiate what Hicks
called the mercantile economy from capitalism.

14

Hicks (1969, Chapter 2) distinguished what he called customary and command behavior
by being bottom-up or top-down. Polanyi presented this framework with a sharper focus on
economics and asserted that, “The main forms of integration in the human economy are …
reciprocity, redistribution, and exchange (Polanyi, 1977, pp. 35-36).” Reciprocity corresponds to
Hicks’ customary economy. It is a mode of behavior in which people aim toward a rough
balance between the goods and services they receive and that they give to others. Reciprocal
obligations are determined by social obligations and traditions, and they change only slowly.
Redistribution is a system in which goods “are collected in one hand and distributed by virtue of
custom, law, or ad hoc central decision (Polanyi, 1977, p. 40).” This system is present in units as
small as households, where it is known as householding, as well as in the taxation levied by
modern states. The essential characteristic is that a central authority collects and distributes
goods and services. This is the economic aspect of Hicks’ command economy. Exchange is the
familiar economic transaction where people voluntarily exchange goods for each other or for
money.
This tri-part schema corresponds also to a division of individual behavior. People even
today rely on a mixture of behavioral modes, choosing which one to use as a result of internal
and external forces (Temin, 1980). I assumed these forces can be represented on two
dimensions. One dimension measures internal forces along an index of personal autonomy. The
other dimension indexes the rapidity of change in the external environment. When people are
less autonomous and change is slow, they typically utilize customary behavior. When change is
rapid and personal autonomy is neither very high nor very low, then people use command
behavior. When personal autonomy is high and the pace of change is moderate, people employ

15

instrumental behavior, that is, they have explicit goals in mind and make exchanges that advance
their plans. These different modes of behavior correspond to the three types of organization used
in economic life.
This model is shown in Figure 3. Straight lines are used for simplicity, but they only
distinguish interior areas and the direction of boundaries; we cannot quantify the axes enough to
see what actual curves would be like. But even this schematic diagram has important
implications. Consider a relatively autonomous individual, probably more typical of the modern
world than when we go back into history, who would show up as a horizontal line near the top of
Figure 3. This person would use different modes of behavior in different situations. All of these
situations may be present in any person’s life. There is not much variation in the customs of
going to work, shopping and eating. They may well be done customarily without much thought.
At the other extreme, dramatic change as in a serious illness, a large fire or other disaster, the
person may utilize command behavior, either leading or being led by another in this time of
crisis. In between, there is plenty of room for this independent person to exercise instrumental
market behavior.
Now consider how different people might respond to a similar rate of change in the
environment, represented by a vertical line in Figure 3. Consider how it would look on the
right-hand side of the diagram. The line shows how people react to a fairly high level of change
in their environment, whether from fire, war or famine. The most community-minded people
near the bottom of the diagram are likely to continue their accustomed activities, as described for
a variety of societies in Diamond (2005). More autonomous people prefer to participate in some
kind of command structure that is dealing with the change under way. This can be a fire brigade,
16

an army, or even a vigilante operation to deal with famine. The most autonomous people would
seize the opportunity to engage in instrumental activity, that is, to undertake commercial
ventures or take command of organizations that others join. In other words, people react
differently to a common stimulus, utilizing different modes of behavior in accordance with their
nature.
Several conclusions emerge from this little model. First, there are two types of tests we
can use to discriminate between the various kinds of economies and organizations. We can look
at individual actions, and we can analyze the nature of economies as a whole. Records of
individual purchases give evidence of market activity and instrumental behavior. Turning to the
other kind of test, we can see the importance of economy-wide patterns; for example, agrarian
economies are dominated by customary behavior as the yearly cycle repeats itself. These two
kinds of tests are complementary. The institutions of market economies and capitalism are
multidimensional, involving personal, economic, and legal activities. We choose which kind of
test to use depending on the available information, and we must remember to situate the specific
tests we use in any observations we can make about other dimensions of the institutions in
question.
Second, everyone uses all modes of behavior at some point. Even the consummate
economist, Fischer Black, worked in hierarchical universities and companies on the one hand
and dressed customary on the other hand (Mehrling, 2005). Many of us have families with their
mixture of reciprocal and redistributive behaviors. Most of us also obey the laws to drive on the
right-hand side of the road and pay our taxes. It is not the case that everyone behaves
instrumentally all the time in a market or capitalist economy.
17

Third, the question of whether an economy at a given time is a customary, command or
market economy is fundamentally a quantitative question. The question is not whether there is
one kind of activity, but rather which mode of behavior dominates the economy. In other words,
when decisions about resource allocation are being made, are they being made more by custom,
command, or markets? When we observe a historical mode of behavior, how typical is it of that
time and place? Has the evidence survived because it was abundant or because it was unusual?
These questions are relevant to the first volume of this History of Capitalism. After
1848, most of the economies described were dominated by market activity. Before then,
historians must seek quantitative tests that do not require extensive data. Our conceptual
framework should be clear so that we can use the scarce information to suggest a quantitative
result.
There is also another issue relevant to Volume 1. The modes of behavior have been
described for individual activities; there is no mention of capitalism. Several of the contributing
authors however define capitalism in their chapters. R. B. Wong asserts that capitalist
economies have “large firms able to amass large amounts of capital (I, 126).” Oscar Gelderblom
and Joost Jonker say, “One of the key [attributes] of capitalism is the extent to which people
work for wages (I, 323).” Mark Harrison explains that Ricardo used “capitalist” to distinguish
owners of capital from landowners (II, 350). And Jeffrey Frieden and Ronald Rogowski claim:
“Since the emergence in the late 1700s, modern capitalism has been the focus of intense
controversy (II, 384).”
I synthesize these comments to define capitalism as distinct from the larger category of
market economy in two ways. First, there should be capital as Neal asserted in his introduction.
18

But instead of the all-inclusive definition he used, capitalism includes only business capital, the
capital involved in commerce and industry. This restriction echoes the change in simple
economic theories from land to capital as the factor of production that worked with labor, which
followed the growth of capitalism.
Second, in order to make the test quantitative, to assure that this restricted category of
capital was widely used, there must be wage earners in a capitalist economy. Farmers working
on a manor or family farm typically were compensated in more flexible ways to deal with the
vagaries of harvests. Workers in factories and related places of business were far more likely to
be paid wages. These conditions may be used as a checklist, but they are better seen as
shorthand to indicate complex changes in economic behavior, morals, and jurisprudence
(Bromley, 2006).
Capitalism then represents a subset of the market economies that preceded it. The
Industrial Revolution stimulated workers to engage in commerce and artisanal production of
various sorts, and instrumental behavior replaced some of the customary behavior of agriculture.
The spread of factories, and particularly the spread of large factories in what is described in
Volume 2 of the History of Capitalism as the Second Industrial Revolution of the late nineteenth
century, meant that many workers were engaged primarily in command behavior. They had to
show up on time, eat when allowed, and follow the dictates of their bosses in their work.
Ironically, the growth of capitalism reduced the scope of market economies—not in the
determinants of resource allocation, but in the experiences of most people. English cotton
factories grew before 1848 in what should be regarded as the actual birth of capitalism.

19

This discussion implies that most of the economies described in Volume 1 of this History
Capitalism were not capitalist. Many of them were market economies, but they generally lacked
the additional characteristics of capitalist economies before 1848. As Hicks said in the course of
describing traders at the origin of trade, “We do not have to make any special assumption about
‘capitalist mentality’ in order to conclude that some of them will use a part of their profit … to
expand their trade (Hicks, 1969, p. 45).”
Similarly, we can observe customary behavior in Paris just after 1848. Zola (1876)
described a feast held in the 1850s by a Paris laundress for her family, fellow artisans and friends
that resembles closely what Sahlins (1972) described as the “social refrigerator” for stone-age
people (mutatis mutandis). When hunters in primitive societies killed a large animal, they
invited the village to eat because they lacked refrigeration and expected their friends to
reciprocate. Zola’s heroine did not kill a bison, but she took her turn in her Paris neighborhood.
Volume 1 contains descriptions of customary, command and market economies, stressing
of course the last of these categories. It does not describe capitalist economies despite its
inclusion in a history of capitalism.

Chapters of Volume 2
Now it is time to turn to the individual papers in The Cambridge History of Capitalism. It is
a fine collection of papers by accomplished economic historians, each of whom summarizes the
current state of knowledge in his area of specialization. (Only one woman is represented in each
volume.) As there are well over thirty chapters in these dense volumes, it would be tedious to
20

describe them in order. In the spirit of Leontief (1963), I survey them in reverse, starting from
the end of Volume 2 and progressing backwards to the beginning of Volume 1, grouping the
articles into groups of three or four to provide coherence to the discussion.
The last group of chapters (albeit first in this survey) consists of the last four substantive
chapters of Volume 2. They function as a kind of summary of the preceding arguments showing
the effect of the spread of capitalism and industrialization on the lives of ordinary people. The
first chapter in this group by Jeffrey Frieden and Ronald Rogowski provides a comprehensive
summary account of the rise and spread of capitalism in the last three centuries. They group the
peacetime history into several periods, in each of which they discuss the “enthusiasts” for the
activities of the time and then the rejectionists and/or skeptics to the progress of capitalism. This
chapter, if available separately on an electronic platform, will make a fine introductory reading
for any economics course that wants to set its material in a wide historical setting.
This standard history is followed by a history of labor unions by Michael Huberman, the
growth of the welfare state by Peter Lindert and the progress of welfare as summarized by the
Human Development Index (HDI) by Leandro Prados. Taken together, they complement the
account of economic regimes by Frieden and Rogowski by providing information about the
spread of benefits to the population as a whole. Given their place at the end of Volume 2, they
can be taken as conclusions to the preceding chapters, but they also may seem to exhausted
readers as an afterthought to the standard narrative.
Huberman makes clear that the spread of the benefits of capitalism to working people was
not an automatic effect of capitalist growth. It was rather the result of political and economic
struggles between capitalists and their workers that had varied outcomes in different countries.
21

The overall history describes an arc, similar to the growth of manufacturing in the spread of
industrialization and its decline—particularly in the West—as we move into a post-industrial
globalized world. Huberman closes with cautious optimism about the future of unions.
Lindert’s chapter, described more fully in the previous section, also describes an arc in the
development of public assistance. As with Huberman, the growth of capitalism has led to
problems with the continuation of the public assistance. But while Huberman focused on
globalization, Lindert concentrates on the health and longevity of individuals.
Prados uses the HDI, composed of per-capita income, education, and longevity, to describe
the effects of economic growth around the world. This measure indicates the familiar divergence
in the past generation as globalization affects the OECD and the rest of the world differently. It
expands our view from simply GDP to include health and education, showing that health
improvement is now declining in importance relative to income and education.
The three preceding chapters deviate from this overall optimistic narrative to describe rough
spots in the progress of capitalism. Harold James provides a narrative of international economic
relations separated into periods. But while Frieden and Rogowski tread lightly over the first half
of the twentieth century, James focuses on it. He evaluates the role of international monetary
arrangements in the interwar period and their progress in the latter half of the century. True to
title of this historical volume, James largely ignores the non-capitalist communists and fascists.
Austin investigates the roles of colonies, starting from Marx’s assertion that colonies
contributed to the spread of capitalism by uprooting pre-capitalist institutions. Filled with
examples that illustrate the variety of colonial experience, this chapter takes a different view.

22

Although colonies aided British industrialization, they also impeded the spread of industry
outside of Europe. Colonialism led to de-industrialization in India and elsewhere, contributing to
the growing diversity of incomes noted in other chapters.
Harrison’s chapter focuses on the economic effects of wars. In contrast to most chapters that
ignore wars as interruptions to the sweep of history, this chapter returns to the framework of
conventional history and emphasizes the economic role of wars. Asking whether capitalism
favors war or profits from war, he finds only weak support for positive answers to these
suggestions. While the world wars loom large in our histories, we are fortunate that large wars
have become infrequent enough to let the diversity of experience overwhelm many
generalizations about the causes and effects of wars (Pinker, 2011).
The next three chapters, working backward through Volume 2, turn us away from national
affairs to business ones—to the stuff of capitalism, as it were. Geoffrey Jones examines multinational companies. Morck and Yeung, as described earlier, look at business groups. And
Ranald Michie surveys international transfers of money. These topics are all results of the
formation of nations, being measured within and between countries, but their unit of analysis is
firms of one sort or another.
Michie surveys the history of bills of exchange. He does not extoll their efficiency over
many centuries or explain the intricacies of their use. Instead, he chronicles their replacement by
government transfers in the world wars. They did not recover their former place in international
finance after the wars, being replaced by tools used by the large firms analyzed in the other two
essays of this group. He compares two kinds of banking systems, universal banks or a system of
branches and banking networks. They both work, without a clear leader in this telling. While
23

praising the innovativeness of finance since the Industrial Revolution, Michie also cautions us in
evocative words for today: “[F]inancial capitalism also possessed seeds of its own destruction,
resulting in successive crises which had the effect of destroying many of the gains made in
previous years, and some of these were of such magnitude that that their consequences were both
deep and prolonged (II, 261).”
Morck and Yeung on one hand and Jones on the other describe large business entities.
Morck and Yeung look at the common ownership of different companies, while Jones looks at
the activities of single firms active in different countries. It seems on the surface that Morck and
Yeung are looking at domestic business organizations, while Jones is examining international
business organizations. It is not clear to the outsider of this field why one form or the other was
chosen in a particular instance. Perhaps it would be useful to compare the efficiency of these
alternate arrangements in some comparable settings. Morck and Yeung use agency theory to
criticize the use of business groups; were those same problems present in multi-national firms?
Jones reports that multi-national firms were important in the growth of globalization. They
were very good at transferring money around the world, as indicated also by Michie, but less
skilled in transferring technology around the world. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to
inquire why the transfer of technology was difficult, but one possible reason is the different
factor prices in the home and foreign countries. Allen argues that the barrier to the spread of
industrialization was not lack of finance, but rather lack of appropriate technology. Jones notes
that multi-national companies originated in the earlier stages of industrialization and were based
in early industrializers. They now have been joined by multi-national based in China, India and

24

other developing countries. It will be a test of Allen’s views to see if the growth of these firms
leads to the spread of industrial technology.
The final group of chapters to discuss in Volume 2 includes the first ones in the volume.
Allen’s contribution has already been described. It is complemented by a chapter on the growth
of agriculture by Giovanni Federico which opens with the claim that, “cities could not have
developed without the commercialization of agriculture (II, 47).” Agricultural output increased
as cities grew during industrialization. This started out as extensive growth as trade allowed
more lands to be tilled in more places and sent to cities. It changed to intensive growth around
1950 as labor productivity in agriculture began to increase as well. Americans date the closing
of the frontier and the beginning of intensive growth for the economy as a whole a half-century
earlier. Agriculture followed on a world scale with a lag.
There is a problem in the contrast between this chapter and the following ones on multinational firms and business groups. Federico argues that small productive units continue to
dominate agriculture: “[A]griculture has remained dominated by small productive units managed
by single households, not by giant corporations (II, 78).” Governments have served as a counterweight to the corporations to protect farmers, although Federico claims the government
sometimes taxes consumers to support farmers. But this contrast suggests also that we may be
drawing the boundary of agriculture too tightly for the modern world. Agro-business and
transport are both essential to the growth of agricultural production and its distribution to
consumers. Perhaps history would be clearer if “agriculture” included them and exposed
parallels with other large companies, with farmers as a competitive fringe of small suppliers. Is
modern agriculture more like modern mining than pre-industrial agriculture?
25

Kristine Bruland and David Mowery expand Allen’s story of the spread of industrialization
by describing a second generation of technical innovations. Speaking of a Second Industrial
Revolution between 1870 and 1914, they identified three industries to match cotton textiles, iron
and the steam engine a century earlier: the internal combustion engine, electric power and light,
and organic chemicals (II, 86). These innovations still dominate our lives today if we count
antibiotics and the resulting increase in the HDI as highly productive parts of the organic
chemical industry.
Bruland and Mowery argue that governments supported and helped to institutionalize
continuing productivity in these and other industries. Starting before the First World War,
government expanded during the war and stayed high. Government followed this pattern in
agriculture, as just noted, although it may have focused more on preserving old practices there
and newer practices here. In both cases, however, they show that modern capitalism is not
simply a private affair. The institutions of capitalism are a combination of private and public
initiatives, organizations and rules, as noted in the previous section of this review.
The involvement of government, Neal’s fourth component of capitalism, was deemed
important enough to merit its own chapter. Ron Harris completes the first group of chapters in
Volume 2 in an attempt to discover what kind of laws promote economic progress. He argues
that law was transformed in the nineteenth century to deal with new problems posed by
agricultural expansion and new industries. There were, as noted prominently in the economic
literature of the past few decades, two legal traditions in industrialized countries. The common
law was the basis of English law, while Roman law was the basis of continental European law.
In each case, neighbors and colonies adopted the legal tradition of the countries they were tied to.
26

There has been a lively debate as to which tradition was most conducive to economic growth, but
Harris concludes that, “no consensus emerged as to the first best rules and institutions (II, 162).”
This brings us to the beginning of Volume 2 and the end of the chapters it contains. The
chapters described here were introduced by Kevin O’Rourke and Jeffrey Williamson and
followed by an essay on the future of capitalism by Neal and Williamson. They note in the latter
essay that these volumes were planned before the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and published
after then. This raises questions about the future of capitalism that the editors pose without
comment.

Chapters of Volume 1
I turn now to Volume 1, which I argue above should be seen as the growth of what Hicks
called the mercantile economy and I called a market economy (Temin, 2013). Capitalism as I
have defined it, and I think the common use concurs, does not appear until Chapter 3 of Volume
2. Only in the Second Industrial Revolution of the second half of the nineteenth century do the
quantity of business capital and the factories that produce items made from the new technology
get large enough to speak of capitalism, heralded by Marx in 1848.
This volume is organized more coherently than Volume 2. It consists of three groups of
chapters that describe ancient economies, economies of early-modern Europe, and the Industrial
Revolution. Separating these sections are groups of chapters surveying economies outside
Europe. The first intermediate group looks at the Silk Road, China, India, and the Middle East.
The second intermediate group describes Latin America, Africa, and Native American Indians. I
27

maintain the practice of working backward though the volume, but I will go forward within each
group.
The ending three chapters of Volume 1 provide a fuller account of the Industrial Revolution
than Allen’s brief restatement at the start of Volume 2. C. Knick Harley reviews the extensive
literature on the Industrial Revolution, from the statistical innovations by Deane and Cole to the
more abstract arguments of Brenner and Gerschenkron. He describes the innovations of the
Industrial Revolution and the first stages of the spread of industrialization within Europe. He
stresses the long preparation for industrialization that is only summarized in Figure 1, taken from
Harley’s chapter. The efficiency of English agriculture, the urbanization that this allowed, and
the growing international trade that attracted workers to urban activities all were part of the story
of British progress. Although Harley’s and Allen’s essays are in different volumes of this
collection, the thoughts and analyses they contain flow easily from one to the other.
Jeremy Atack follows with a rousing account of American economic growth. We tend to
think of France and Belgium as Britain’s closest neighbors, but North America was economically
also contiguous to the British Isles. Culturally, the United States was of course even closer than
the Continent. Harley’s account of pre-conditions is echoed by Atack’s description of American
society, and Allen’s Standard Model describes American policies. With British institutions and
American resources, Atack argues that progress and prosperity were inevitable.
José Luis Cardoso rounds out the account of early industrialization by examining the changes
in ideas and doctrines that accompanied this dramatic change. He traces the intellectual path
from Mercantilism to Laissez-faire, discusses the setting and contributions of Smith, Malthus and
Ricardo, and introduces Say’s ideas of aggregate supply and demand. He closes his chapter and
28

the volume by noting the publication in 1848 of both Marx’s Communist Manifesto and Mill’s
Principles of Political Economy. While Marx built on previous ideas to predict doom and
conflict due to diminishing returns and limited resources, Mill drew on changes in the economy
to predict economic progress that would lead to better, not worse, conditions. The attentive
reader can see the world shifting underfoot in the mid-nineteenth century.
Before we go on to descriptions of the build-up to these changes, three chapters urge us to
pause to consider the rest of the world. They each focus on the effects of the expansion of
Europe on regions that did not industrialize in the early nineteenth century. Richard Salvucci
argues that markets were ubiquitous in Mesoamerica, but they did not dominate economic
activity enough to be market economies (I, 405). He describes the European use of Latin
America primarily as a mining camp, taking out gold from the indigenous settlers, silver from
the ground and agricultural products from the plains and tropics of South America. Given the
time frame of Volume 1, he only alludes briefly to the controversy that has swirled around the
long-run effects on that area.
The other two chapters in this group focus on the organization of economic activity separate
from the effects of Europe, although they all refer to questions in the recent development
literature about the disturbance from the invaders. Morten Jerven argues that there was a lot of
Hicksian market activity in indigenous Africa, but nothing like capitalism. Ann Carlos and
Frank Lewis argue that the Native American economy was even more primitive, closer to Hicks’
customary economy. Native Americans were primarily hunters and gatherers, and the gift giving
and other interactions that characterize their activities were the practices that Hicks drew on for
his theory. There also was the adaptation of customary gift giving to promote more modern fur
29

trading in North America, but this was not the major economic activity, even though it generated
most of the surviving data.
Africa was more advanced, and Jerven refers back to Polanyi’s version of the Hicksian triad
to describe the literature. He argues for the presence of trade in products, the first stage in Hicks’
progress of the market, in various places. Instead of Polanyi’s conclusion that markets were
absent before industrialization, Jerven describes pockets of markets in a basically customary
agricultural economy, albeit for products, not factors of production, rather like Salvucci’s
description of Latin America. This more complex view provides concrete examples for the early
stages of market development that Hicks described with European history in mind. This chapter
raises questions about the development of factor markets in the early stages of markets that were
considered only briefly by Hicks.
Returning to the main European narrative, we find chapters on the early modern period. Karl
Gunnar Persson’s chapter on the medieval economy provides a kind of bridge between the
chapters on outlying areas just described and the main narrative because it deals with Europe
dealing with “the ruins left by the disintegrated Roman empire (I, 225)” at the start of the second
millennium CE. How far had Europe come in the next half-millennium? The chapter concludes
that the progress showed “capitalism in its infancy (I, 260-61).”
The newness of this view is shown by the absence of Bloch’s classic Feudal Society (1961)
from this chapter and its bibliography. Bloch explained how Europe managed to begin the
process of recovery in the Roman ruins, moving from chaos to some kind of defense based on a
land-based system of service that developed into what has been called feudalism. Bloch

30

explained the set-up for Shakespeare’s King Lear, where kings had to move to food instead of
food moving to kings because it was safer to move a few armed men than a bulk cargo of grain.
None of this is in this chapter. Instead, we learn about fledgling goods markets, the decline
of serfdom, and even the occasional land sale. The reader assumes there must have been some
reason for the introduction of, say, serfdom, but he or she will not find it here. This chapter
shows the effect of focusing on the rise of capitalism noted in the previous section. It puts the
focus on nascent activities in early periods that anticipate later changes rather than on the
primary activities of people in the period under observation. This chapter flattens out history to
make a simple monotonic—albeit slow moving—process toward the pinnacle of capitalism. It
fails to celebrate the uniqueness of the economic arrangements of medieval Europe. Gunnar
Persson however reiterates the quantitative issue raised in the last section: “The essential
question is not whether markets existed but how penetrating markets were in daily life (I, 227).”
And this explains why, despite his enthusiasm, he finds only capitalism in its infancy in medieval
Europe.
The following chapter by Luciano Pezzolo describes the economy of another part of Europe
in the same medieval time. Pezzolo argues that the great trading cities of Italy trod the early path
toward capitalism. This was the path to a mercantile economy that Hicks (1969, Chapter 3)
outlined in his theory, and Italy provides an example—perhaps the only example—of this
historical development.
Pezzolo focuses on Venice, Genoa and Florence, the triad of great trading cities. This of
course is where the records are, and they are exploited well in this chapter. But this focus raises
an uncomfortable question. Is the development of a mercantile economy dependent on the path
31

of three cities? Is there a small population of successful cities with the attendant randomness in
Hicks’ theory? Of course, there was only one Industrial Revolution, and we must make do with
the history we have.
The process Pezzolo chronicles is the process that Hicks outlined. Merchants were in control
of politics in these cities, and they adapted laws and procedures to further their commercial
activities. Elsewhere in medieval Europe, market activity was the exception rather than the rule,
as Gunnar Persson described. But in Italy at the same time, commerce and the trappings of
modern trading systems were evolving.
Oscar Gelderblom and Joost Jonker continue this story into the early modern period in the
next chapter, but returning to northern Europe. This hop-scotching around Europe provides
coverage of the continent, but it raises questions about causation. Pezzolo sees Italy as the cradle
of commerce, but Gelderblom and Jonker point to developments elsewhere. They both point to
trade as the stimulus for economic growth, but first in the Mediterranean Sea and then in the
Atlantic Ocean. It may be asking too much of a collection like this to draw the connections.
Their discussion of trade is complemented by Patrick O’Brien’s account of Britain.
Observing that trade and therefore growth is largely a peacetime activity, he tries to square this
view with Britain’s many wars in the early modern period. O’Brien argues that the British navy
was the key to British economic success. By its use, Britain’s wars could be kept away from
Britain itself, inhibiting progress elsewhere while allowing the British economy to prosper.
Before we can search further for this story, we must acknowledge the editors’ device of
looking around the world periodically. In the first of them—and so the last to be described—

32

Étienne de la Vaissiére recounts the rise and decline of the Silk Road, the overland route from
Europe to the East. Pezzolo and Gerlderblom and Jonker regard seaborne trade as the source of
progress, and Vaissiére seems to agree. R. B. Wong describes “China before capitalism” as
having few large landowners and no large commercial firms. He says that in China, “It is not
easy to make a clear distinction between custom, market and command in the manner conceived
by Hicks (I, 151).” Tirthankar Roy provides a view of India that is more political than economic,
explaining how the Mutiny (of the mid nineteenth century) resulted in making India into a
British colony. Sevket Pamuk argues that the Middle East prospered in the eighth through the
eleventh centuries, but then fell behind Europe. The following chapters by Gunnar Persson and
Pezzolo—already described—celebrate vigorous growth in Medieval Europe. Pamuk describes
institutional change in the Ottoman Empire, but acknowledges the limited political power of
merchants. There was no Middle Eastern analog of the Italian city states.
We now pick up the beginning of the story of Volume 1 in ancient economies. We can tie
the three first chapters together by referring to Hicks’ phases of mercantile development (Hicks,
1969, pp. 61-62). The first stage has merchants trading in an economy that was largely nonmercantile, using custom or command. The second phase has merchants in city states, where
they are strong enough to bring city states and their governments into mercantile activities. And
the final, modern phase is where mercantile activity pervades an entire country. The three
chapters on antiquity trace out this progression.
Michael Jursa describes economic progress in Babyonia during “the long sixth century”
BCE. He describes merchant activity, but does not assert that the whole economy was engaged
in this activity. Alain Bresson describes the growth of Greek city states in Greece’s golden age.
33

Hicks cited Greece in support of his theory, and Bresson fills in some of the history of this
second phase of mercantile activity. Willem Jongman goes on to describe the early Roman
empire as the third, modern phase of mercantile development.
Jongman confines himself to showing the increase in the quantity and quality of Roman
consumption. He neglects the mercantile part of the generation of this prosperity. The Pax
Romana extended around the Mediterranean Sea and allowed Roman provinces to specialize in
products where they had a comparative advantage. “The city of Rome stood at the peak of a
pyramid of rising [wheat] prices (Hopkins, 2009, p. 191).” This pyramid reveals the existence of
enough Mediterranean trade to make provincial wheat prices approximate the price in Rome
minus the cost of transportation. The resulting regional specialization must have increased living
standards by itself, although recent research has found evidence of technical change as well.
Jongman’s information reveals the looseness of the Malthusian model; there was room for
sustained high incomes before the Industrial Revolution.
To end this survey on a high note, I estimated—on the basis of very scant Roman data—that
per-capita incomes in first century Roman Italy were as high as per-capita income in early
modern Holland, bringing Gelderblom and Jonker together with Jongman (Temin, 2013, Chapter
11). But while both of these prosperous places were exceptional in pre-industrial history, neither
of them gave rise to the Industrial Revolution. We return to Allen’s chapter in Volume 2 for the
most likely reason. They did not have Britain’s combination of high wages and cheap power.
Holland used peat, an expensive fuel, and Rome used manpower with only a little water power.
Just high wages in a progressive economy was not sufficient; cheap power was also needed to
move mercantile or market economies into industrial ones.
34

Conclusions
The Cambridge History of Capitalism is a high-quality addition to the previous Cambridge
histories of other ideas, places and times. The many chapters are written by senior scholars who
survey topics with mastery and erudition. Like other Cambridge histories, this is a good
reference work.
As a collection of essays, this two-volume work turns out to contain two distinct arguments.
The second volume surveys the spread of capitalism since the Industrial Revolution. The first
volume surveys the extent of markets and market economies in the previous two or more
millennia. The second volume takes its underlying model from Douglass North; the first
volume, from John Hicks. The second volume has econometrics and other hypothesis tests in the
background. The first volume is based on case studies and often sparse underlying data. The
second volume will be a useful reference for economists; the first volume will be of interest
primarily to economic historians.
The first volume suffers from the attempt to make it look like the second. The repeated
references to capitalism in economies that lacked industrial capital and wage labor are confusing.
Instead of making economies in different places and times distinct, this modern term in chapter
titles and texts makes chapters into one-dimensional measures of capitalist tendencies. Some
authors transcend this organization, but the narrow focus reduces the value of Volume 1.
Why was Volume 1 forced into this Procrustean bed? One possibility is that this history was
commissioned to glorify capitalism as the natural and even inevitable organization of economic
35

activity. If this presentation is used to oppose economic regulation or concerted effort to combat
global warming, it will be seen as a very restricted view of history.

36

Figure 1
Urban real wage Europe, laborers, fourteenth to twentieth centuries

Source: Neal and Williamson, 2014, Vol. 1, p. 496 (Harley).

37

Figure 2
Tax collection costs as a percentage of the amounts collected by central governments, United
States and United Kingdom, 1787/96-2011.

Source: Neal and Williamson, 2014, Vol. 2, p. 487 (Lindert).

38

Figure 3
Modes of Behavior
Source: Temin, 1980.

1
Instrumental
Behavior

Figure 3

Command
Behavior

Personal
Autonomy

T

T

T
Customary behavior

0

0

1
Contextual Change

39

References

Alesina, Alberto F., Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “On the Origin of Gender Roles: Women
and Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2013), 469-530.
Allen, Robert C., “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from the Middle Ages
to the First World War,” Explorations in Economic History, 38 (October 2001), 411-47.
Allen, Robert C., The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009).
Allen, Robert C., Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011).
Ashton, T. S., The Industrial Revolution (London: Oxford University Press, 1948).
Sven Beckert, Angus Burgin, Peter James Hudson, Louis Hyman, Naomi Lamoreaux, Scott
Marler, Stephen Mihm, Julia Ott, Philip Scranton, and Elizabeth Tandy Shermer, “The
History of Capitalism,” Journal of American History, 101:2 (September 2014), 503–36.
Berle, Adolf A., Jr. and Gardner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private Property (New
York: Macmillan, 1932).
Bloch, Marc, Feudal Society (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961).
Bromley, Daniel W., Sufficient Reason (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).

40

Chandler, Alfred D., Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the Industrial Enterprise (Camridge:
MIT Press, 1962).
Dennison, Tracy, and Sheilagh Ogilvie, “Does the European Marriage Pattern Explain Economic
Growth?” Journal of Economic History, 74 (September 2014), 651-93.
Diamond, Jared M., Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (New York: Viking,
2005).
Galor, Oded, Unified Growth Theory (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011).
Hajnal, John, “European Marriage Patterns in Perspective,” in David V. Glass and David E. C.
Eversley (eds.), Population in History (London: Edward Arnold, 1965).
Hicks, John, A Theory of Economic History (London: Oxford University Press, 1969).
Hopkins, Keith, “The Political Economy of the Roman Empire,” in Ian Morris and Walter
Scheidel (eds.), The Dynamics of Ancient Empires (New York: Oxford University Press,
2009), pp. 178-204.
Lamoreaux, Naomi R., Daniel M. G. Raff, and Peter Temin, “Beyond Markets and Hierarchies:
Toward a New Synthesis of American Business History,” American Historical Review,
108 (April 2003), 404-33.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, “”Corporate Ownership around the World,”
Journal of Finance, 114 (1999), 1193-1242.
Leontief, Wassily, “When Should History be Written Backwards?” Economic History Review, 16
(1963), 1-8.
41

Mehrling, Perry, Fischer Black and the Revolutionary Idea of Finance (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley,
2005).
Mokyr, Joel, The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1750-1850 (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2009).
More, Thomas, Saint, 1478-1535, Utopia (London: Penguin, 2012).
Neal, Larry, and Jeffrey G. Williamson (eds.), The Cambridge History of Capitalism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Cambridge, Harvard University Press,
2014).
Pinker, Steven, The Better Angels of our Nature: Why Violence has Declined (New York:
Penguin, 2011).
Polanyi, Karl, The Livelihood of Man (New York: Academic Press, 1977).
Rostow, W. W., The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1960).
Sahlins, Marshall, Stone Age Economics (Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1972).
Temin, Peter, “Modes of Behavior,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1 (June
1980), 175-195.
Temin, Peter, The Roman Market Economy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2013).
42

Voitländer Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth, “How the West ‘Invented’ Fertility Restriction,”
American Economic Review, 103 (2013), 2227-64.
Zola, Émile, L’Assommoir (The Drinking Den) (London: Penguin, 2000 [1876]).

43

