                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE POWER OF THE STREET:
                         EVIDENCE FROM EGYPT'S ARAB SPRING

                                         Daron Acemoglu
                                         Tarek A. Hassan
                                         Ahmed Tahoun

                                       Working Paper 20665
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20665


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2014




We thank Jesse Shapiro, Matt Gentzkow, Nancy Quian, Larry Katz, Laurence van Lent, Erik Meyersson,
Mohamed Mostagir, Jacopo Ponticelli, and Antoinette Schoar for helpful comments. We also thank
Karim Ouda (CEO of 25trends.me) for providing a valuable list of Twitter users, and thank seminar
participants the University of Chicago, CIFAR, Duke University, IIES Stockholm, IfW Kiel, Stanford,
Yale, and the NBER Political Economy meeting for valuable discussions. Leland Bybee, Xavier Jaravel,
Racha Khalil, Chris Natoli, Souzan Mansour, Siladitya Mohanti, and Hongcen Wei provided excellent
research assistance. All mistakes remain our own. Hassan is grateful to the Fama-Miller Center at
the University of Chicago for providing financial support. Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial
support from ARO MURI W911NF-12-1-0509. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu, Tarek A. Hassan, and Ahmed Tahoun. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Power of the Street: Evidence from Egypt's Arab Spring
Daron Acemoglu, Tarek A. Hassan, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 20665
November 2014
JEL No. E02,G12,G3,O11,O43,O53

                                             ABSTRACT

During Egypt's Arab Spring, unprecedented popular mobilization and protests brought down Hosni
Mubarak's government and ushered in an era of competition between three groups: elites associated
with Mubarak's National Democratic Party (NDP), the military, and the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood.
Street protests continued to play an important role during this power struggle. We show that these
protests are associated with differential stock market returns for firms connected to the three groups.
Using daily variation in the number of protesters, we document that more intense protests in Tahrir
Square are associated with lower stock market valuations for firms connected to the group currently
in power relative to non-connected firms, but have no impact on the relative valuations of firms connected
to other powerful groups. We further show that activity on social media may have played an important
role in mobilizing protesters, but had no direct effect on relative valuations. According to our preferred
interpretation, these events provide evidence that, under weak institutions, popular mobilization and
protests have a role in restricting the ability of connected firms to capture excess rents.


Daron Acemoglu                                      Ahmed Tahoun
Department of Economics, E18-269D                   London Business School
MIT                                                 26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
77 Massachusetts Avenue                             NW1 4SA London
Cambridge, MA 02139                                 atahoun@london.edu
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

Tarek A. Hassan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
tarek.hassan@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction
From the Arab Spring to the recent uprising against Victor Yanukovic’s government in
Ukraine, corruption and favoritism have motivated people to pour into the streets to
protest against the economic and political arrangements benefiting connected individuals
and firms. Such protests have sometimes been successful in unseating unpopular rulers,
as illustrated by the recent events in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Ukraine. But are they
effective at limiting the extent of corruption and favoritism that set them off in the first
place?
    This paper strives to shed light on this question by studying Egypt’s Arab Spring.
On February 11, 2011, Hosni Mubarak, Egypt’s president and de facto dictator since his
accession to power in 1981, was forced to resign in the face of large protests in the main
square of Cairo, Tahrir Square. Mubarak’s regime was a perfect specimen of economic
favoritism and corruption underpinned by the monopolization of political power by a nar-
row group centered around his National Democratic Party (NDP). Rampant corruption
and repression, which excluded vast segments of the population from political partici-
pation, was a major trigger of the protests. Mubarak’s fall was followed by a phase of
military rule until June 2012, when Mohammed Mursi, an Islamist, was elected president.
Mursi’s presidency in turn was followed by a second phase of military rule starting in July
2013. Throughout these four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring, politically connected firms
(in particular, those connected to the NDP, the military, and the Islamists) have seen
their fortunes ebb and flow, offering a window to study the real-time effects of episodic
street protests against a changing cast of ruling political elites.
    Our primary approach for discerning the impact of street protests and the events that
they triggered is to study their influence on the stock market valuations of different types
of firms. This methodology estimates the value of political connections from changes
in the relative stock market valuations of politically connected firms following shifts in
political power. It is particularly useful when there is a well-defined set of connected
firms, as is the case in Egypt, and when direct measures of corruption and the shifting
rent-seeking abilities of different groups of firms are unavailable (as they often are).
    We begin our analysis with a series of event studies, which both illustrate the major
political events of Egypt’s Arab Spring and document the value of political connections.
We find that in the nine trading days following Mubarak’s fall, the value of firms connected
to the NDP fell by about 13% relative to the value of non-connected firms, indicating a
perception of major rent shifts away from these firms in the Egyptian Stock Exchange.
Since NDP-connected firms were often viewed to gain significant advantage from state-
sanctioned monopolies, this result is quite plausible. Consistent with some degree of
anticipation of subsequent political changes in Egypt, some specifications also show an
increase in the value of military-connected firms. Since Mubarak’s fall was partially
precipitated by the military’s withdrawal of support, it is plausible for market participants
to have expected an increased political and economic role by the military in the subsequent
months — an expectation that events since then have borne out. We further document
the subsequent upheaval in Egyptian politics following Mubarak’s fall, and show that the


                                             1
key events that impacted the power of the military and the Islamists during this period
are reflected in the stock market returns of firms connected to these groups.
    Our main results focus on the direct effect of street protests on the returns of politically
connected firms. Using information from Egyptian and international print and online
media, we construct a daily estimate of the number of protesters in Tahrir Square and
analyze the effect of these protests on the returns of firms connected to the group then in
power. Our specifications estimate the differential changes in the stock market values of
different types of connected firms relative to non-connected firms as a function of the size
of the protests. They show a robust and quantitatively large impact of larger protests
on the returns of firms connected to the incumbent group. For example, a turnout of
500,000 protesters in Tahrir Square lowers the market valuation of firms connected to the
incumbent group by 0.8% relative to non-connected firms. Interestingly, we do not find
an offsetting gain in the value of “rival” (non-incumbent) connected groups, a finding that
will be important for our interpretation below. We also verify that the association between
street protests and the stock market valuations of politically connected firms is not just a
reflection of spikes in protests during some of the key events already mentioned above. In
other words, even during periods when protests did not lead to changes in governments
or institutions, protest activity is strongly associated with swings in the relative stock
market valuations of (incumbent) connected firms.
    We further use data from the universe of tweets by Egyptian Twitter users during this
period to shed light on several interrelated questions. First, we document that activity
on Twitter predicts protests in Tahrir Square, suggesting that social media has helped
coordinate street mobilizations. Second, we also find that this social media activity has
no direct effect on stock market valuations with or without simultaneously conditioning
on street protests. Third, we investigate whether the cohesiveness of the coalition under-
pinning street protests has played a role in the relationship between protests and relative
stock market valuations of connected firms. Using the “opposition turnover rate,” which
we measure from changes in retweeting activity of different types of messages, we find
some evidence that a less cohesive opposition (that is, a higher opposition turnover rate)
reduces the impact of protests on the stock market valuation of firms connected to the
incumbent group.
    There are several possible interpretations of these findings. The first is that the differ-
ential fluctuation in the stock market valuation of connected and non-connected firms is
unrelated to the value of political connections, but reflects the heterogeneous responses of
firms with different characteristics to macroeconomic shocks during this tumultuous pe-
riod. We believe that this is unlikely to be the case. In addition to controlling for various
firm-level characteristics and for the sectors in which each firm operates, our methodol-
ogy easily lends itself to the study of the timing of responses and to various falsification
exercises. We consistently find that the relative valuations of politically connected firms
change immediately following protests and key political events, and not before. Moreover,
we find no systematic differential effects during other major economic and political events
before the onset of Egypt’s Arab Spring. In addition, we also study the changes in prof-
itability and in the board composition of different types of firms during these episodes.

                                               2
We find not only lower profitability of NDP-connected firms after Mubarak’s fall, but
also generally higher profits for firms associated with the group currently in power. Con-
sistent with this observation, Egyptian firms appear to have shifted the composition of
their boards to include more representatives from the group currently in power during
each phase of Egypt’s Arab Spring. For example, during military rule firms tended to
hire military officers and fire NDP members. The evidence thus suggests that Egyptian
firms are not only aware of the value of connections to the incumbent group, but have
also made efforts to cultivate these connections at short notice.
    The second interpretation is that what we are finding is an instance of pure rent
reallocation within the Egyptian economy — without any influence on the overall extent
of corruption, favoritism, and rents captured by connected firms. For example, it is
possible that Mubarak’s fall left the amount of corruption and rent-seeking resulting from
monopolies, insider deals, and financial improprieties essentially unchanged, and merely
shifted these benefits from NDP- to military-connected firms. Though the reaction of
the stock market following Mubarak’s fall indicates that this is plausible, most of our
results suggest that there is more than pure rent reallocation going on. While protests
and certain other key events caused major drops in the relative stock market valuation of
firms connected to the incumbent group, we find no positive impact on the stock market
valuation of firms connected to the other two, rival groups (again relative to non-connected
firms). If anything, the point estimates are consistently negative, suggesting that what
we are uncovering is more than a mere reallocation of rents within the well-defined group
of connected firms.1
    The third possibility is that protests are simply a marker for broader discontent within
society, and that this broader discontent is correlated with the likelihood of a future major
regime change (e.g., a coup or constitutional change). Then, as the probability of such
events changes, the net present discounted value of future expected rents for connected
firms respond. Though we find this quite plausible, our evidence suggests that this is
also not the entirety of the story. To start with, our results from Twitter data indicate
that differential stock market valuations are correlated with actual protests, but not with
various types of (anti-government) activity on social media, underscoring the importance
of protests rather than just general discontent in moving the perceptions about rent
capture in the economy. Moreover, during many of the key episodes, there was no change
in political institutions or government, nor did it appear likely that such a change would
be forthcoming anytime soon, which also weighs against the interpretation that these
results merely reflect changes — or expectations of imminent changes — in the identity
of the government.
    The fourth possibility is that large protests change the future distribution of political
power in society, for example, by solving the collective action problem of certain groups
and mobilizing them. If so, spikes in protests can be a source of de facto power in a society
with weak political institutions and act as a constraint on the ability of connected firms
to siphon off rents. This interpretation is made somewhat more plausible by the results in
  1
   This of course does not rule out the possibility that rents will be captured by some other set of
newly-emerging connected firms (e.g., firms forming new connections as political winds change).


                                                 3
the previous literature that protests during various critical periods have an autonomous
impact both on future protests and on certain economic and political outcomes ( Aidt and
Franck (2014), Collins and Margo (2007), Madestam, Shoag, Veuger, and Yanagizawa-
Drott (2013); see our discussion below), and by our finding on the interplay between social
media activity and protests. In particular, one possible interpretation of our results using
the opposition turnover rate described above is that, consistent with an autonomous role
of protests in changing the future allocation of political power, a less cohesive opposition
is less effective even in the midst of street mobilization.
     Taken together, our preferred interpretation is a combination of the third and the
fourth possibilities provided above. It appears plausible that spikes in protests change
perceptions about future institutional changes. But the collage of evidence suggests that
this is not all that is going on. Rather, protest activity and the broader mobilization that
it generated appear to have acted as effective constraints on rent-seeking (or the market’s
perception of future rent-seeking).
     We should emphasize at this point that there are various threats to the validity of
our conclusions and also certain shortcomings of the methodology that we are utilizing.
First, as we have already indicated, there are several alternative interpretations, and even
though we have suggested that the totality of the evidence is not supportive of these
interpretations, our results do not completely rule them out. Second, by its nature, this
type of evidence focuses on the stock market participants’ perception of future rents. It
is possible that during this critical period, there was a decoupling of these perceptions
from the reality of corruption and favoritism within the Egyptian economy. Though our
results on firms’ efforts to change the composition of their boards suggests that this is
not the case, we are not completely able to rule out this possibility. Third, because we
do not know how much these events change the market participants’ perceptions, we are
unable to obtain estimates of the absolute extent of profits resulting from corruption and
favoritism in the Egyptian economy (e.g., our finding of a 13% change in the relative value
of NDP-connected firms in the first nine trading days after Mubarak’s fall may merely
represent a lower bound of the total value of these firms’ political connections). Finally,
given the very specific circumstances in Egypt during this time period, it is difficult to
draw inferences about the general impact of street protests and political mobilization on
political and economic outcomes in other institutional and historical settings. 2
     Our methodology builds on the literature on political connections, which uses stock
market returns as a measure of the (changing) value of politically connected firms. The
first study we are aware of using this is strategy is Roberts (1990) for the United States.
The seminal study in economics is Fisman (2001), who exploited rumors about Indonesian
President Suharto’s health and found that the value of connections accounted for 23% of
firms’ value in the Indonesian stock market during the mid-1990s. Johnson and Mitton
(2003) found that political connections accounted for 17% of the value of firms in the
the Malaysian stock market using the fall from power of Anwar Ibrahim, the Minister
of Finance. Similar results are found for Pakistan by Khwaja and Mian (2005) and for
   2
     Nevertheless, we believe that our work indicates a simple approach for studying this question in
different historical settings.


                                                 4
Weimar Germany by Voth and Ferguson (2008).3 Dube, Kaplan, and Naidu (2011) use
the same methodology to show how insiders captured gains from information about CIA-
supported coups (with stock market returns moving before the event). See also Dinç
(2005), Faccio (2006), Faccio, Masulis, and McConnell (2006), Leuz and Oberholzer-Gee
(2006), and Acemoglu, Johnson, Kermani, Kwak, and Mitton (2013) for various other
applications of this methodology. We differ from this literature by investigating the direct
effect of street protests on firms connected to current power holders and rival groups.
    The second literature we are building on studies the effect of protests and social un-
rest on political change. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006) emphasize the effect of
protests (and the threat of revolution) on changes in political regimes. In particular, they
suggest that protests which temporarily shift the de facto distribution of political power
in society may force a change in political institutions so as to alter the future distribution
of de jure political power. Several empirical and historical papers have found evidence
consistent with the idea that democratizations, particularly in 19 th -century Western Eu-
rope, have been associated with, and perhaps a response to, major uprisings, protests,
and revolutionary threats (e.g., Aidt and Jensen (2013), Aidt and Franck (2013)).4
    Some works in this literature have modeled the decision to take part in protests and
the implications of these endogenous protests on political equilibria (e.g., Kuran (1989,
1991), Lohmann (1994), Fearon (2011), Kricheli, Livne, and Magaloni (2011), and Bidner
and Francois (2013)). Another branch of the literature (e.g., Collins and Margo (2007),
Madestam et al. (2013)) is more closely related to our interpretation as it shows that short-
run, random factors that prevent or facilitate protests have a durable impact on political
organization and social and economic outcomes. To the best of our knowledge, this
literature has not investigated the role of street protests on constraining or redistributing
economic rents from favoritism and corruption. The closest result in the existing literature
is Chaney (2013) who documents the effect of drought in Egypt throughout the last several
centuries on ruler concessions to religious authorities, which he interprets as being a partial
response to the threat of protests and unrest. 5
    A related literature in economics and political science focuses on political instability
and its impact on economic outcomes (e.g., Alesina and Perotti (1996), Alesina, Özler,
Roubini, and Swagel (1996), Svensson (1998), Overland, Simons, and Spagat (2005), and
   3
     An important difference between this literature and our paper is that rather than focusing on changes
in government or collapses of certain regimes, we mostly focus on changes in the balance of power driven
by street mobilization, thus enabling us to shed light on whether such protests can restrain rent seeking
under otherwise weak institutions.
   4
     Another branch of this literature (e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson (2008)) raises the possibility that
politically powerful groups will be able to take offsetting actions in order to deal with popular pressures or
even institutional constraints on their power, thus re-creating some of the initial advantages and privileges
they had via different channels (this also builds on Michael’s’s Iron Law of Oligarchy, 1966, as discussed
in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012)). The fact that we find an increase in the value of military-connected
firms during Mubarak’s fall provides some support for this view, but taken as a whole, our results also
suggest that street protests do more than just reallocate rents between different powerful groups.
   5
     Campante and Chor (2012), Chaney (2012), Gilli (2012), and Kent and Phan (2014) discuss the
origins of the Arab Spring, but do not investigate the implications of street protests and the associated
events on the values of connected firms and rents in the Egyptian economy.


                                                      5
Haber, Maurer, and Razo (2004)). Though our work is also related to this literature,
we differ sharply in our interpretation. Rather than viewing all instability as a cause of
uncertainty and thus a discouragement to investment and growth, we show that certain
types of protests under weak institutions (as those in Egypt) may serve as a partial check
on rent-seeking activity.
    Another literature related to our work concerns the role of social media in political
events. Edmond (2013) provides a theoretical analysis of how social media impact col-
lective action and ruler responses. There is also a large literature in computer science on
using social media analysis for determining different political trends and political polar-
ization (e.g., Adamic and Glance (2005), and Weber, Garimella, and Batayneh (2013) in
the context of Egypt). Our paper contributes to this literature by showing the impact of
social media activity on street protests and also by clarifying how this activity might or
might not influence the extent and distribution of rents in the economy. 6
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our data
set and our classification of politically connected Egyptian firms into three rent-seeking
networks. Section 3 gives historical background and uses a series of event studies to
describe the power struggle between these three networks and its impact on the stock
market valuation of firms to which they are connected. Section 4 presents our main results
linking the number of protesters in Tahrir Square to the size of economic rents accruing
to connected firms. Section 5 investigates the impact of social media on protests, studies
whether discontent expressed on social media has an independent effect on differential
social returns, and explores the interaction between the cohesiveness of the opposition
and street protests. Section 6 concludes.


2       Data
Our dataset comprises 177 firms that were listed on the Egyptian stock exchange on
January 1, 2011. We obtain daily closing prices for each of these firms between January
1, 2005, and July 31, 2013, from Zawya, a financial data provider specializing in the
Middle East. The same vendor also provides accounting data and stock return indices.
We use these data to construct daily stock returns for each of the firms in our sample,
as well as quarterly measures of the size (total assets) and leverage (total debt over total
assets) of each firm.
    As standard controls, we estimate an Egyptian- and a world-market beta for each firm
by regressing the daily stock returns of each firm during the 2010 calendar year on the
returns on the MSCI-Egypt and MSCI-world indices, respectively:

                                        Rit = αxi + β xi Rtx + ν it ,                                   (1)
    A piece of evidence from a completely different context that is consistent with our finding that general
    6

discontent voiced on social media has limited political effects comes from the work of King, Pan, and
Roberts (2013) who show that Chinese censors permit expression of general discontent on social media
but aim to silence any attempt at mobilization for collective action.



                                                     6
where x = W orld, Egypt and Rit is the return on firm i between its previous trading day
and t (note that not all firms trade on each day in our sample). Rtx denotes the return on
the MSCI World and Egypt indices, respectively.
    As an additional control, we use the Global Data on Events, Location, and Tone
(GDELT) dataset to measure the sensitivity of each firm’s stock returns to general unrest
in the county. GDELT is an open-source project that uses English-language news sources
to compile a list of approximately 250 million political events that occurred across the
world from 1979 to the present. For each event, GDELT uses simple grammatical rules
to identify an action taken by an actor in a given location upon another actor (in essence,
subject, verb, object). We use this dataset to obtain a list of strikes, boycotts, riots, and
instances of ethnic clashes between Muslims and Copts (the Christian minority in Egypt)
that occurred between January 1, 2005, and Dec 31, 2010. We then regress the stock
returns for each firm on a dummy variable that is 1 on the two trading days following
one of the events on our list, and refer to the slope coefficient of this regression as “unrest
beta,”β Ui nrest .7

2.1     Connected Firms
Firms listed on the Egyptian stock exchange are required to publish quarterly reports
disclosing the names of their board members and principal shareholders. This requirement
came into effect during the first quarter of 2011, immediately before the onset of Egypt’s
Arab Spring.8 We downloaded these reports from the Egyptian stock exchange’s website
on a continuous basis.
    We classify a firm as connected to the NDP if the name of at least one of the firm’s
major shareholders or board members appears on a list of 6,000 prominent NDP members
posted online by activists in the aftermath of the fall of Mubarak’s regime. This list was
created as part of a campaign, “Emsek Felool” (“to catch remnants” of the old regime),
to publicly identify the cronies of the old regime. 9 The list gives the full name, rank
within the NDP, and any official function of each prominent NDP member by Egyptian
governorate. The types of functions it lists include members of parliament, aldermen,
and local and party council members. Our algorithm matches 19 names in 22 firms. (See
Appendix A.2 for details.)
    In accordance with the Egyptian constitution, the Egyptian military’s financial ac-
counts are outside the control of the civilian government (the “two tills” system). This
   7
     See Appendix A.1 for details on this procedure.
   8
     The first reports were filed for the second quarter of 2011, but they contain a section on the status
of board members and shareholder structure for the previous quarter, thus also covering the relevant
information for the first quarter of 2011.
   9
     For a description of the “Emsek Felool” internet and street campaign, see articles published
by the Guardian, (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/16/egypt-national-democratic-party-
members), and the Washington Post (http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/middle east/egyptians-
fear-return-of-mubarak-allies/2011/11/16/gIQAS58iTN story 1.html). At the time of writing, the origi-
nal list was no longer publicly available at http://www.emsekflol.com/. It is available from the authors
upon request.


                                                    7
system has historically allowed the Egyptian military to operate autonomously and build
a largely opaque empire of economic activities outside of civilian control ( Harb, 2003). We
classify listed firms as connected to the Egyptian military if they are wholly or partially
owned by the military “till.” We identify these firms by first selecting all state-owned hold-
ing companies, that is, government-owned entities that hold stock in listed firms, from the
Zawya database. Although these holdings do not officially declare which of the two “tills”
they are accountable to, we distinguish between military- and civilian-government-owned
holdings by checking whether the principal officers, shareholders, or board members of
the holding company (or any of its affiliated firms) are linked to the military. For this, we
use a variety of sources (see Appendix A.2 for details). Using this procedure, we obtain
a list of 12 military-owned holding companies that own stakes in listed firms. We then
classify a listed firm as connected to the Egyptian military if one of these 12 companies
appears on the list of its principal shareholders, giving us 33 military-connected firms in
total. Consistent with a strict division between military and civilian control, we find no
overlap between NDP- and military-connected firms.
    In addition to NDP- and military-connected firms, we also attempted to identify firms
connected to the Muslim Brotherhood by collecting the names of prominent members
from various sources and cross-referencing them with the names of principal owners and
board members of listed firms. Despite committing significant resources to this effort,
we identified only one connection to the Muslim Brotherhood. This negative finding
may indicate that the Muslim Brotherhood did not manage to penetrate listed firms
in the Mubarak era. An alternative explanation, which we find more plausible, is that
those involved may have been more likely to go to great lengths to conceal any such
connections, for the obvious reason that the Muslim Brotherhood was outlawed, and thus
operated underground for most of its existence. 10 As a partial substitute for identifying
links to the Muslim Brotherhood, we generate a dummy variable for firms that Zawya or
MSCI classify as operating according to Islamic principles. Both data vendors maintain
such classifications to enable Islamic investment. MSCI also uses this classification as
the basis for its Islamic stock return indices. For example, MSCI’s criteria require that
firms adhere to Islamic principles both in the conduct of their business (no investment in
firms that cumulatively derive more than 5% of their revenue from alcohol, tobacco, pork,
weapons, gambling, etc.) and in their financing (no “excessive” leverage or significant
income from interest, etc.). 11 We refer to these firms as “Islamic” because they are
likely to benefit relative to their competitors under an Islamist government. For ease of
reference, we also sometimes refer to them as “connected” or with some abuse of English,
“Islamic-connected.” Of the 13 Islamic firms, 8 are connected neither to the NDP nor to
the military and the remaining 5 are connected to the NDP.
    Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the three types of connected firms,
  10
     This is consistent with the fact that we were only able to compile a list of a few hundred names of
publicly known Muslim Brothers, in contrast to the NDP, for which we have a list of 6,000 members.
  11
     See MSCI’s website for details on this classification (http://www.msci.com/products/indexes/thematic/faith-
based/islamic/) and https://www.zawya.com/cm/analytics/default.cfm?full for the equivalent definition
used by Zawya.


                                                   8
where we refer to non-connected firms as those that fall into none of the three categories.
The table presents means and standard deviations of firm characteristics as of January
1, 2011, before the beginning of Egypt’s Arab Spring. The first panel gives statistics for
all firms. The second and third panels show the same statistics for connected versus non-
connected, as well as separately for NDP-, Military-, and Islamic-connected firms. On
average, NDP-connected firms have assets of 2,436 million Egyptian pounds and are thus
significantly larger than than the average military-connected firm (with assets of 240 mil-
lion Egyptian pounds). NDP-connected firms also tend to have somewhat higher leverage
(computed as total debt divided by total shareholder assets) than military-connected and
non-connected firms. Reassuring for our comparisons below is that all types of firms
appear to have similar Egyptian, world-market, and unrest betas on average.
    Table 2 shows the number of NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms in each of
the 16 sectors of the economy. Once again reassuringly, all types of firms have represen-
tation in a variety of sectors. For example, military-connected firms cluster in industrial
manufacturing but are also active in the food and beverage and the health care sectors.
Not surprisingly, Islamic firms are clustered in financial services, but are also active in
manufacturing, telecom, and real estate. Throughout our analysis, we include sector fixed
effects in our regressions.

2.2     The Number of Protesters in Tahrir Square
Our main specifications relate stock returns of firms connected to the incumbent regime
to daily variation in the number of protesters in Tahrir Square. We construct this series
using text analysis of 102 English-language newspapers published between January 2011
and July 2013 in Egypt and around the world. To this end, we downloaded all newspaper
articles containing the words “protesters”/“protestors” and “Tahrir” and “Egypt” from
newspapers in the category “major world publications” of the Lexis Nexis Academic
service and from all available English-language Egyptian news outlets (Al-Ahram Gate,
Al-Ahram Weekly, Al-Akhbar English, and Daily News Egypt). We supplemented this
pool of articles with the online content of Al-Masry Al-Youm, Al-Ahram English, and
Copts United in order to ensure that the Egyptian press our analysis covers is broadly
balanced between pro- and anti-regime news outlets. 12
    We then programmed an algorithm that isolates the number of protesters (usually a
term such as “hundreds”or “tens of thousands”) reported by each article and identifies the
day for which the number is reported (e.g., an article published on Tuesday might report
on events on the same day, the previous day, or even a day in the previous week). We then
assigned a numerical value to each word used. Finally, we set the number of protesters
equal to zero for all days on which fewer than three separate outlets report a protest,
and use the median number of protesters across outlets for all other days. Appendix
A.3 gives the details of this algorithm and a sample of our mapping between words and
  12
     The political leanings of these newspapers vary. Some of them are considered to be independent (e.g.,
Al-Masry Alyoum and Daily News Egypt) and others are considered loyal to the state (e.g., Al-Ahram
and Al-Akhbar).


                                                    9
numbers. Using the same algorithm, we also constructed a daily time series of the number
of protesters in Rabaa Square, which became the rallying point for pro-Islamist protesters
in the later stages of Egypt’s Arab Spring.
    Figure 1 plots the resulting estimates for the number of protesters in Tahrir Square for
each day through the end of July 2013. Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics
on the number of protesters for each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring and for
all four phases combined. “Tahrir Protesters” and “Rabaa Protesters” give the numbers
of protesters in thousands in Tahrir and Rabaa Square, respectively. The first phase
(Mubarak’s fall) has the highest number of Tahrir protesters with an average of 838,070
per trading day. Protests in Rabaa Square began under Islamist rule and reached their
peak in the fourth, post-Islamist, phase with an average of 6440 protesters per trading
day. Appendix Figure 1 shows the share of total Tahrir protesters over the sample period
by weekday. It shows that the largest protests tend to be on Fridays (32.55% of total
protesters), which is not surprising given that most Egyptians do not work on Fridays.
Because protests frequently occur on days on which the Egyptian stock exchange is closed
(typically Fridays and Saturdays), we assign the number of protesters turning out on
non-trading days to the following trading day in all specifications that relate returns to
protests.

2.3    Data from Social Media
In some of our specifications, we relate stock returns and the number of protesters in
Tahrir Square to activity on social media. In particular, we use data from Twitter to
construct a measure of mobilization for street protests, a measure of political support for
the political opposition, and a measure of the cohesiveness of the opposition.
    To construct these measures, we obtained a list of 318,477 Egyptian Twitter users who
tweeted at least once between July 1, 2013, and September 17, 2013, from an Egyptian
social media firm (25trends.me). Using the Twitter Application Programming Interface,
we downloaded the entire history of tweets made by each of these users. Although Twitter
limits the downloadable history of each user to 3,200 tweets, less than 20% of users exceed
this limit, enabling our procedure to cover the period back to January 1, 2011, in the
majority of cases. We end up with approximately 311 million tweets made by Egyptian
users between January 1, 2011, and July 31, 2013.
    As a simple measure for the degree of mobilization for street protests, we count the
tweets that contain hashtags referring to Tahrir Square on each day. We refer to this mea-
sure as “Tahrir hashtags.” As a robustness check, we also counted all tweets that contain
the words “Tahrir” anywhere in the body of the tweet. This alternative measure delivers
almost identical results. To mirror our empirical approach on street protests, we assign
tweets made during non-trading days to the following trading day in all specifications that
relate Tahrir hashtags to stock returns.
    To gauge the political support for the opposition on any given day, we used the fol-
lowing steps to count the retweets of tweets made by prominent opposition figures. First,
we identified the Twitter accounts of all prominent opposition figures that appear on the

                                            10
Socialbakers list of prominent Twitter accounts in Egypt. (Our definition of the political
opposition changes as groups move in and out of power. See Appendix A.4 for details.)
Second, we downloaded all daily tweets by these opposition figures. Third, we counted
the number retweets of these tweets on any given day. For robustness checks, we also
counted the number of unique retweeters of opposition figures as an alternative measure
of political support of the opposition (this again yields almost identical results).
    Finally, we used our Twitter data to construct a measure of the nature and cohesion
of the political opposition on a given day. We calculate the “opposition turnover rate,” in
analogy to an employee turnover rate, as the number of Twitter users who retweet a tweet
of an opposition leader in t − 1 but not in t, divided by the average number of retweeters
on the two days in percent. 13 This daily turnover in opposition re-tweets captures the
ability of opposition leaders to attract and retain re-tweeters. High turnover means low
retention of followers.
    See Appendix A.5 for details on the construction of our Twitter-based variables. Panel
B of Table 1 lists summary statistics.


3       Egypt’s Arab Spring and Its Impact on Rents
In this section, we provide a brief historical overview of Egyptian politics, emphasizing
the role of the three key power groups: the military, the NDP, and the Islamist movement.
We then describe the events during the Arab Spring while also using the standard event
study approach to document the impact of these political changes on the extent of rents
in the Egyptian corporate sector (as reflected in stock market valuations of connected
firms).

3.1       Historical Background
In 1952, a group of military officers (the “free officers”) surrounding Gamal Abdel Nasser
deposed the last Egyptian king and descendant of Ottoman viceroys, Farouk. 14 Af-
ter a brief reign by Mohammed Naguib, Nasser took over the presidency of the newly
proclaimed Republic of Egypt in 1954. The attempt to consolidate independence from
colonial powers, repeated conflicts with Israel, and socialist economic policy dominated
Nasser’s time in office. During the Suez crisis of 1956, British, French, and Israeli troops
invaded the Sinai and parts of mainland Egypt to reestablish Western control of the Suez
Canal. Although outgunned, the Egyptian government convinced the United States and
the Soviet Union to impose economic sanctions that resulted in the withdrawal of all
  13
    Formally, denoting the set of opposition retweeters in t as Tt, we have Opposition Turnover t =
   |Tt−1 ∩Tt |
                   where Tt−1 ∩ Tt denotes the intersection of Tt−1 and the complement of Tt .
0.5(|Tt−1 |+|Tt |) 100,
  14
    The general discussion in this section is based on Sayyid-Marsot (1985), Osman (2010), and Amin
(2011). For an in-depth discussion of the role of the Muslim Brotherhood and Islamists in Egypt and
around the world, see Kepel (1985), Riesebrodt (1993), and Kepel (2006). Kuran (2010) gives a general
discussion of the relationship between Islamism and economics. Classic references on Egyptian economic
history are Landes (1958), Issawi (1961), Owen (1969), and Hershlag (1980).


                                                 11
foreign forces. This diplomatic victory increased public support for a pan-Arab move-
ment with Nasser at its center, paving the way to a short-lived political union between
Egypt, Syria, and parts of Yemen (the “United Arab Republic,”1958-1962). Mounting
tensions over water in the Jordan valley and shipping disputes triggered the 1967 war
during which Israel occupied the Sinai, Gaza, the West Bank of the Jordan River, and
the Golan Heights.
    After Nasser’s death in 1970, Anwar Sadat, another member of the free officers and
Nasser’s long-time vice-president, reversed many of the socialist policies of his predecessor
and embarked on a policy of economic and political liberalization. In 1978, Sadat signed
a comprehensive peace deal with Israel that returned the Sinai to Egypt, broke Egyptian
ties with the Soviet Union, and permanently aligned Egypt to the West, but also largely
alienated it from its Arab allies. As part of the deal, the United States commenced
payment of an annual subsidy to the Egyptian military (US$1.3bn in 2008). 15
    In 1981, Sadat was assassinated by a radical Islamist. Hosni Mubarak, a former air
force officer and Sadat’s vice-president, acceded to the presidency, and ruled Egypt under
an emergency law that suspended civil rights and granted sweeping powers to the police
until his ouster during the Arab Spring. Mubarak continued his predecessor’s policies of
economic liberalization with some success. GDP per capita rose about five-fold during
his reign to US$2,973 in 2011. 16 However, the general view among Egyptians was that
the gains from growth were largely concentrated in the hands of Mubarak’s cronies.
    The internal balance of power since the formation of the Egyptian Republic in 1954
can be broadly characterized as a struggle between three centers of power: the military, a
group of secular elites and cronies of the regime organized in the ruling NDP, and various
Islamist movements centering around the Muslim Brotherhood. The prominent role of
the military is apparent from the fact in this republic founded by a military takeover all
presidents until the Arab Spring had been military men. The constitution written by the
free officers reestablished civilian rule, but also dissolved all traditional political parties,
put the military beyond the direct control of the civilian government, and made it a
natural seat of power. Also crucial was the “two tills” system, already mentioned above,
which allowed the military to build a large economic empire in civilian industries but
beyond the civilian government’s tax authority. These economic activities finance a large
network of patronage that supplies current and former military officers with everything
from subsidized bungalows on the Mediterranean to lucrative posts in the management of
military-owned firms upon retirement. The military has also been traditionally opposed
to Islamists: going back to its founding as a modern army under the Ottoman viceroy
Muhammad Ali, the Egyptian military has been secular and has periodically purged
Islamists from its ranks.
    Since 1954, Egypt has for all practical purposes been under one-party rule. After
disbanding traditional political parties, Nasser founded the Liberation Rally as the civilian
arm of the regime and sole political party. When Nasser aligned Egypt with the Soviet
Union, the party was renamed as the Arab Socialist Union, and later Sadat re-organized
  15
       Congressional budget justification for foreign operations, fiscal year 2008.
  16
       Current US dollars, World Bank.

                                                       12
it into the, ostensibly centrist, NDP. Consistent with its frequent re-dedications, the NDP
never had a clear ideology aside from being modernist and anti-Islamist. Instead, it
collected members of the secular elite, bureaucrats, and cronies of the regime. Although
founded by the free officers, the NDP quickly grew into an independent center of power,
possibly because the successive presidents nurtured it as a counterweight to the military.
Particularly in the final years of Mubarak’s rule, the NDP expanded its influence and
prominent NDP members acquired vast fortunes. Hosni Mubarak’s son and would-be
successor, Gamal Mubarak, had his power base in the NDP.
     Egypt’s Islamist movement has been the main political force opposing the ruling coali-
tion of military and NDP. Its main social organization is the Muslim Brotherhood founded
by Hassan al-Banna in 1928. Its ideology is fundamentalist in the sense that it favors a
literal interpretation of scriptures and advocates a return to an idealized Islamic society.
Its traditional followers are the urbanized middle and lower classes. The Muslim Brother-
hood and the majority of its offshoots have been outlawed almost continuously since 1948
after it was accused of instigating riots in Cairo. (In response, its supporters assassinated
the prime minister Mahmoud Al-Nokrashi.) Although the Muslim Brotherhood actively
supported the free officers in their coup against King Farouk, Nasser cracked down on
the movement almost immediately after taking power. Sadat later eased the oppression
of Islamists, in part using their support in his anti-socialist agenda. However, the Camp
David Accords made him extremely unpopular with the Islamist movement (and likely
prompted his assassination). Although outlawed, the Muslim Brotherhood continued
operating and building a vast network of charitable organizations and religious schools
throughout this period. In the later years of Mubarak’s reign, it gained a semi-official
status and most of its leaders were released from prison. In the 2005 election, candidates
more or less directly affiliated with the Islamist movement gained around 20% of seats in
the Egyptian parliament.
     The interplay of these three centers of power was disrupted in 2011, when a broad
coalition of disenfranchised youths, urban middle classes, and poor took to the streets of
Cairo. The Arab Spring of 2011 originally began with the so-called Jasmine Revolution in
Tunisia, which was initially ignited by public outrage over the suicide of a street vendor
in December of 2010. By early 2011, Tunisian President Bin Ali had stepped down, but
far from abating, the revolutionary fervor against the rule of privileged elites in Tunisia
was getting stronger and soon spread to Egypt.
     On January 25, 2011, thousands (5,000 according to our measure) of protesters con-
gregated in Tahrir Square for the first public demonstration against the Mubarak regime.
In a country in which all public demonstrations were illegal and duly crushed, this protest
was a watershed event. Moreover, the protests were organized not by Islamists but by
young, middle-class Egyptians.
     Following this event, Egypt’s Arab Spring unfolds in four stages: (1) the fall of
Mubarak, (2) the rule of the military, (3) the rule of the Islamist Mohammed Mursi,
and (4) the recovery of power by the military. In the remainder of this section, we de-
scribe and analyze each of these four phases using event studies in the Egyptian stock
market.

                                             13
3.2     The Arab Spring in Event Studies
We now use the standard event study methodology to describe the impact of key political
events during Egypt’s Arab Spring on the rents — or the perception of rents — captured
by different types of connected firms.
    Our empirical strategy is to exploit changes in the cumulative returns on each firm’s
stock between the opening of trade on trading day n and the closing of trade on the end
trading day m (where we count all trading days relative to January 25, 2011, the day
of the first large
               P protest in Tahrir Square). Cumulative returns for firm i are defined as
CR[n, m]i = m    t=n Rit , where Rit is the log return of firm i on trading day t. We relate
changes in cumulative returns to the type of connection of the firm—NDP, military,
Islamic—summarized by the vector Ni (i.e., Ni is a vector of three dummies for NDP-,
military-, and Islamic-connected firms).
    The empirical model we estimate can be written as

                               CR[n, m] = Ni0 γ + Xi0 ν + η s + i ,                             (2)

where Xi is a vector of controls, γ is a vector of coefficients, one attached to each one of the
dummies in Ni , η s denotes a full set of sector fixed effects, and i is an error term. Because
our sample includes non-connected firms, the vector of coefficients γ measures how the
cumulative stock market returns of a group of connected firms have changed relative to
the returns of non-connected firms. This strategy is valid if, absent the political events
taking place during this window, no systematic differences exist between the returns of
the different types of connected firms and the non-connected firms. In other words, we
require the standard identification assumption

                                    Cov (Ni0 , i | Xi , η s ) = 0.
    The plausibility of this assumption depends on the controls we include in the vector
Xi . In our baseline specification, these controls are, in addition to a constant term, the
betas β W
        i
          orld
               , β Egypt
                   i     , β iU nrest (as described above), a full set of (16) sector fixed effects,
and controls for size and leverage. Our specification here is a slight deviation from the
earlier event study literature in that, instead of constructing abnormal returns relative
to an Egyptian Capital Asset Pricing Model, we include various controls, including the
Egyptian market beta, on the right-hand side. 17 Several considerations motivate this
choice. First, our specification allows for partial diversification between Egyptian and
world markets, an important advantage in view of the fact that the Egyptian stock market
is only a small part of the world market. Second, by separately including the betas for
the world market and the Egyptian markets, as well as the unrest beta, this approach
controls for omitted factors in a more flexible manner. Our inclusion of sectoral dummies
  17
    In some of our specifications, we follow the earlier literature and work with cumulative abnormal
returns computed as
                                           Xm                            
                            CAR[n, m]i =       Rit − αi − β iEgypt RtEgypt .
                                          t=n




                                                  14
and controls for size and leverage is motivated by the potential differential impacts of
political unrest on firms that are in different sectors or have different characteristics or
exposure to various risks.
    We interpret the vector γ as the effect of the event in question on market participants’
expectation of the net present value of economic rents accruing to the three types of
connected firms relative to the value of non-connected firms. This interpretation is subject
to a number of caveats. First, any change in the value of non-connected firms will lead to
a simultaneous change in all of the components of the vector γ. This underscores that all
of our results are about differential rents (or their perceptions). Because we typically do
not find that all of the components of the vector γ move in the same direction, we believe
that our results are not primarily driven by changes in the value of non-connected firms.
    Second, rather than a decline in the rents previously captured by a given group, a
negative estimate of a component of γ may instead reflect some systematic expected
discrimination against these firms (in the extreme, going from zero to “negative” rents).
We do not find this interpretation to be problematic for our focus, because such systematic
discrimination would also be politically motivated, and given the common reading that
the extent of monopoly power and rents in the Egyptian economy was (and continues to
be) very high, we believe that a negative estimate is much more likely to be driven by
the disappearance of significant rents rather than going from a situation of no rents to
systematic discrimination.
    Third, any macroeconomic changes differentially impacting some sectors or types of
firms could manifest as positive or negative estimates of the components of γ. The rel-
ative stability of our results under different sets of controls and with various estimation
strategies strongly weighs against this interpretation, however.
    Fourth, we may find positive or negative effects even when there is no change in actual
rents if perceptions of rents change. We do not see this as a serious shortcoming either,
since we are also interested in how society at large, and stock market participants in
particular, have perceived the constraints on rent-seeking over this time period. In any
case, our results on changes in board composition and profitability of firms connected to
different groups presented below suggests that it is not just perceptions of rents that are
changing.
    Fifth, rents may be accruing to powerful minority shareholders, and their ability to
capture such rents might vary over time and affect our estimates of γ. Though this
possibility is a real concern in a country with weak economic institutions, we do not
believe that it invalidates our overall inferences. If in fact there is such a change in the
ability of the minority shareholders to take advantage of the majority exactly during our
event window, this should be interpreted as an impact of the changes in the distribution
of political power associated with our events. Moreover, such effects should lead us to
underestimate the size of the effect of the event on overall rents. If, for example, after the
fall of Mubarak, NDP-connected minority shareholders become weaker and are no longer
able to capture rents at the expense of other shareholders, we should see an increase
(rather than a decrease) in the stock market returns of NDP-connected firms relative to
non-connected firms, which is not the pattern we observe in the data.

                                             15
    All standard errors we report throughout are robust against heteroscedasticity. In ad-
dition, because there might be other factors correlated across connected firms, we have also
experimented with adjusted standard errors that account for potential cross-firm corre-
lation of residual returns (see Greenwood (2005); Becker, Bergstresser, and Subramanian
(2013)).18
    As an alternative to the empirical model described above, we also report results from a
synthetic matching estimator aimed at constructing a more informative control group for
each connected firm. Following Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003), Abadie, Diamond, and
Hainmueller (2010), and Acemoglu et al. (2013), we construct the control group separately
for each connected firm as a convex combination of the subset of non-connected firms that
minimizes the deviation of the pre-event behavior of the connected firm from the control
group, where the pre-event window contains all trading days between January 1 and
December 23, 2010. Intuitively, in contrast to our OLS regression results, which compare
firms that are similar in terms of the covariates, this approach compares firms that are
similar in terms of the behavior of their pre-event stock market returns. Details on the
construction of this estimator are provided in Appendix B.2.

3.3     Mubarak’s Fall
We begin by analyzing the effect of the fall of Mubarak on the relative stock market
valuations of firms connected to the three competing political groups. After January
25, 2011, the protests against Mubarak’s regime quickly gained momentum. On Friday
January 28, about 50,000 protesters turned out and large daily demonstrations followed
in Tahrir Square. The Egyptian stock exchange, located in an adjacent side street, did
not re-open the following Sunday and remained closed for a number of weeks due to
continuing protests. The protests continued to grow after January 28. More than 500,000
protesters filled the square on February 1, 8, and 11, according to our estimates. On the
evening of February 11, the vice president, Omar Suleiman, publicly announced Mubarak’s
resignation, and the hand-over of power to the military leadership.
    The following weeks were a period of instability. The police had all but disappeared
from the streets, and looting, violence, and protests continued. By March 23, a measure
of order had been restored and the Egyptian stock exchange resumed regular trading.
    Table 3 analyzes this period using our event study methodology. The event window
[0,8] ranges from January 25 until the end of the first week of trading after the re-opening
of the exchange on March 30. Column 1 shows our most parsimonious specification which,
in addition to the indicators for NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms, includes
sector fixed effects. During the event window, there was a large (approximately 20%) fall
in the market overall. More importantly, we see a negative and marginally significant
effect on NDP-connected firms (-0.086, s.e.=0.049) and a positive and again marginally
  18
    To perform this, we run specification (2) for each trading day in the year prior to Egypt’s Arab Spring
(the 2010 calendar year) and use the residuals from this estimation to calculate the cross-correlation
matrix of residuals. We then use this estimated cross-correlation matrix to adjust our standard errors.
See Appendix B.1 for details on the construction of our adjusted standard errors.


                                                    16
significant effect on military-connected firms (0.048, s.e.=0.028). These estimates suggest
a sizable decline in the value of NDP-connected firms relative to non-connected firms and
a non-trivial increase in the value of military-connected firms at the same time.
    Column 2 shows our baseline specification in which we control for size and leverage as
well as world-market, Egyptian-market, and unrest betas. We now find a larger effect on
NDP-connected firms (-0.131, se.e.=0.049) that is statistically significant at the 5% level. 19
The effect on military-connected firms declines in magnitude and is no longer statistically
distinguishable from zero. This result implies that the loss of connections to the Mubarak
regime reduced the market valuation of NDP-connected firms by 13.1 percentage points
over the 65 days (9 trading days) after the first large demonstration. In monetary terms,
this loss is equivalent to $2.8bn or about 4.3% of the market capitalization of all Egyptian
firms on January 1, 2011. 20 Appendix Table 1 and Appendix Figure 2 show the same
results for alternative event windows, with similar results.
    The remaining columns of Table 3 document the robustness of our baseline specifica-
tion in column 2. In column 3, we drop the sector fixed effects and show that the same
pattern is present even without these controls. In column 4, we adjust standard errors for
the cross-correlation of error terms estimated in 2010 data, with very similar results and
somewhat smaller standard errors, reflecting the fact that the residual correlation between
connected firms is negative. In view of this result, in the rest of the paper, we focus on
the generally larger non-corrected standard errors. In column 5, we weight each firm with
the log number of transactions in its stock to account for the different volumes of trade
across stocks. The results are again very similar to those in our baseline specification in
column 2.
    Column 6 reports the estimates from our synthetic matching procedure. The return
on NDP-connected firms is again negative and somewhat larger (-0.200). We follow the
standard procedure of constructing confidence intervals by randomly drawing 500 placebo
NDP-connected groups from the non-connected firms and compute confidence intervals
at each level of significance so that exactly the requisite fraction of estimates are located
outside the confidence interval (see Appendix B.2 for details). The resulting confidence
interval shows that the differential impact on NDP-connected firms and significant at 1%.
The matching estimates also show a large and significantly negative effect on Islamic-
connected firms (though this may partially result from the fact five Islamic-connected
firms are also connected to the NDP and our matching procedure does not control for
dual connections).
    In columns 7, we use cumulative abnormal returns as dependent variable. The results
are once again similar to our baseline specification.
    As a falsification exercise, we repeat our estimation for the most major political events
  19
     The results are very similar if we include higher-order controls. For example, including quartics in size
and leverage leaves the coefficient on NDP-connected firms essentially unchanged (-0.121, s.e.=0.045).
  20
     This is a sizable effect compared to other estimates in the literature. For example, Johnson and
Mitton (2003) find an effect amounting to 6.3% of market capitalization over 13 months. Voth and
Ferguson (2008) find an effect amounting to 0.71% of market capitalization over 60 days.




                                                     17
that took place in Egypt during the 2010 calendar year. 21 Because these events have
several features common with the protests that led to the collapse of Mubarak’s regime
(e.g., creating instability and surprise for the markets) but were never meant to displace
the existing regime and/or limit its cronyism, investigating whether they have similar
effects on connected firms is particularly informative. We should find similar results
during these placebo events if, despite our controls and other strategies, the differential
effects of Mubarak’s fall (and other similar events we study in the rest of the paper) on
connected firms are driven by the differential sensitivities of these firms to macroeconomic
or political events. If, on the other hand, the patterns we are documenting reflect the
reduced prospects for the capture of rents by firms connected to the NDP, then because
these events do not appear to have significantly changed the fundamental balance of power
within Egyptian politics, we should not find such differential effects The results in Table
4 are reassuring in this respect as they show no significant changes in the relative stock
market valuations of the three types of connected firms during any of the six events listed.
    Figure 2 shows the results of an additional falsification exercise in which we look at
differential returns for NDP-connected firms in seven consecutive event windows of equal
length prior to January 25, 2011. It shows that the coefficients on the dummy variable for
NDP-connected firms (the dots in the figure) are indistinguishable from zero in all seven
pre-event windows, contrasting with the large and statistically significant drop following
Mubarak’s fall. Figure 3 shows the same result using the synthetic matching estimator,
once again documenting no differential changes before the event, followed by the large
differential drop of the value of NDP-connected firms in the immediate aftermath of
Mubarak’s toppling.
    Appendix Figure 3 shows the distribution of t-statistics on the NDP-, military-, and
Islamic-connected dummies when we run our baseline specification on each trading day
in the 2010 calendar year. The rate of false positives is close to 5% for the coefficients
on each of the three dummy variables, suggesting that our baseline specification does not
show a tendency to over-reject the null of no differential effects during the previous year.
    Overall, we interpret these results as showing a fairly sizable negative effect on NDP-
connected firms. Subject to the caveats outlined above, we believe the most plausible
interpretation is that Mubarak’s fall triggered a change in the market’s expectations of the
rents that the NDP-connected firms would be able to capture in the future. Intriguingly,
we also find some evidence of a positive impact on the market’s perceptions of rents
of military-connected firms. This is plausible given the ensuing power vacuum and the
role the military played during the events leading up to Mubarak’s fall discussed above.
It suggests that there might have been some amount of expected rent reallocation across
different power groups during this period. Because the collapse of Mubarak’s regime was a
major institutional change for Egypt, these results may reflect the expected consequences
following from these institutional changes or the effects of changes in de facto power
emanating from street protests on the rents of connected firms. We will next see that
  21
    These are the Nag Hammadi massacre, a strike for higher minimum wages, the extension of the state
of emergency by parliament, the sacking of the critical editor of the Al-Dosthour newspaper, rumors
about a strict regulation of mass text messages, and the closure of four satellite TV channels.


                                                 18
during other key events there continues to be a negative impact on firms connected to
groups that lose power, even though there are no discernible changes in de jure political
institutions but only changes in de facto power. Moreover, these other events will also
show little evidence of a positive effect on firms connected to rival groups.

3.4     Later Phases
The first phase of Egypt’s Arab Spring ended on April 16, 2011, when an administrative
court dissolved the NDP on charges of corruption and seized its assets. Panel A of
Table 4 shows the differential returns for NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms
during key events of the second phase under military rule. The first key event is a major
military crackdown against protesters beginning on July 31, 2011. During this period,
the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces dropped its alleged support for the protesters,
arrested key activists, and attempted repeatedly to forcibly clear Tahrir Square from
the protesters who continued to demand elections and democratic reforms. These events
ended on September 8, when the square was finally cleared, and soldiers demolished
the encampments and planted grass on the middle of the square. Following a period of
calm, protesters re-took Tahrir Square on November 17-20 (which constitutes our second
event). The demonstrations continued thereafter, pressuring the military finally to allow
presidential elections to take place, with the results of the first round announced on May
28 and the results of the runoff election announced on June 24 (corresponding to our third
and fourth events). The first round of elections led to a runoff between the former general
Ahmed Shafiq and the Islamist and Muslim Brother, Mohammed Mursi, who proceeded
to narrowly win the runoff election with 51.7% of the vote.
    A struggle for influence with the Supreme Council of Armed Forces dominated the
first two months of Mursi’s presidency. This struggle culminated with Mursi’s sacking of
Mohammed Tantawi (the Commander-in-Chief) and the four highest-ranking generals on
August 12, 2012 (the fifth key event). 22 On December 23, a new constitution promoting
political Islam but also granting expanded powers to the military passed in a referendum
in spite of a boycott by the secular opposition (our sixth event). From this point on-
ward, Mursi was generally seen to be over-stepping his mandate, and became increasingly
unpopular. A new broad-based opposition movement, tamarood (“rebel”), first collected
millions of signatures against Mursi’s rule and then mobilized for street protests beginning
on June 30, 2013. As millions poured into the streets protesting Mursi’s rule in Tahrir
Square and elsewhere in the country, a smaller number of his supporters (up to 50,000
according to our measure) camped out in Rabaa Square. On July 4, a military coup
removed Mursi from power (our seventh and final event).
    The results of this series of event studies in Table 5 document a pattern broadly
consistent with our expectations — whenever a group loses power, there is a loss of value
for firms connected to that group, and whenever a group gains power, there is a gain
 22
    These are Lieutenant General Sami Anan (Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces), Vice Admiral Mohab
Mamish (Commander of the Navy), Lieutenant General Abd El Aziz Seif-Eldeen (Commander of the Air
Defense Forces), and Air Marshal Reda Mahmoud Hafez (Commander of the Air Force).


                                                19
in value for firms connected to that group. For example, after the military crackdown,
military-connected firms gain 8% in value (coefficient=0.080, s.e. = 0.044), whereas they
lose 2.4% when protesters re-take Tahrir Square. We see no differential returns for any
group of connected firms right after the first round of the presidential elections, which
may not be too surprising given that the voting outcome in this round did not strongly
shift power towards any of the groups. After the second round, there is an increase in
the value of all three groups, which is somewhat surprising. However, this finding might
be consistent with many Egyptians’ perception at this stage that the old regime and
the Islamists had worked out a deal that would favor all three powerful groups and thus
all connected firms (the fact that results were announced only after a week-long delay
reinforced this suspicion). Following Mursi’s sacking of the powerful generals, but not
after passing of the constitution, we see a positive effect on the Islamic-connected firms
(coefficient=0.010, s.e.=0.006). We also find that the passage of Mursi’s constitution
has a negative effect on the value of NDP-connected firms, a finding consistent with the
general belief at that time that this constitution was going to put an end to the role of
the NDP in Egypt’s political arena. Finally, after Mursi’s fall, Islamic-connected firms
experience a loss of value. These patterns appear to be quite robust as we show in the
Appendix Tables 2 to 5. In summary, these results confirm the importance of shifting
political power for the market’s expectation of future rents.
    We should note that the events with the most consistent results — the military crack-
down, the re-taking of Tahrir Square by the protesters, and President Mursi’s sacking
of key generals — did not change de jure political power, political institutions, or the
government in place. Instead, they were associated with changes in the balance of power
and the de facto power of different groups, such as the protesters in Tahrir Square and the
leading members of the Muslim Brotherhood. 23 As such, these results are both a preview
of our main findings on the effect of street protests and mobilization on (the perception
of) future rents, which we present below, and an indication that this effect may have
partly been due to shifts in de facto power that mattered in an environment with weak
institutions.
    Note also that, by and large, when these events changed the power of a particular
group, the firms connected to other groups did not experience significant changes in
value. Though exceptions to this exist (particularly in the context of the second round
of the presidential election, and the impact of the passage of the Muslim Brotherhood’s
constitution on the value of NDP-connected firms), this overall pattern suggests that our
findings are not just a consequence of the expectation that a given amount of rents are
being reallocated from one group of connected firms to another — an interpretation that
will be further supported by the results presented in the next section.
  23
    In particular, the military crackdown was a change in the military’s policy of dealing with the
protesters, and thus clearly did not involve any changes in political institutions, laws, or the form of
government. The re-taking of the square was likewise simply a change in the events in the streets.
Mursi’s sacking of generals was also an entirely constitutional move that involved no changes in the
structure of formal power.




                                                  20
3.5     Other Reactions and Outcomes for Connected Firms
If the political developments during Egypt’s Arab Spring truly changed the ability of
different types of firms to exploit their connections and capture rents, we would also
expect to see firms exerting effort to acquire more politically valuable types of connections
and may even expect changes in their profitability as the balance of political power shifts
in society.
    Though we do not have as detailed data on these outcomes, the available data, pre-
sented in Table 5, are consistent with these expectations. Panel A shows that one year
after the beginning of military rule, we see fewer NDP members on the boards of the firms
in our sample and more board members using military titles, indicating attempts by firms
to disassociate themselves from the NDP and build military connections. Similarly, we
see a small decrease in the number of military titles after the Islamists take power. We do
not see a greater number of members of the Muslim Brotherhood on boards, most likely
due to our the aforementioned inability to identify these individuals.
    In Panel B, we see that the significantly higher profitability of NDP-connected firms
drops sharply during the period of military rule, and the profitability of military-connected
firms increases. During Islamist rule, we see a small additional decrease in the profitability
of NDP-connected firms, a sharp drop in the profitability of military-connected firms,
and a higher profitability for Islamic firms (though the profitability of non-connected
firms increases even more during this phase). Naturally, these results, which are looking
over longer periods of time, could reflect other concurrent changes during these time
windows. All the same, they are broadly consistent with the picture that emerges from
our event studies and bolster our confidence that what we are finding is not mere spurious
correlation. Moreover, they suggest that the changing valuations in the Egyptian stock
market we document above are unlikely to be just a reflection of changes in the perception
of stock market participants, but instead reflect real changes in rents captured by different
groups of connected firms. 24


4      Street Protests and Economic Rents
In this section, we present our main results, which focus on the impact of street protests
on (perceived) rents accruing to connected firms. Our findings in the previous section
already suggest that shifts in de facto power, partly related to protest activity, have a
major impact on stock market participants’ perception of the size of rents that will be
captured by different groups of connected firms (and which connected firms receive them).
We now exploit daily variation in protests and stock returns to show that protests have
a systematic effect on the rents of firms connected to the incumbent regime, but not on
the rents of other connected firms.
  24
     Using data on insider trades, we also looked at the mean purchases of stocks by corporate insiders for
each set of connected firms during the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring. The results in Appendix Table
6 show very little movement in this measure of net insider trades, suggesting that there is no tendency
of insiders to divest or increase their holdings in these companies


                                                    21
       Our main specification takes the form

                         Rit = Ni0 γ + (Pt × Ni0 ) γ p + Xi0 ν t + δ t + η s + it ,                    (3)

where Rit is as defined above (the log return of firm i on day t) and Pt denotes the
(standardized) number of protesters in Tahrir Square on trading day t. In particular, in
our baseline regressions, Pt is measured as the total number of protesters on that day
capped at 500,000 and divided by 500,000, so that the maximum value Pt takes is 1. We
cap this variable at 500,000 to reduce the impact of very large protests on a few days (we
also deal with this issue by using other functional forms as discussed below). Ni and Xi
are again the vector of dummies denoting affiliation to one of the three groups, and our
set of standard controls, respectively. The fact that the coefficient on Xi , ν t , is indexed
by time indicates that we allow a full set of time interactions with these covariates (in
some specifications also with sector fixed effects). Finally, δ t and η s denote, respectively,
time and sector dummies.
    The coefficients of interest are the entries of the vector γ p . Under the usual assumption
that there are no omitted variables conditional on our controls causing differential returns,

                                  Cov (Pt × Ni0 , it | Xi , δ t , η s ) = 0,

these coefficients measure the effect of the number of protesters in Tahrir Square on the
relative stock market valuation of connected firms. Specifically, we require that (1) there
should be no omitted variables that fluctuate at the daily frequency and are correlated
with both stock returns and the number of protesters in Tahrir Square, and (2) that there
is no reverse causality from daily differential returns on firms connected to different power
groups to the intensity of protests.
    A specific concern would be that news about the current government’s popularity or
performance might impact stock returns of different types of firms while also trigger-
ing protests. Though this concern is potentially important, we believe that our use of
daily data greatly alleviates it. In particular, there is a considerable degree of random-
ness in which days protesters are able to solve the collective action problem, organize,
and mobilize, and this variation will be quite important for our results. 25 Relatedly, we
will demonstrate that future protests have no predictive power for current stock market
valuations, weighing against concerns about omitted factors and reverse causality. 26
    Columns 1-4 in Table 7 show estimates of equation (3) for each of the four phases
of Egypt’s Arab Spring. Column 1 shows a negative and statistically significant effect
  25
     If protests were anticipated in advance, this would also imply that future protests should impact
current stock market prices, a pattern for which we find no support as we explain next.
  26
     A related concern is that protests are often led by a small group of “leaders,” and one might worry
whether these leaders have any information about the vulnerability of the incumbent group. We do not
see this possibility as a threat to our empirical strategy. First, the fact that the protests have leaders
does not change the fact that the protests are shifting the balance of power in society (and our results are
a testament to that fact). Second, if the leaders’ superior information about regime vulnerability were an
important factor, we would again expect our specification tests to show the correlation between current
stock market returns and future protests, which is not the pattern we see in the data.


                                                     22
of street protests on the stock market valuation of NDP-connected firms during the first
phase of the revolution. Given that Pt = 1 corresponds to 500,000 (or more) protesters
turning up to Tahrir Square, the coefficient (-1.614 s.e.=0.602) shows that the presence
of 500,000 or more protesters in Tahrir Square is associated with a 1.6% decrease in the
valuation of NDP-connected firms. The cumulative number of protesters during this first
phase according to our standardized measure is 1.22, such that the cumulative impact of
street protests on the value of NDP-connected firms is a 1.95% decrease during this phase.
We find no statistically significant impact on firms connected to the two rival groups.
    Column 2 shows the same specification for the second phase, under military rule.
Now we see a substantial impact on military-connected firms (-0.889, s.e.= 0.326) and no
significant effect on NDP-connected and Islamic firms. The cumulative impact of street
protests on the value of military-connected firms is a decrease of 4.7% during this phase.
    Column 3 looks at the third phase (Islamist Rule), and finds that none of the three
effects of street protests are statistically distinguishable from zero, except for a marginally
significant, positive effect on NDP-connected firms (0.672, s.e.=0.382). A possible reason
for this lack of significant results in the third phase is that during this period, Tahrir
Square saw both pro- and anti-Islamist protests.
    Column 4 looks at the the fourth (post-Islamist) phase, in which pro- and anti-Islamist
camps separated geographically, and we see that the clear relationship between the number
of protesters and the stock market valuation of firms connected to the target group of the
protests reemerge. In particular, in this column, we include protests in Rabaa Square,
which became the location of pro-Islamist demonstrations, whereas those in Tahrir Square
were generally anti-Islamist. Consistent with this, Tahrir Square protests have a negative
effect, whereas Rabaa Square protests have a positive effect on Islamic-connected firms
(-1.332, s.e. =0.815, and 27.85, s.e.=12.89, respectively).
    A noteworthy pattern in Table 7 is that, with the exception of the third phase of
the revolution (Islamist Rule), and consistent with our event study results, we find a
significantly negative effect of protests in Tahrir Square on the relative stock market
valuation of firms connected to the incumbent regime, and generally no effect on firms
connected to the rival (non-incumbent) groups. Motivated by this, in Table 8, we adopt
a more parsimonious specification where we pool data from all four phases and include
only two dummies, one for being connected to the group that is currently in power (the
“incumbent group”), and the other for being connected to one of the other two rival
(non-incumbent) groups. The incumbent group during Mubarak’s fall is the NDP; during
military rule it is the military; during Islamist rule it is the Islamists. For the post-
Islamist rule, we still code the Islamists as the “incumbent” group because anti-Islamist
protests in Tahrir square continued for several weeks after Mursi’s fall (until the end of our
sample). As noted above, pro-Islamist protests were in Rabaa Square during this period,
and we also control for interactions of this latter type of protests with the incumbent and
connected (non-incumbent) dummies. 27 Non-connected firms are again in the regression,
so all coefficients are relative to the changes in the values of non-connected firms.
  27
    Appendix Table 8 shows that our results are fully robust to dropping the post-Islamist period from
our sample.


                                                 23
    Column 1 of Table 8 shows our most parsimonious specification that relates returns to
a full set of time and sector fixed effects and the interaction of the two dummies with the
number of protesters in Tahrir Square. It shows a negative and statistically significant
effect of the number of protesters in Tahrir Square on the relative market valuation of
firms connected to the incumbent government (-0.879, s.e.=0.243), and no positive impact
on firms that are connected to the other two rival groups (-0.281, s.e.=0.205). Column
2 estimates our baseline specification allowing our full set of controls fully flexible effects
over time (that is, it includes the interaction of a full set of time dummies with the
control vector Xi ). The estimated effect of the number of protesters on the returns on
firms connected to the incumbent government drops only a little to -0.751 (s.e.=0.254)
and the effect on the returns of firms connected to the rival groups remains negative and
insignificant at (-0.160, s.e.=0.216). We reject the hypothesis that the two coefficients
are equal and of opposite sign with a p-value of 0.011. 28 This specification thus suggests
that while street protests significantly decrease the market valuation of incumbent firms,
they have no effect on firms connected to non-incumbent groups. This pattern is broadly
consistent with our previous results, but can be seen more clearly when pooling data
across the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring.
    The rest of the table probes the robustness of this result. Column 3 drops all dates
identified in our event analysis as involving changes in government or formal institutions
plus the next three trading days (in particular, we drop the fall of Mubarak, the first and
the second round of the presidential elections, the passing of the Muslim Brotherhood’s
Constitution, and the military coup against Mursi). In column 4, we go one step further
and drop all of the events studied in the previous section plus the following three trading
days. These two specifications illustrate that our results in this section are not just
capturing the stock market responses of connected firms in the context of the event studies
already reported. Rather, the fact that the results in columns 3 and 4 are very similar
to the baseline suggests that protests have a major impact on the relative stock market
valuation of firms connected to the incumbent group — even when there are no changes,
and no clear expectation of imminent changes, in regime or political institutions.
    This pattern bolsters our interpretation that these findings do not just reflect the
consequences of changes (or expected changes) in regime or de jure political institutions.
Instead, our interpretation is that, consistent with the findings in Collins and Margo (2007)
and Madestam et al. (2013), there is also some element of current protests signaling future
mobilization and thus impacting the perception of the extent of rents that can be captured
by firms connected to politically powerful groups.
    As further robustness checks, column 5 adds a full set of firm fixed effects, which
has essentially no impact on our estimates. Column 6 adds a quadratic in all of our
controls (size, leverage, and the three betas for the Egyptian market, the world market,
and unrest), again fully interacted with time dummies, with little impact on our coefficien t
  28
     A more appropriate test of the hypothesis that the results reflect a pure reallocation of rents from
incumbent to rival connected groups is to test wether the two coefficients weighted by the market capital-
ization of incumbent and connected (non-incumbent) firms across the sample are equal and of opposite
sign. We reject this hypothesis with a p-value of 0.034.


                                                   24
estimates.29
    Column 7 goes one step further and includes interactions between the number of Tahrir
Square protesters and the 16 sector dummies (as well as the controls already included in
column 2). This reduces the coefficient on the incumbent times protesters interaction to
-0.483, although it remains statistically significant at 10% (s.e. = 0.247). The slight loss
of precision in this fairly demanding specification (with 3608 control variables) is most
likely attributable to the loss of power. This interpretation is confirmed by column 8,
which continues to include the interactions between the number of protesters and the 16
sector dummies but drops the other time-interactive controls, restoring the coefficient of
interest to a precisely-estimated -0.685 (s.e. = 0.234). Column 9 goes even further and
includes a full set of interactions between the time and sector dummies (which of course
subsumes interactions with the numbers of protesters). The estimate of the impact of
protests on the relative stock market value of firms connected to the incumbent group
continues to be significant at 5 percent in this very demanding specification (-0.548, s.e.
= 0.271).
    Table 9 turns to an investigation of whether current protests or leads or lags of protests
impact the stock market valuation of connected firms. Because of limited liquidity in the
Egyptian Stock Exchange and because protests often peak after trading hours, the impact
of shifts in the balance of political power might be transmitted to stock market valua-
tions over several days, making lags of protests statistically significant. If, on the other
hand, leads were statistically significant, this would signal a failure of our identification
assumption — in particular, it would make it likely that both protests and stock market
valuations are responding to some other slow-moving change that is not being controlled
for in our regressions. The results in Table 9 document that the impact of current protests
is robust, and that there is no evidence of leads of protests predicting stock market reac-
tions (i.e., no evidence that current stock market outcomes are being predicted by future
protests). This pattern bolsters our confidence in the results presented so far, and weighs
against an interpretation in which protests and stock market valuations of different types
of firms are being driven by omitted factors or news about other events weakening the
regime in power.
    The results in columns 3 and 4 of Table 9 indicate that the one-day lag of protests is
indeed statistically significant, but there is no evidence of a statistically significant effect
from longer lags, which is encouraging for our interpretation. (The specification in column
6 also shows a marginally significant effect at the second lag.)
    Figure 4 shows the results of a placebo experiment in which we use the sample dis-
tribution of the number of protesters in Tahrir square between Jan 1, 2011 and July 30,
2013 to randomly assign a number of protesters to trading days between Jan 1 and Nov
30, 2010. We then estimate specification (3) using the fictitious data. The figure shows
results obtained from 200 random assignments of protesters to trading days, where the
three panels show histograms of the t-statistics on the interaction of dummies for NDP-,
  29
     The coefficients of interest also remain virtually unchanged (-0.727, s.e=0.254 and -0.160, s.e.=0.217)
when we add controls for the interaction of the incumbent and non-incumbent dummies with the volume
of trade as a fraction of all shares outstanding (not shown in the table).


                                                    25
military- and Islamic-connected firms with the fictitious number of protesters, respec-
tively. The rate of false positives is smaller than 5% for the coefficients on each of the
three interactions, again suggesting that our specification does not show a tendency to
over-reject the null.
    Additional robustness checks are included in the Appendix. Appendix Table 7 shows
that the interaction between the number of protesters in Tahrir square and the incum-
bent dummy is negative and statistically significant even when we estimate our baseline
specification separately for each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring. The only
exception to this is the phase of Islamist rule, as is already apparent from Table 7. Our
results also remain virtually unchanged when we include a full set of interactions between
the day of the week and the number of protesters in Tahrir Square (not shown), allaying
any concerns that firms connected to the incumbent group may experience systematically
different returns on certain days of the week. Appendix Table 9 investigates the robust-
ness of our results to functional forms, using the (non-capped) level of protesters, the log
of protesters, and a fixed effect for protests exceeding 100,000 participants. All results
are similar to those presented in Table 8.30
    We draw four main conclusions from the results presented in this section. First,
consistent with our event study results, street protests and the shifts in de facto power
engendered by them appear to affect the stock market valuation of firms connected to
the three power groups relative to non-connected firms. Second, the intent of protesters
appears to have real effects: in the first and second phases of the revolution, protests
in Tahrir Square directed against the incumbent government (first Mubarak’s and then
military’s) tend to reduce the stock market value of firms connected to the incumbent
government. In the fourth phase, anti-Islamist protesters in Tahrir Square reduce the rel-
ative market valuations of Islamic firms, whereas pro-Islamist protesters in Rabaa Square
appear to increase these valuations. This pattern is confirmed by the results in Table
8, which looks at the effects of protests in the entire sample and shows the effect is on
firms connected to the incumbent group, while there appears to be no significant effect
on the value of connections to the two rival (non-incumbent) groups. Third, this pattern
of results is not consistent with the differential effects of protests on the stock market
valuations of connected firms being entirely due to the reallocation of a fixed amount of
rents. Had this been the case, we would have found a positive impact on the relative
valuation of firms connected to rival groups. Fourth, our results to some extent reflect ex-
pectations of future changes in regimes and de jure institutions (especially since protests
have sometimes been followed by such major changes, most notably with Mubarak’s fall).
Nevertheless, the fact that protests impact the value of firms connected to the incumbent
group even during episodes in which such changes neither occurred nor were expected
imminently suggests that they cannot be explained entirely by expectations of changes
   30
      In addition, we estimate the parameters of a Box-Cox transform for the specification in column 1 of
Table 8 (without the covariates, Xi0 ν t ). The maximum likelihood estimate of the exponent on Pt is 1.212
(s.e.=0.832). We cannot therefore reject the hypothesis that the relationship between our main variable
(the incumbent dummy interacted with the number of protesters capped at 500,000) and differential stock
returns is linear.


                                                   26
in governments and de jure institutions. We therefore tentatively interpret the evidence
as suggesting that, in addition to impacting expectations of future institutional changes,
street protests may have also directly curtailed the amount of rents accruing to the firms
with the most valuable political connections.


5      Social Media and Protests
Much has been written on the role of social media in triggering and coordinating protest
activity during the Arab Spring. Nevertheless, there has been little systematic analysis of
the impact of social media on protest activity and on the broader political equilibrium in
the Arab Spring (or in any other context that we are aware of). 31 In this section, we use
our Twitter data to study a number of related questions. First, we investigate whether
social media activity predicts protests. Second, we analyze whether discontent voiced on
social media impacts stock market returns with or without simultaneously controlling for
street protests (which we showed in the previous section to be an important determinant
of these returns). Third, we use social media data to glean additional information about
the nature of the protests and show that the cohesiveness of the opposition as reflected
in the pattern of retweeting interacted crucially with the impact of protest activity on
differential returns of connected firms.
    Panel A of Table 10 shows that there is a positive association between Tahrir hashtags,
our main measure of social media activity related to the protests, and the number of
protesters in Tahrir Square during each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring. To
facilitate the interpretation of the coefficients, we standardize both the left- and the right-
hand-side variables throughout the table (subtracting the mean and dividing by standard
deviation). During the first phase of the revolution (Mubarak’s fall), the authorities
blocked access Twitter between January 25 and February 2, 2011 (on some days during
this window, they also shut down the entire internet and some phone services). Although
tweeting by telephone during this period was still possible, we control for limited access
to social media and the internet by adding a dummy for this period on the right-hand
side. Interestingly, the coefficient on this dummy is positive and marginally statistically
significant, suggesting that invasive measures that cut access to social media may have
backfired in this instance.
    In all phases, except in the post-Islamist one, where many protests were by Muslim
Brotherhood supporters who were unlikely to use the Tahrir hashtags, we see a strong
correlation between this measure of social media activity (related to protests) and the
protests themselves. Column 5 pools all phases together and confirms the pattern. The
point estimate (0.219, s.e.=0.075) suggests that a one standard deviation increase in the
number of tweets is associated with a 0.219 standard-deviation increase in the number of
protesters in Tahrir Square.
  31
    As mentioned in the Introduction, an exception is Weber et al. (2013) who use Twitter data to map
out the segregation between different camps in Egypt’s Arab Spring. Nevertheless, they do not investigate
any of the questions we explore in this paper, and specifically in this section.


                                                   27
    The results in columns 1-5 might be reflecting the fact that protesters turn up to Tahrir
Square and then report their presence on Twitter using the Tahrir hashtag. Columns 6
-8 investigate this issue by studying whether it is the leads or lags of hashtags that are
correlated with protests. Reassuringly, we find that it is the lags of Tahrir hashtags that
matter for protests more than the current or the lead values. If it were simply that
people who are participating in protests are also tweeting about it, then there should be
a contemporaneous correlation between the two variables. The lead being the dominant
variable, on the other hand, would suggest that both of these variables might be reflecting
some other news or omitted factors. Instead, the lagged hashtags being the dominant
variable, the pattern we find in the data, supports the view that social media is being
used as a vehicle for mobilizing people — who then turn out to Tahrir Square the following
day.
    In Panel B, we look at the amount of retweeting of tweets by opposition leaders, which
we interpret as a measure of general discontent with the government in power and support
for the opposition. We find very similar results, suggesting that general discontent is also
associated with greater numbers of protesters in Tahrir Square. When we turn to timing,
however, the evidence is less clear-cut. Because of serial correlation, when any two of the
current, lag and lead values are included together, neither one is individually statistically
significant (though they jointly are).
    When we include both the Tahrir hashtags and the retweeting variables together in
Panel C, we find that the coefficient on Tahrir hashtags remains statistically significant at
the 1% level (0.140, s.e.=0.050) while the coefficient on retweets of opposition is now only
marginally significant (0.202, s.e.=0.107). This pattern is plausible since Tahrir hashtags
are presumably more directly related to the protests than the more general discontent
captured by our opposition retweets variable.
    Columns 1-4 of Table 11, however, show that social media activity has no impact on
differential stock market returns with or without controlling for actual street protests. 32
Though this might reflect the differential measurement error in our various different mea-
sures (e.g., perhaps our social media variables are measured with greater error), it is also
consistent with the view that what matters for the actual balance of power — and the re-
sulting economic rents — is the mobilization of people in the street, and not their general
discontent. This is, in particular, consistent with the fact that discontent with Mubarak’s
regime has been deep-rooted in Egyptian society for decades, but had little impact on
actual politics until it poured into the streets.
    In column 5, we drop our control for the number of protesters in Rabaa Square and
instead use our Twitter data to construct a measure of the nature and cohesion of the
opposition. In particular, we construct a measure we call “opposition turnover,” which
we define (in analogy to an employee turnover rate) as the number of Twitter users
  32
    For the purposes of this comparison between Twitter-based measures and the number of protesters in
Tahrir Square we treat all independent variables symmetrically and do not cap the number of protesters
at 500,000. Instead, we standardize the number of retweets, Tahrir hashtags, and Tahrir protesters by
deducting their respective sample means and dividing by their respective sample standard deviations.
This is why the magnitude of coefficients differs relative to that in Table 8.


                                                 28
who retweet a tweet of an opposition leader in t − 1 but not in t divided by the average
number of retweeters on the two days. At one extreme, when the composition of retweeters
changes from day to day, this will indicate a much less cohesive opposition (with fewer
dedicated members) relative to the other extreme where the same people retweet more
systematically. It might then be reasonable to imagine that a less cohesive opposition
will not be able to exert as much de facto power as a more cohesive one. Our results
in this table confirm this expectation. Though the opposition turnover variable does not
have much of an effect by itself, when this turnover variable is high, protests have a
more limited impact on the rents captured by firms connected to the incumbent. 33 The
interaction between the incumbent dummy, the number of protesters in Tahrir Square,
and the opposition turnover variable is positive and significant at the 10% level (0.138,
s.e.=0.075). The estimate implies that a one standard deviation increase in the opposition
turnover rate (3.73) is associated with a 34% drop in the effect of street protests on the
relative stock market valuations of firms connected to the incumbent group.


6      Conclusion
The Arab Spring was a momentous set of changes, involving an unparalleled mobilization
of people in many parts of the Arab world. In Egypt, it led to the downfall of the
regime of Hosni Mubarak, who had ruled the country as a de facto dictator for 30 years.
The broad-based mobilization unleashed by these events continued after Mubarak’s fall,
underscoring the importance (but in many instances also the limitations) of the power of
the street. Several theories in social science emphasize the role of de facto power, often
resulting from groups being able to solve their collective action problems and mobilizing in
the street, in changing economic allocations, and even in changing the de jure distribution
of political power. Nevertheless, there is only limited evidence in economics and other
social sciences showing that changes in the de facto political power of different groups
and political mobilization directly matter for any economic outcome.
    In this paper, we provide evidence that protests have played an important role in
curtailing rents captured by politically connected firms in Egypt (or at the very least,
the stock market participants’ perceptions of these rents). Starting with an application
of the standard event study methodology, we document that during the various phases of
Egypt’s Arab Spring, protests have reduced the stock market valuation of firms connected
to the groups against whom they were organized, relative to the stock market valuation
of non-connected firms. Except during Mubarak’s fall, where we see a positive impact on
military-connected firms in some specifications, we do not find an effect on the valuation of
  33
    It is reasonable that it should be the triple interaction of the opposition-turnover variable with protests
and the incumbent and non-incumbent connected dummies that should matter — not the opposition-
turnover variable interacted with these dummies for connected firms. In particular, the interaction
between opposition turnover and the dummies for connected firms correspond to the impact of opposition
turnover when there are no protesters. But since when there are no protesters, there is no pressure from
the street on the incumbent government, the cohesion of the opposition should also not matter, which is
the pattern we find.


                                                      29
firms connected to the rival (non-incumbent) groups. Many of the events we focus on did
not involve any changes in formal political institutions or the identity of the government
in power. Rather, they seem to reflect the perception that, in the face of the mobilization,
the ability of connected firms to exploit their political connections to their benefit — and
likely to the detriment of the rest of society — would be limited. Consistent with this
interpretation, we also find that listed firms have increased the number of board members
who were from the military when the military was powerful, and at the same time shed
board members who were associated with Mubarak’s party, the NDP; later, when the
Muslim Brotherhood was powerful, they decreased the number of board members using
military titles.
    Our main results go beyond the event study methodology and look at the effect of
daily variation in the number of protesters in Tahrir Square on the stock market valuation
of connected firms. Once again, we find lower stock market valuations of firms connected
to the incumbent group relative to non-connected firms during days of heightened protest
activity, and no impact on the values of firms connected to the rival (non-incumbent)
groups. We also illustrate that these results are unlikely to be driven by reverse causality
or some omitted factors moving stock market returns first and subsequently triggering
protest activity. In addition, these results are not a mere reflection of stock market
reactions during periods of fall of governments or changes in formal political institutions.
Finally, we also find that there are concurrent changes in profitability of firms connected
to different groups.
    The totality of this evidence motivates our interpretation that these patterns cannot
be explained just as the changes in perceptions of stock market participants without cor-
responding changes in the extent of rents captured by connected firms in the Egyptian
economy. Though some of the differential returns were undoubtedly related to the mar-
ket’s perception that as one group falls another will rise, our evidence suggests that all
of these effects are unlikely to be just a consequence of a given amount of rents being
reallocated between different groups of connected firms. Nor do they appear explained
entirely by swings in de jure political power (resulting from changes in formal political
institutions and regime). We therefore tentatively interpret them as also reflecting stock
market participants’ perceptions that the ability of connected firms to siphon off rents will
be curtailed by a combination of heightened mobilization following these major protests
and future changes in political power and perhaps even political institutions.
    Finally, we also documented that, consistent with popular media coverage of Egypt’s
Arab Spring, social media played some role in the protests. Both tweeting activity related
to Tahrir Square and retweeting of opposition leaders’ tweets, which we interpret as a
measure of general discontent about the government in power, predict protests. Social
media data also enable us to measure daily variation in the cohesiveness of the opposition,
and this cohesiveness appears to matter for how impactful street protests are.
    We view our results as a first attempt to show the systematic importance of mo-
bilization and de facto political power on important economic outcomes, including the
ability of connected firms and individuals to capture rents. Several questions of course
remain. First, despite the robustness of our findings and the supporting evidence we pro-

                                             30
vide, we do not claim that the results in this paper estimate causal effects resulting from
quasi-random variation in protest on rents of politically powerful and connected firms.
Exploiting other empirical designs, natural experiments, or other sources of potentially
exogenous variation to estimate such causal effects is an obvious area for future work.
Second, our results are largely confined to studying the impact of various political events
and street protests on stock market valuations. An important area for future work is
to find other, more direct measures of rent-seeking and corruption by different types of
firms. Third, and perhaps most importantly, we make no claim to external validity be-
yond Egypt. Though we suspect that de facto political power matters greatly in other
contexts also, especially under weak institutions, our results have no implications for how
this would play out in other countries. One advantage of our methodology, however, is
that it can easily be applied to other settings where there is popular mobilization, so we
are hopeful that similar investigations could be carried out to provide a more complete
picture of how, and what type of, de facto political power may matter for political and
economic equilibria. Fourth, some of the theories emphasizing the importance of de facto
political power (e.g. Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2006)) stress their impact on political
transitions. A more systematic analysis of this question is an area for future work.




                                            31
References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010). Synthetic control methods for
 comparative case studies: Estimating the effect of california’s tobacco control program.
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490), 493–505.

Abadie, A. and J. Gardeazabal (2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study of
 the basque country. American Economic Review 93 (1), 113–132.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, A. Kermani, J. Kwak, and T. Mitton (2013). The value of
  connections in turbulent times: Evidence from the united states. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2000). Why did the west extend the franchise?
  growth, inequality and democracy in historical perspective. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 115 (4), 1167–1199.

Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democ-
  racy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; New York.

Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2008). Persistence of power, elites and institutions.
  American Economic Review 98 (1), 267–293.

Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power,
  Prosperity, and Poverty. Crown, New York.

Adamic, L. A. and N. Glance (2005). The political blogosphere and the 2004 us election:
 Divided they blog. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Link Discovery,
 pp. 36–43. ACM.

Aidt, T. S. and R. Franck (2013). How to get the snowball rolling and extend the franchise:
  Voting on the great reform act of 1832. Public Choice 155 (3-4), 229–250.

Aidt, T. S. and R. Franck (2014). Democratization under the threat of revolution: evi-
  dence from the great reform act of 1832. Working Paper .

Aidt, T. S. and P. S. Jensen (2013). Democratization and the size of government: Evidence
  from the long 19th century. Public Choice 157 (3-4), 511–542.

Alesina, A., S. Özler, N. Roubini, and P. Swagel (1996). Political instability and economic
  growth. Journal of Economic Growth 1 (2), 189–211.

Alesina, A. and R. Perotti (1996). Income distribution, political instability, and invest-
  ment. European Economic Review 40 (6), 1203–1228.

Amin, G. (2011). Egypt in the Era of Hosni Mubarak: 1981-2011. American University
 in Cairo Press, Cairo; New York.


                                            32
Becker, B., D. Bergstresser, and G. Subramanian (2013). Does shareholder proxy access
  improve firm value? evidence from the business roundtable’s challenge. Journal of Law
  and Economics 56 (1), 127–160.

Bidner, C. and P. Francois (2013). The emergence of political accountability. The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 128 (3), 1397–1448.

Campante, F. R. and D. Chor (2012). Why was the arab world poised for revolution?
  schooling, economic opportunities, and the arab spring. Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 26 (2), 167–188.

Chaney, E. (2012). Democratic change in the arab world, past and present. Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity .

Chaney, E. (2013). Revolt on the nile: Economic shocks, religion, and political power.
  Econometrica 81 (5), 2033–2053.

Collins, W. J. and R. A. Margo (2007). The economic aftermath of the 1960s riots in amer-
  ican cities: Evidence from property values. The Journal of Economic History 67 (4),
  849–883.

Dinç, I. S. (2005). Politicians and banks: Political influences on government-owned banks
  in emerging markets. Journal of Financial Economics 77 (2), 453–479.

Dube, A., E. Kaplan, and S. Naidu (2011). Coups, corporations, and classified informa-
 tion. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3), 1375–1409.

Edmond, C. (2013). Information manipulation, coordination, and regime change. The
  Review of Economic Studies 80 (4), 1422–1458.

Faccio, M. (2006). Politically connected firms. The American Economic Review 96 (1),
  369–386.

Faccio, M., R. W. Masulis, and J. McConnell (2006). Political connections and corporate
  bailouts. The Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2597–2635.

Fearon, J. D. (2011). Self-enforcing democracy.         The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 126 (4), 1661–1708.

Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. American Economic
  Review 91 (4), 1095–1102.

Gilli, M. (2012). A simple model of repression and revolt in autocracies applied to the
  arab spring. CISEPS Working Paper Series .

Greenwood, R. (2005). Short- and long-term demand curves for stocks: Theory and
  evidence on the dynamics of arbitrage. Journal of Financial Economics 75 (3), 607–
  649.

                                           33
Haber, S., N. Maurer, and A. Razo (2004). The Politics of Property Rights: Political
  Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, 1876-1929. Cam-
  bridge University Press, New York; Cambridge.

Harb, I. (2003). The egyptian military in politics: Disengagement or accommodation?
  Middle East Journal 57 (2), pp. 269–290.

Hershlag, Z. Y. (1980). Introduction to the Modern Economic History of the Middle East
  (2nd rev. ed. ed.). Brill Archive, Leiden.

Issawi, C. (1961). Egypt since 1800: A study in lop-sided development. The Journal of
   Economic History 21 (1), 1–25.

Johnson, S. and T. Mitton (2003). Cronyism and capital controls: Evidence from malaysia.
  Journal of Financial Economics 67 (2), 351–382.

Kent, L. and T. Phan (2014). A model of the arab spring revolutions: Why did the arab
  spring turn out differently across countries? mimeo William and Mary .

Kepel, G. (1985). Muslim Extremism in Egypt: The Prophet and Pharaoh. University of
  California Press, Berkeley.

Kepel, G. (2006). Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. IB Tauris, London.

Khwaja, A. I. and A. Mian (2005). Do lenders favor politically connected firms? rent
 provision in an emerging financial market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4),
 1371–1411.

King, G., J. Pan, and M. E. Roberts (2013). How censorship in china allows government
  criticism but silences collective expression. American Political Science Review 107,
  1–18.

Kricheli, R., Y. Livne, and B. Magaloni (2011). Taking to the streets: Theory and evidence
  on protests under authoritarianism. In APSA 2010 Annual Meeting Paper, pp. 1–45.

Kuran, T. (1989). Sparks and prairie fires: A theory of unanticipated political revolution.
 Public Choice 61 (1), 41–74.

Kuran, T. (1991). Liberalization and democratization in the soviet union and eastern
 europe. World Politics 44 (01), 7–48.

Kuran, T. (2010). Islam and Mammon: The Economic Predicaments of Islamism. Prince-
 ton University Press.

Landes, D. S. (1958). Bankers and Pashas: International Finance and Economic Imperi-
  alism in Egypt. Heinemann, London.



                                            34
Leuz, C. and F. Oberholzer-Gee (2006). Political relationships, global financing, and cor-
  porate transparency: Evidence from indonesia. Journal of Financial Economics 81 (2),
  411–439.

Lohmann, S. (1994). The dynamics of informational cascades: The monday demonstra-
  tions in leipzig, east germany. World Politics 47 (01), 42–101.

Madestam, A., D. Shoag, S. Veuger, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2013). Do political
 protests matter? evidence from the tea party movement. The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 128 (4), 1633–1685.

Osman, T. (2010). Egypt on the Brink: from Nasser to Mubarak. Yale University Press,
  New Haven, CT.

Overland, J., K. L. Simons, and M. Spagat (2005). Political instability and growth in
 dictatorships. Public Choice 125 (3-4), 445–470.

Owen, E. R. J. (1969). Cotton and the Egyptian Economy, 1820-1914: A Study in Trade
 and Development. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Riesebrodt, M. (1993). Pious Passion: The Emergence of Modern Fundamentalism in the
  United States and Iran. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Roberts, B. E. (1990). A dead senator tells no lies: Seniority and the distribution of
  federal benefits. American Journal of Political Science 34 (1), 31–58.

Sayyid-Marsot, A. L. (1985). A Short History of Modern Egypt. Cambridge University
  Press, Cambridge; New York.

Svensson, J. (1998). Investment, property rights and political instability : Theory and
  evidence. European Economic Review 42 (7), 1317–1341.

Voth, H.-J. and T. Ferguson (2008). Betting on hitler: The value of political connections
  in nazi germany. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1), 101–137.

Weber, I., V. R. K. Garimella, and A. Batayneh (2013). Secular vs. islamist polarization
 in egypt on twitter. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference
 on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, pp. 290–297. ACM.




                                           35
                              Table 1: Summary Statistics


                     Panel A: Firm Characteristics by Network
                 (1)     (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)    (6)                  (7)
                        Share                           Mean
                  N Market Cap      Size    Leverage β W orld β Egypt              β U nrest

All              177       1.00         800.87       0.39       0.53     0.79      0.0023
s.d.                                   1986.15       1.05       0.88     0.80      0.0153
Unconnected      114       0.41        465.46        0.37       0.51     0.79      0.0028
s.d.                                   1431.53       1.24       0.95     0.95      0.0192
Connected        63        0.59        1412.17       0.43       0.57     0.79      0.0015
s.d.                                   2627.07       0.59       0.77     0.47      0.0042
NDP              22        0.33        2436.62       0.65       0.58     0.61      0.0003
s.d.                                   3429.74       0.61       1.23     0.50      0.0053
Military         33        0.12         240.11       0.25       0.56     0.88      0.0015
s.d.                                    340.43       0.44       0.43     0.45      0.0035
Islamic          13        0.19        2481.98       0.49       0.77     0.68      0.0019
s.d.                                   2780.73       0.67       1.51     0.64      0.0058

Notes: The table presents means and standard deviations of firm characteristics on Jan-
uary 1, 2011, before the beginning of Egypt’s Arab Spring. The first panel gives statistics
for all firms. The second and third panels show the same statistics for connected vs. non-
connected and NDP-, Military-, and Islamic-connected firms, respectively. Among the 13
Islamic firms, 5 are connected to NDP and the other 8 are connected to neither NDP
nor the military. Share Market Cap denotes the share of each group of firms in the total
market capitalization of all firms in our sample on January 1, 2011. Size is a firm’s book
value in millions of Egyptian pounds. Leverage is total debt over total assets. β W orld
and β Egypt denote firms’ beta with respect to the MSCI-world and -Egypt indices, respec-
tively. Both variables are calculated using return data for the 2010 calendar year. β U
                                                                                      i
                                                                                        nrest

denotes our measure of the sensitivity of a firm’s return to general unrest in the country.
It is calculated by regressing a firm’s return on a dummy variable that is one on the two
trading days that follow strikes, boycotts, riots, and instances of ethnic clashes between
Muslims and Copts (the Christian minority in Egypt) that occurred between January 1,
2005, and December 31, 2010.




                                             36
                             Table 1 Summary Statistics (continued)


                 Panel B: Summary Statistics by Phase of Egypt’s Arab Spring
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)    (5)
                                   Mubarak’s Military        Islamist    Post-    All
                                       Fall        Rule        Rule     Islamist Phases
Date Range                          01/01/11 04/18/11 08/13/12 07/05/13 01/01/11
                                    -04/17/11 -08/12/12 07/04/13 07/29/13 07/29/13

Trading Days                               38.00        323.00       219.00       16.00       596.00

Means per Trading Day
Tahrir Protesters (’000)                  838.07         13.69        23.57       31.88        70.37
Rabaa Protesters (’000)                    0.00           0.00         0.46        6.44         0.34
Retweets of Opposition Leaders             1.74          3.31         5.56        12.48         4.28
Tahrir Hashtags                            0.64           1.15         0.77        2.31         1.01
Opposition Turnover Rate                   5.43           8.00        10.12       18.57         8.90

Daily Mean Return on Portfolio of
All Connected Firms                        -0.60         -0.09        -0.01        0.18        -0.08
NDP                                        -1.05         -0.09        -0.00        0.08        -0.11
Military                                   -0.31         -0.09        -0.03        0.24        -0.07
Islamic                                    -1.01         -0.04        -0.00        0.22        -0.08
Unconnected Firms                          -0.48         -0.15        -0.04        0.32        -0.12
All Firms                                  -0.01         -0.00        -0.00        0.00        -0.00

Incumbent Group                            NDP          Military     Islamic     Islamic       N/A

Notes: The table presents the number of trading days and means per trading day of time-series
variables used in our analysis by phase of Egypt’s Arab Spring. Columns 1-4 show statistics for each
of the four phases, whereas column 5 gives statistics for all four phases combined. Tahrir Protesters
(’000) and Rabaa Protesters (’000) give the number of protesters in thousands in Tahrir and Rabaa
Square, respectively. Retweets of Opposition Leaders refers to the number of retweets received by a
list of prominent members of the opposition. Note that this list changes as groups move in and out
of power; see Appendix A.4 for details. Tahrir Hashtags denotes the number of tweets containing
a hashtag containing the word “Tahrir.” Opposition Turnover Rate is measured as the number of
Twitter users who retweet a tweet of an opposition leader in t − 1 but not in t, divided by the average
number of retweeters on the two days in percent. Throughout, we assign tweets made during non-
trading days and the number of protesters turning out on non-trading days to the following trading
day. Daily Mean Returns denotes the returns in percent on an equally weighted portfolio of all
connected firms, NDP-connected firms, military-connected firms, Islamic firms, non-connected firms,
and all firms, respectively. Incumbent group denotes the group (NDP, Military, Islamist) that is the
target of protests in Tahrir Square during each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring.




                                                   37
                   Table 2: Firm Connections by Sector


                            NDP    Military   Islamic   Non-connected    All

Agriculture                  0         0        0             8           8
Construction                 3         0        0             7          10
Consumer Goods               0         1        0             3           4
Education                    0         0        0             2           2
Financial Services           4         0        5            23          31
Food and Beverages           2         8        1            10          20
Health Care                  1         4        0             6          11
Industrial Manufacturing     3        10        1            23          37
Leisure and Tourism          1         1        0             7           9
Media                         0        1         0            0           1
Mining and Metals            2         2        0             3           7
Oil and Gas                  0         2        0             2           4
Real Estate                  4         0        4            18          23
Services                     0         0        0             1           1
Telecommunications           1         0        2             0           3
Transport                    1         4        0             1           6
Total                        22       33        13           114         177

Notes: The table shows the number of NDP-connected, military-connected,
Islamic, non-connected, and all firms in each of the 16 sectors of the econ-
omy. There is no overlap between NDP-, military-, and nonconnected firms.
Among the 13 Islamic firms , 5 are connected to NDP and the other 8 are
connected to neither the NDP nor the military. Definitions of sectors are
taken from Zawya.




                                     38
                                        Table 3: Mubarak’s Fall


                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)            (6)           (7)
                                                     CR[0,8]                                  CAR[0,8]

NDP                -0.086*   -0.131**     -0.142**    -0.131**   -0.142**     -0.200***        -0.145**
                   (0.049)    (0.049)      (0.059)     (0.046)    (0.054)   [-0.099,0.101]      (0.056)
Military           0.048*      0.032      0.075**        0.032      0.035        0.053           0.051
                   (0.028)    (0.030)      (0.021)     (0.026)    (0.033)   [-0.066,0.082]      (0.035)
Islamic             -0.031     -0.064       -0.058      -0.064     -0.090     -0.159***         -0.125*
                   (0.054)    (0.051)      (0.063)     (0.041)    (0.058)   [-0.107,0.130]      (0.066)
β W orld                      0.037**        0.023       0.037    0.050**                       0.132**
                              (0.016)      (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.013)                       (0.046)
β Egypt                        -0.028       -0.021      -0.028   -0.093**
                              (0.018)      (0.025)     (0.023)    (0.030)
β U nrest                      2.134*        0.897       2.134      1.812                      11.219**
                              (1.182)      (1.337)     (2.253)    (2.039)                       (4.632)
Size                          0.024**      0.022**     0.024**    0.016*                         0.014
                              (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.009)                       (0.009)
Leverage                       -0.024       -0.003     -0.024*     -0.028                        0.017
                              (0.017)      (0.019)     (0.014)    (0.022)                       (0.027)
R2                  0.252       0.320        0.138       0.320      0.387                        0.451
N                    145         143          143         143        136                          143

Sector F.E.          yes        yes         no            yes      yes            no              yes
Adjusted S.E.        no         no          no            yes      no             no              no
Weights              no         no          no            no       yes            no              no
Matching E’tor       no         no          no            no       no             yes             no

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification (2) for the event window January 25 to
March 30, 2011
                              CR[n, m] = Ni0 γ + Xi0 ν + η s + i .
The dependent variable in columns 1-6 is CR[n, m], the cumulative return on each firm’s stock
between the opening of trade on the start date n and the closing of trade on the end date m.
Columns 7 instead uses the cumulative abnormal return relative to an Egyptian market CAPM,
CAR[n, m], as dependent variable. Ni denotes the vector of dummies reflecting NDP-, military-,
and Islamic-connected firms. The vector of controls, Xi , contains a constant term, each firm’s
world-market beta, β W i
                         orld
                              , Egyptian-market beta, β Egypt
                                                        i     , unrest beta, β iU nrest , and controls for
size and leverage. η s denotes a full set of (16) sector fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. In column 5, each observation is weighted with the log number of transactions on
the last trading day of the event window. Standard errors in column 4 are adjusted for the cross-
correlation of firms’ returns in pre-event data. Columns 6 uses a synthetic matching estimators
calculated from comparing the returns on 20 NDP-, 32 military-, and 13 Islamic-connected firms
with 97 non-connected firms. 95% confidence intervals are in brackets.




                                                     39
  Table 4: Placebo Events during 2010 Calendar Year


                (1)              (2)               (3)
               Nag             Labor            State of
            Hammadi           Dispute,         Emergency
            Massacre          Strikes          Extended
Panel A    CR[-270,-269]    CR[-192,-190]     CR[-185,-184]

NDP             -0.005              0.021          -0.013
               (0.010)            (0.018)         (0.014)
Military        0.016              0.038           -0.006
               (0.012)            (0.026)         (0.019)
Islamic         -0.004             -0.016          -0.007
               (0.011)            (0.016)         (0.013)
R2               0.203              0.063           0.060
N                 135                136             136

             Editor of       Regulation of      Satellite
            Al-Dostour        Mass SMS          Channels
              Sacked                           Shut down
Panel B     CR[-80,-79]       CR[-75,-74]      CR[-73,-72]

NDP             -0.002             -0.001          -0.003
               (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.009)
Military        -0.004             0.004           0.006
               (0.005)            (0.008)         (0.008)
Islamic          0.008             0.008           0.010
               (0.012)            (0.005)         (0.010)
R2              -0.021              0.076           0.002
N                 129                146             144

Notes: The table applies our baseline specification from
column 2 of Table 3 to different political events from
the 2010 calendar year. The table reports only the co-
efficients of interest and omits covariates in order to
save space. See the caption of Table 3 for details on
the specification. Events in Panel A: 10 dead after at-
tacks on Coptic Christians in the town of Nag Hammadi
(worst sectarian violence since 2000); strikes for a higher
minimum wage; parliament votes to extend the state of
emergency for 2 years; Events in Panel B: the indepen-
dent Al-Dostour newspaper sacks its outspoken editor-
in-chief, Ibrahim Issa, raising protests within the jour-
nalistic community; rumors in government press that the
Ministry of Communications is planning to impose new
regulations on mass text messaging; government shuts
down four independent satellite channels.


                             40
                      Table 5: Post-Mubarak Events


                   Panel A: Events during Military Rule

                    (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)
                  Military         Retake           Presidential Elections
                 Crackdown         Tahrir          1st round     2nd round
                 CR[91,117]      CR[163,165]      CR[291,292] CR[309,310]

NDP                   0.004          -0.010           -0.015         0.018**
                    (0.029)         (0.012)          (0.010)         (0.008)
Military            0.080*         -0.024**           0.002          0.015*
                    (0.044)         (0.008)          (0.007)         (0.009)
Islamic              -0.009          0.001            0.010          0.022*
                    (0.030)         (0.012)          (0.008)         (0.012)
R2                    0.025           0.250            0.068          0.241
N                      138             141              126            137
Sector F.E.            yes             yes              yes            yes
Std. Controls          yes             yes              yes            yes

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification (2) for the event
windows July 31-September 08, 2011 (column 1), November 12-21, 2011
(column 2), May 28-29, 2012 (column 3), and June 24-25, 2012 (column
4):
                  CR[n, m] = Ni0 γ + Xi0 ν + η s + i .
The dependent variables in all columns is CR[n, m], the cumulative re-
turn on each firm’s stock between the opening of trade on the start date n
and the closing of trade on the end date m. Ni denotes the vector of dum-
mies reflecting NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms. The vector
of controls, Xi , contains a constant term, each firm’s world-market beta,
βWi
    orld
         , Egyptian-market beta, β Egypt
                                   i     , unrest beta, β Ui nrest , and controls
for size and leverage. η s denotes a full set of (16) sector fixed effects. Ro-
bust standard errors in parentheses. The table shows only the coefficients
of interest and omits covariates to save space.




                                       41
          Table 5: Post-Mubarak Events (continued)

            Panel B: Events during Islamist Rule

                      (1)                (2)              (3)
                   Generals          Constitution       Mursi
                    sacked             passes           sacked
                  CR[343,344]        CR[433,433]      CR[541,562]

NDP                   -0.002           -0.011**          -0.019
                     (0.006)            (0.005)         (0.021)
Military              -0.004             0.003           -0.009
                     (0.007)            (0.005)         (0.029)
Islamic              0.010*              -0.005        -0.054**
                     (0.006)            (0.005)         (0.016)
R2                     0.069              0.050           0.054
N                       122                128             127
Sector F.E.             yes                yes             yes
Std. Controls           yes                yes             yes

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification
(2) for the event windows August 12-13, 2012 (column 1),
December 23-23, 2012 (column 2), and June 4-July 4, 2013
(column 3):

              CR[n, m] = Ni0 γ + Xi0 ν + η s + i .

The dependent variable in all columns is CR[n, m], the
cumulative return on each firm’s stock between the opening
of trade on the start date n and the closing of trade on the
end date m. Ni denotes the vector of dummies reflecting
NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms. The vector
of controls, Xi , contains a constant term, each firm’s world-
market beta, β W    i
                      orld
                           , Egyptian-market beta, β Egypt
                                                     i     , unrest
         U nrest
beta, β i        , and controls for size and leverage. η s denotes
a full set of (16) sector fixed effects. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. The table shows only the coefficients of
interest and omits covariates to save space.




                                42
                              Table 6: External Validity


                                   (1)                (2)               (3)
Panel A                                    Number of Board Members
                             Pre-Revolution     Military Rule      Islamist Rule
                              Jan 1, 2011       Jun 30, 2012       Jun 30, 2013

Prominent NDP members              19                      16                14
Using military titles              21                      28                22
Known Muslim Brothers               1                       0                 0

Panel B                        Profitability of Connected and Non-connected Firms
                             Pre-Revolution        Military Rule      Islamist Rule
                           Jul 2009-Jun 2010 Jul 2011-Jun 2012 Jul 2012-Jun 2013

NDP-connected firms               11%                  2.8%                 2.2%
Military-connected firms           8%                 11.4%               - 0.01%
Islamic firms                     7.9%                 2.4%                 4.9%
Non-connected firms                7%                   4%                 11.9%

Notes: Panel A shows the total number of board members of firms in our sample who
appear on a list of 6,000 prominent NDP members, who use military titles, or who are
known Muslim Brothers (see section 2.1 of the main text for details). Panel B shows the
profitability of NDP-connected, military-connected, Islamic, and non-connected firms in
the reporting years 2010, 2012, and 2013. Note that the reporting years 2012 and 2013
coincide roughly with our definition of the “Military Rule” and “Islamist Rule” periods
as defined in Table 1.




                                          43
      Table 7: The Effect of Street Protests on Stock Market Valuations


                                      (1)              (2)       (3)         (4)
                                    Mubarak’s       Military Islamist      Post-
                                      Fall            Rule      Rule      Islamist
                                                  Daily Log Returns × 100

NDP x Tahrir Protesters              -1.614***       -0.135       0.672*          -0.308
                                      (0.602)       (0.411)       (0.382)        (0.742)
Military x Tahrir Protesters           -0.886      -0.889***      -0.527          -0.145
                                      (0.612)       (0.326)       (0.324)        (0.617)
Islamic x Tahrir Protesters             1.773        0.600         0.421         -1.332*
                                      (1.213)       (0.382)       (0.477)        (0.815)
NDP x Rabaa Protesters                                                            -8.089
                                                                                (11.595)
Military x Rabaa Protesters                                                       -6.406
                                                                                 (9.539)
Islamic x Rabaa Protesters                                                      27.850**
                                                                                (12.895)
R2                                     0.610          0.331        0.421           0.423
N                                      5603           43997        27210           1895
Total # Tahrir Protesters              1.220          5.290        4.175           1.020
Total # Rabaa Protesters                                                           0.206
Incumbent                              NDP          Military      Islamic        Islamic

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification (3),

                  Rit = Ni γ + (Pt × Ni0 ) γ p + Xi0 ν t + δ t + η s + it,

for each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab Spring. Dependent variable in
all columns is Rit , the log return on firm i at time t multiplied by 100. Ni
denotes the vector of dummies reflecting NDP-connected, military-connected,
and Islamic firms. Pt denotes the number of protesters in Tahrir Square,
capped at and normalized with 500,000. Xi denotes the vector of controls that
contains β iW orld , β iEgypt , β Ui nrest , and controls for firm size and leverage. δ t and
η s are time and sector fixed effects, respectively. The specification in column
4 also contains the interaction between Ni and the number of (pro-Islamist)
protesters in Rabaa Square. Total # Protesters gives the sum of our (capped
and normalized) measure of Tahrir and Rabaa protesters by phase. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses.




                                             44
                      Table 8: Protests Reduce Stock Market Valuation of Firms Connected to Incumbent Government


                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)
                                                                                                   Daily Log Returns × 100

     Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters                  -0.879***     -0.751***      -0.834***      -0.855***     -0.754***   -0.695***   -0.483*   -0.685***     -0.548**
                                                     (0.243)       (0.254)        (0.278)        (0.281)       (0.255)     (0.252)    (0.247)    (0.234)       (0.271)
     Other Connected x Tahrir Prot.                   -0.281        -0.160         -0.110         -0.122        -0.165      -0.092     -0.008     -0.166        -0.243
                                                     (0.205)       (0.216)        (0.227)        (0.228)       (0.218)     (0.217)    (0.222)    (0.208)       (0.223)
     R2                                                0.386         0.404          0.337          0.320         0.404       0.404      0.405      0.387         0.404
     N                                                78705         78705          72527          66857         78705       78705      78705      78705         78705

     Include time effect ×Xi                            no            yes            yes           yes            yes        yes        yes         no           no
     Drop changes in gov’t or constitution              no            no             yes           yes            no         no         no          no           no
     Drop all events analyzed in section 3              no            no             no            yes            no         no         no          no           no
     Include firm fixed effect                          no            no             no            no             yes        no         no          no           no
     Include time effect ×Xi2                           no            no             no            no             no         yes        no          no           no
     Include sector effect × Tahrir Protesters          no            no             no            no             no         no         yes         yes          no
                                                        no            no             no            no             no         no         no          no           yes




45
     Include time effect × firm effect

     Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification
                                                                              0
                                                         Rit = Iit γ + (Pt × Iit ) γ p + Xi0 ν t + δ t + η s + it .

     Dependent variable in all columns is Rit , the log return on firm i at time t multiplied by 100. Iit denotes a vector of two dummies reflecting
     connections to the incumbent government and to the two other non-incumbent power groups during each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab
     Spring, respectively. Pt denotes the number of protesters in Tahrir Square, capped at and normalized with 500,000. Xi denotes the vector of
                                orld
     controls that contains β W
                              i      , β iEgypt , β iU nrest , and controls for firm-size and leverage. δ t and η s are time and sector fixed effects, respectively.
     All specifications also control for the interaction between Iit and the number of (pro-Islamist) protesters in Rabaa Square. Robust standard
     errors are in parentheses. Column 2 shows our baseline specification. Column 3 drops all dates identified in our event analysis as involving
     changes in government or formal institutions plus the next three trading days (in particular, it drops the fall of Mubarak, the first and the
     second round of presidential elections, the passing of the Muslim Brotherhood’s constitution, and the military coup against Mursi). In column
     4, we drop all of the events studied in Tables 3 and 5 plus three trading days after each event. Column 5 adds firm fixed effects to the baseline
     specification in column 2. Column 6 includes the interaction of the number of protesters in Tahrir square square of the parametric controls in
     the vector Xi . Column 7 includes the interaction of all (16) sector fixed effects with the number of protesters in Tahrir Square, Pt × δ s . Column
     8 shows the same specification as column 7 but drops the interaction δ t × Xi . Column 8 also drops the interaction δ t × Xi , but includes the
     interaction of time fixed effects with sector fixed effects, δ t × δ s .
                Table 9: Timing of the Effect of Protests on Market Valuation of Connected Firms


                                                 (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)               (6)
                                                                 Daily Log Returns × 100
     Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters                     -0.757***             -0.736***                    -0.751***
                                                        (0.254)               (0.255)                      (0.256)
     Other Connected x Tahrir Protesters                 -0.143                -0.153                       -0.146
                                                        (0.218)               (0.217)                      (0.218)
     Lead Incumbent x Tahrir Prot.              0.003     0.063
                                               (0.250)  (0.254)
     Lead Other Connected x Tahrir Prot.       -0.099    -0.071
                                               (0.224)  (0.228)
     Lag 1 Incumbent x Tahrir Prot.                              -1.066*** -1.522*** -1.021***            -1.501***
                                                                  (0.299)     (0.347)    (0.307)           (0.348)
     Lag 1 Oth. Connected x T. Prot.                               0.349        0.465     0.352              0.464
                                                                  (0.243)     (0.336)    (0.260)           (0.336)
     Lag 2 Incumbent x Tahrir Prot.                                                       -0.287           -0.580*




46
                                                                                         (0.342)            (0.349)
     Lag 2 Oth. Connected x T. Prot.                                                      -0.048             0.010
                                                                                         (0.275)            (0.288)
     Lag 3 Incumbent x Tahrir Prot.                                                       -0.042            -0.143
                                                                                         (0.268)            (0.263)
     Lag 3 Oth. Connected x T. Prot.                                                       0.108             0.114
                                                                                         (0.241)            (0.240)
     R2                                         0.404     0.404    0.404        0.404      0.404             0.404
     N                                          78705    78705     78705       78705      78705              78705

     Notes: This table shows variations of the baseline specification in column 2 of Table 8 that add leads and
     lags of the term (Pt × Iit0 ), where Iit again denotes the vector of two dummies reflecting affiliation to the
     incumbent government and to the two other non-incumbent power groups during each of the four phases
     of Egypt’s Arab Spring. See the caption of Table 8 for details. The specifications in columns 1, 3, and 5
     add leads and lags while dropping the interaction of the current number of protesters with Iit .
                          Table 10: Activity on Twitter Predicts Protests


                           (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)      (8)
                         Mubarak’s    Military    Islamist   Post-                      All
                           Fall        Rule         Rule    Islamist                   Phases
Panel A                                          Number of Tahrir Protesters

Tahrir Hashtags           3.834**     0.089***    0.642**     0.707    0.219***               0.108    0.237*
                          (1.922)      (0.025)    (0.261)    (0.738)    (0.075)              (0.115)   (0.133)
Lag Tahrir Hashtags                                                               0.225***    0.137
                                                                                   (0.077)   (0.123)
Lead Tahrir Hashtags                                                                                    -0.022
                                                                                                       (0.117)
Internet Shutdown         2.006*                                       1.859*      1.865*    1.871*    1.858*
                          (1.090)                                      (1.069)     (1.070)   (1.070)   (1.070)
R2                         0.148        0.046      0.250      0.112     0.078       0.080     0.083     0.077
N                            83          483        326         25       917         917       917       916

Panel B                                          Number of Tahrir Protesters

Retweets of Opp.           -1.037     0.047***   0.469***     0.035    0.258**                0.181     0.137
                          (1.265)      (0.018)    (0.123)    (0.063)   (0.103)               (0.136)   (0.195)
Lag Retweets of Opp.                                                              0.240***    0.098
                                                                                   (0.091)   (0.102)
Lead Retweets of Opp.                                                                                   0.155
                                                                                                       (0.151)
Internet Shutdown          1.232                                       1.987*      1.974*    2.005*    2.016*
                          (1.076)                                      (1.074)     (1.074)   (1.075)   (1.073)
R2                         0.021        0.002      0.370     -0.043     0.095       0.087     0.098     0.104
N                            83          483        326        25        917         917       917       916

Panel C                                          Number of Tahrir Protesters

Tahrir Hashtags                                                        0.140***               0.080    0.174*
                                                                        (0.050)              (0.107)   (0.101)
Lag Tahrir Hashtags                                                               0.155**     0.079
                                                                                  (0.061)    (0.120)
Lead Tahrir Hashtags                                                                                    -0.055
                                                                                                       (0.104)
Retweets of Opp.                                                       0.202*                 0.133     0.086
                                                                       (0.107)               (0.138)   (0.198)
Lag Retweets of Opp.                                                               0.178*     0.081
                                                                                   (0.092)   (0.107)
Lead Retweets of Opp.                                                                                   0.151
                                                                                                       (0.159)
Internet Shutdown                                                        1.993*     1.984*   2.012* 2.018*
                                                                        (1.074)     (1.074)  (1.076) (1.074)
R2                                                                        0.111      0.106    0.116     0.117
N                                                                          917        917      917       916
Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates with robust standard errors in parentheses. Dependent variable in all
columns is the number of protesters in Tahrir Square on any given day. Independent variables are the number
of tweets with Tahrir hashtags (Panels A and B) and the number of retweets received by opposition leaders
(Panels B and C). The dependent variable and these independent variables are normalized by deducting the
sample mean and dividing by the sample standard deviation. All specifications contain a constant term (not
reported) and a fixed effect for days in which Twitter was blocked in Egypt (Internet Shutdown, not reported
in Panel C).



                                                     47
                           Table 11: Activity on Twitter and Stock Returns


                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)             (5)
                                                                       Daily Log Returns × 100
Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters                                     -0.072***            -0.084***          -1.548*
                                                                   (0.023)               (0.023)          (0.805)
Other Connected x Tahrir Prot.                                      -0.003                -0.004           0.396
                                                                   (0.026)               (0.026)          (0.548)
Incumbent x Tahrir Hashtags                             0.015        0.023
                                                       (0.025)     (0.026)
Other Connected x T. Hashtags                          -0.018       -0.018
                                                       (0.024)     (0.025)
Incumbent x Retweets of Opposition                                             0.050*   0.060**
                                                                              (0.029)    (0.030)
Other Connected x Retweets of Opp.                                             -0.013     -0.015
                                                                              (0.023)    (0.025)
Incumbent x Opposition Turnover                                                                            -0.003
                                                                                                          (0.007)
Connected x Opposition Turnover                                                                            -0.001
                                                                                                          (0.006)
Incumbent x Tahrir Prot. x Opp. Turnover                                                                  0.138*
                                                                                                          (0.075)
Other Connected x T. Prot. x Opp. Turnover                                                                 -0.037
                                                                                                          (0.051)
R2                                                      0.404       0.404        0.404       0.404         0.404
N                                                       78705       78705        78705       78705         78705

Notes: Ordinary Least Squares estimates of specification,
                                                     
                 Rit = Iit γ + Pt × Ii0 γ p + Tt × Ii0 γ T + Xi0 ν t + δ t + η s + it .

Dependent variable in all columns is Rit , the log return on firm i at time t multiplied by 100. Iit
denotes the vector of two dummies reflecting affiliation to the incumbent government and to the two
other non-incumbent power groups, respectively. Pt denotes the number of protesters in Tahrir Square.
Tt denotes measures of activity on Twitter (Tahrir Hashtags and Retweets of Opposition). Tt and Pt
are normalized by deducting the sample mean and dividing by the sample variance. Xi denotes the
vector of controls that contains β iW orld , β iEgypt , β U
                                                          i
                                                            nrest
                                                                  , and controls for firm size and leverage. δ t and
η s are time and sector fixed effects, respectively. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Column
5 adds the triple-interaction It × Pt × Ot where Ot is the opposition turnover rate measured as the
number Twitter users who re-tweet a tweet of an opposition leader in t − 1 but not in t, divided by
the average number of re-tweeters on the two days in percent.




                                                        48
                                                                        Figure 1: Number of Protesters in Tahrir Square
                                                               500
                 Number of Protesters in Tahrir Square (Thousands)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Post
                                                                     Mubarak's
                                                      400




                                                                       Fall
                                                                                            Military Rule                                                                          Islamist Rule                        Islamist




                                                                                                                              2nd round Presidential Elections
                                                                                                                              1st round Presidential Elections
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rule




                                                                                                                                                                                        Constitution Passes
                                                                                                                                                                 Generals Sacked
                                             300




                                                                           NDP Dissolved




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mursi Toppled
                                                                                                         Retake Tahrir
                                                                                           Crackdown
                                                                                             Military
                  0      100       200




                                         01jan2011                              01jul2011               01jan2012           01jul2012                                               01jan2013                 01jul2013
                                                                                                                          date




Note: Number of protesters in Tahrir Square on each day between January 1, 2011, and July 30, 2013. See
section 2.2 of the main text for details.




                                                                                                                         49
                          Figure 2: Placebo Regressions in Pre-Event Windows




Note: Coefficients and 99%, and 95% confidence intervals on the dummy variable for NDP-connected firms
in specifications corresponding to column 2 of Table 3. The figure shows coefficients for seven consecutive
event windows prior to Jan 25, 2011 (event trading day 0). Each event window consists of 8 consecutive
trading days. For comparison, the coefficient on the far-right side depicts the treatment effect of Mubarak’s
fall shown in column 2 of Table 3.




                                                     50
            Figure 3: Placebo Regressions in Pre-Event Windows using Matching Estimator




Note: Coefficients and 99% and 95% confidence intervals on the dummy variable for NDP-connected firms
in specifications corresponding to column 6 of Table 3. The figure shows coefficients for seven consecutive
event windows prior to January 25, 2011 (event trading day 0). Each event window consists of 8 consecutive
trading days. For comparison, the coefficient on the far-right side depicts the treatment effect of Mubarak’s
fall shown in column 6 of Table 3.




                                                     51
          Figure 4: Histograms of T-Statistics from Placebo Regressions for Specification ( 3)

                   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                       Density




                                      -4                -2                 0              2           4
                                                    T-stat on NDP x Tahrir Protesters (Placebo)
                                      7 out of 200 false positives (3.5%).
                   0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                      Density




                                      -4                -2                 0                 2        4
                                                   T-stat on Military x Tahrir Protesters (Placebo)
                                      6 out of 200 false positives (3%).
                   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                       Density




                                      -4                -2                0                 2         4
                                                   T-stat on Islamic x Tahrir Protesters (Placebo)
                                      6 out of 200 false positives (3%).




Note: The figure shows the results of a placebo experiment in which we use the sample distribution of the
number of protesters in Tahrir square between Jan 1, 2011 and July 30, 2013 to randomly assign a number
of protesters to trading days between January 1 and November 30, 2010. We then estimate specification
(3) using the fictitious data. The figure shows results obtained from 200 random assignments of protesters
to trading days, where the three panels show histograms of the t-statistics on the interaction of dummies
for NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firms with the fictitious number of protesters, respectively.




                                                                      52
A      Appendix to Section 2
A.1     Construction of Unrest Beta
This appendix describes the procedure for generating a time series of violent disruptions in
Egypt from 2005 through 2010. We use the Global Data on Events, Location, and Tone
(GDELT) dataset that contains nearly a quarter-billion political events that occurred
across the world from 1979 to the present. An event is defined as an action taken by a
national, subnational, or transnational actor upon another such actor. Every event and
actor is coded using the Conflict and Mediation Event Observations (CAMEO) coding
system. These events are extracted from news reports by the Textual Analysis by Aug-
mented Replacement Instructions (TABARI) software with a few additional modifications
specific to GDELT for information on location and tone. News sources include interna-
tional, regional, and local news sources, all either in English or translated to English so
that TABARI can parse the reports.
     GDELT uses TABARI to analyze every sentence in a news report, although TABARI
ordinarily only analyzes the lead sentence. TABARI uses simple grammatical rules of
the English language to parse one sentence at a time and identify the subject, verb
phrase, and direct object. The subject and object are then checked against a dictionary
of 60000 political, religious, and ethnic actors (i.e., proper nouns) and 1500 agents (i.e.,
common nouns). If the subject or object is found in the dictionary, then it is converted
into a sequence of CAMEO actor codes using the dictionaries; otherwise, the sentence is
ignored. For example, the dictionary would map “Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak” to
“EGYGOV” (Egyptian government). The subject who initiates the action is called the
source, and the object who receives the action is called the target. Not all event records
in GDELT have both a source and a target. The verb phrase is similarly checked against
a dictionary of verb phrases and either converted to a CAMEO event code or ignored.
The location of an actor or verb is defined as the geographic location in the text of the
article that is the fewest words away from that actor or verb. For example, if “Cairo” is
five words away from the source actor “Mubarak” and “Israel” is twelve words away from
“Mubarak”, then Cairo will be selected as Mubarak’s location. Any event records with
exactly the same date, source, target, and event codes are collapsed into a single event
record.
     We run five Python scripts as follows. The first script downloads files from the GDELT
server a chunk at a time, stores them in our directory, and unzips the packages. We
download all GDELT files from 2005 to March 2013. The second script looks at every
datapoint in the subset of GDELT downloaded by the first script, checks if the event is
somehow recorded as being located in Egypt and if the event is coded as 14 (protest), 18
(assault), or 19 (fight). If the event satisfies these two conditions, then the script stores
its two actor codes into a list. The list of unique actor codes is then written to a separate
file. This file is then manually edited into another file (we refer to this edited list as the
actor sublist), so that it contains only Egyptian actors, relevant transnational actors (e.g.,
most UN organizations, IMF, multinational corporations), relevant ethnic actors (e.g.,


                                             53
Arabs), relevant religious actors (e.g., Christians, Muslims), and all subnational actors
(e.g., police, government, media, health, criminals, rebels, insurgents). The third script
creates two time series, one for events under the 143 event code (strikes and boycotts)
and one for events under the 145 event code (protest violently, riot). It creates these
time series by filtering all GDELT data downloaded by the first script for events that
(1) are somehow recorded as being located in Egypt, and in which (2) both actors are
members of the actor sublist, and (3) the event base code is 143 for one time series and
145 for the other time series. It records all events that pass these filters into two time
series to separate files. The fourth script creates a time series of violence involving Copts
by filtering the subset of GDELT. The conditions for the filter are (1) either one of the
actors is recorded as Coptic or one of the actors is both Christian and Egyptian and the
event is somehow recorded as being located in Egypt, and (2) the event code is either 14
(protest), 18 (assault), 19 (fight), or 20 (mass violence). The fifth script splits the three
time series above into bunchings so that each bunching can be manually verified, where a
bunching is defined as a series of events such that no two consecutive events in the series
are more than five days apart. This script also adds two new columns to each time series.
The columns “strike” and “strike verified” are added to the 143 time series; “riot” and
“riot verified” are added to the 145 time series; “copts” and “copts verified” are added to
the Copts time series. The former of the two columns is recorded as 1 for every datapoint.
The latter is recorded as 0 for every datapoint, to be changed to 1 if the event is verified.
    Then, we manually verify each bunching in the three time series by checking each
bunching to see if corresponds to an event recorded in one of the Major World Publications
on LexisNexis. After performing this LexisNexis search, we look through the search results
for an event that could be classified as either 143, 145, or violence involving Copts. If
such an event is found, we verified the entire bunching by changing the 143/145/copts
verified variable to 1 for all events in that bunching. If the bunching is long (almost a
month or longer), then we do not verify all datapoints in the bunching; instead, we define
an interval by the publication date of the chronologically first such article that fits the
time series and the date of the last such article that fits the time series and verified all
datapoints in that interval (which is a subset of the interval spanned by the bunching).

A.2     Classification of Firms
In this appendix we explain the procedures of classifying our firms as connected to the
NDP or the Military.

A.2.1    NDP-Connected Firms
To classify firms as connected to the NDP, we first scrape a list of names from the website
emeskflol.com. This is a list of approximately 6,000 prominent NDP members posted
online by activists in the aftermath of the fall of the Mubarak regime. The list was
created as part of an internet campaign called “Emsek Felool” (“to catch remnants” of
the old regime) in order to identify publicly the cronies of the old regime. The list gives


                                             54
the full name, the rank within the NDP, and any official function of each prominent NDP
member by Egyptian governorate. The functions it lists include members of parliament,
aldermen, and local and party council members. We classify a firm as connected to the
NDP if the name of at least one of the firm’s major shareholders or board members
appears on the felool list.
    We implement the following merge procedures. If the board member (or the share-
holder) name consists of two names (first and last name), we apply the following criteria:
1) do the person listed in the felool list and the person listed as a board member (or
shareholder) have the same last name? If yes, 2) do the person on the felool list and the
person listed as a board member (or shareholder) have the same first name? If yes, then
we consider the person on the felool list and the board member (or the shareholder) as
potentially the same person. If the board member (or the shareholder) name consists of
more than two names, we apply the following four criteria: 1) do the person listed on the
felool list and the person listed as a board member (or shareholder) have the same last
name? If yes, 2) do the person on the felool list and the person listed as a board member
(or shareholder) have the same first name? If yes, 3) do the person on the felool list and
the person listed as a board member (or shareholder) share a first letter of any of the
middle names? If yes, 4) do the person on the felool list and the person listed as a board
member (or shareholder) share at least one letter of any of the middle names? If yes, then
then we consider the felool person and the board member (or the shareholder) as poten-
tially the same person. We then manually review all the potential matches generated by
the above merging procedures.

A.2.2    Military-Connected Firms
In accordance with the Egyptian constitution, the Egyptian military’s financial accounts
are outside the control of the civilian government (the “two tills” system). We classify
listed firms as connected to the Egyptian military if they are wholly or partially owned
by the military “till”. We identify these firms first by selecting all state-owned holding
companies, that is, government-owned entities that hold stock in listed firms, from the
Zawya database. Although these holdings do not officially declare which of the two “tills”
they are accountable to, we distinguish between military- and civilian-government owned
holdings simply by checking whether the principal officers, shareholders, or board members
of the holding company (or any of its affiliated firms) are linked to the military. Appendix
Table 10 lists these entities, their link to the military and the sources that document these
links.

A.3     Protester Data
We run several Python scripts to construct our time series of the number of protesters.
Three main scripts fully describe this process. The first extracts the number of protesters
for each article, the second extracts the date of the protest from each article, and the
third edits the data. We describe each of these scripts in detail in a separate subsection


                                             55
below. The final output is a table in which each date has a single row and each newspaper
has a single column. An entry in this two-dimensional grid is the maximum observation
reported by that newspaper on that date.

A.3.1    Retrieving the Newspaper Articles
Starting from January 25, 2011, through the end of July 2013, we download all newspa-
per articles containing the words “protesters”/“protestors”, “Tahrir” and “Egypt” from
newspapers in the category “major world publications” of the Lexis Nexis Academic
Service and from all English-language Egyptian news outlets that are available on the
service (Al-Ahram Gate, Al-Ahram Weekly, Al-Akhbar English, and Daily News Egypt).
We write a script that downloads for each article, its news source, date of publication,
and the text of the article. After searching for these articles, they are downloaded in
sets of 500 articles (since LexisNexis caps downloads at 500 articles, and caps searches
at 3000) in plain text (.txt) format. In order to ensure that the Egyptian press cov-
ered by our analysis is balanced between pro- and anti-regime news outlets, we supple-
ment the pool of articles downloaded from LexisNexis with the online content of three
Egyptian news outlets: Al-Masry Al-Youm (http://www.egyptindependent.com/), Al-
Ahram English (http://english.ahram.org.eg/), and Copts United (http://www.copts-
united.com/English/). These three newspapers are chosen because (1) their web sites
are coded in a manner that made it possible to scrape with Python, and (2) the web sites
offer coverage going back to January 25, 2011. Although each news source has its own
script to scrape articles, the procedure of each is roughly the same. The script looks at
the pre-filtered list of top news stories. It extracts the URL for each story and possibly
the date of publication. It then goes to each URL and extracts the text of the article
and the date of publication if not yet extracted. The script then goes to the next page
of top stories and repeats. For Copts United in particular, the lists of top stories are not
paginated like the other news sources. For Copts United, each top story has a particular
index, and the list of top stories when that index is fed into the URL is that top story
and the ten or so other top stories following it. Therefore, the Copts United scraper only
extracts a single URL from each list of top stories (i.e., the URL of the top story with
that particular index), goes to that URL, and extracts the article text. It then repeats
this process for the next index.


A.3.2    Identifying the Number of Protesters
The purpose of this script is to extract the number of protesters from the articles that we
collected. The script first checks to make sure that the words “protestors”/“protesters”,
“Tahrir” and “Egypt” are indeed in the article. It then cuts text snippets (with a length
of 61 words) surrounding numbers (including numbers like “more than a thousand” or
“over a hundred thousand”), and filters these text snippets to increase the chance that
these numbers are indeed the number of protesters in Tahrir Square. Specifically, there
are eight sub-filters in the filter: (1) Checks that there is a synonym of “protester” in the

                                             56
text snippet, (2) Checks that there is a synonym of “Tahrir Square” in the text snippet,
(3) Checks that the word following the number is not an irrelevant word, i.e., a word that
indicates that the snippet does not contain the number of protesters, e.g., “mile”, “killed”,
“soldiers”, “videos”, “gmt”, (4) Checks that the number is not a year, ranging from 1901 to
2014, with year 2000 excluded, (5) Checks that the number is not too small, i.e., less than
100, (6) Checks that words in a tighter radius (seven words) around the number are not
irrelevant words, e.g., “arrested”, “Alexandria”, “pro-regime”, “population”, “Qaddafi”,
(7) Checks that irrelevant (e.g., “Syria”, “Baghdad”, “Boston”) are not anywhere in the
snippet, and (8) Checks that specifically pro-MB words (e.g., “pro-Morsi”, “pro-Mursy”,
“pro-Brotherhood”, “Brotherhood supporters”) are not anywhere in the snippet if the
article was published after the constitutional referendum (on March 19, 2011). Once the
script has a list of text snippets for each article, it chooses the maximum number among
each article’s text snippets. It takes the maximum number rather than all numbers
because many newspapers report the total number of protesters in Tahrir Square that
day, as well as subsets who, e.g., marched to the presidential palace; choosing only the
maximum prevents a downward bias caused by observations that are only of subsets of
the protest, not the total protest.

A.3.3    Identifying the Date of the Protest
This script looks for a date near the number of protesters and also the first date that
appears in the article, using a relative date word, like “yesterday”, “last night”, or “Tues-
day”. If there are one or more dates near the number of protesters, it chooses the one
closest to the number of protesters. If there is no date near the number of protesters,
it chooses the first date in the article as the date of the protest. It then determines the
calendar date by subtracting the right number of days from the date of publication. For
example, if the chosen date is “yesterday”, then the date of the protest will be the date of
publication minus one day. If the chosen date is “Tuesday”, it checks if the date of pub-
lication is on a Tuesday, in which case it decides that the protest date is the publication
date, and if not, then it uses the last Tuesday before the publication date as the protest
date. If it cannot find any date in the article, it marks the date as missing data.

A.3.4    Editing the Data
Our final script converts numbers written as words into numbers, e.g., “one hundred” into
100, “few thousand” into 5000, “several thousand” into 5000, etc. (For a more detailed
listing of this mapping see Appendix Table 11.) It then adds an observation for days in
which no newspaper reported a protest in Tahrir; this observation has 0 protesters, and
the news source, publication date, and article text are marked as missing data.

A.4     Classification of Opposition Figures
We define the opposition during a given phase of the Arab Spring as a group of promi-
nent Twitter users asking protesters to gather in Tahrir to demand the removal of the

                                             57
incumbent government. To this end, we classify prominent Twitter users listed in Ap-
pendix Table 12 into four camps: Secular, Muslim Brotherhood (MB), Salafist, and Old
Regime (that is, both NDP and Military). We search official sources on the internet for
public announcements made by each of the above groups regarding their intention to join
Tahrir protests. Then, our choice of which political groups constitute the opposition in
a given phase is defined on the basis of these public announcements. For instance, the
MB’s political wing, the Freedom and Justice Party, announced their refusal to take part
in the demonstrations that aimed to put an end to the Military rule. So, while Twitter
accounts of Muslim Brotherhood activists are included in our definition of opposition dur-
ing the Fall of Mubarak (phase 1), they are excluded during the period of Military Rule
(phase 2). In July 2013, following the military coup against President Morsi, members
of April 6th group participated in The Third Square, a movement that rejects both MB
and military rule. So, while the April 6th members are included in phases 1, 2, and 3,
they are excluded from phase 4. We end up with the following classification of opposi-
tion: Phase 1 (Mubarak’s Fall): Secular, MB, Salafist; Phase 2 (Military Rule): Secular;
Phase 3 (Islamist Rule): Secular and Old Regime supporters (NDP and Military); Phase
4 (Post-Islamist): Secular, Salafist, and Old Regime supporters (NDP and Military).

A.5     Twitter Data
In this appendix we describe how we assemble our databases of Egyptian tweets. To build
our Twitter databases we use a number of scripts that each serve a different function. We
first describe the general ideas behind the scraping process and how the data are assembled
and then we describe our two main Twitter databases.

A.5.1    The Twitter Scripts
We use the Twitter Application Programming Interface (API) to scrape our data. The
Twitter API is a tool used to access data available from Twitter. It allows authorized
applications to interface with Twitter’s data. We use the REST API version as it allows
access to historical tweets. Twitter uses the OAuth authentication protocol to allow access
to the API. In order to access the API, we first create a Twitter developer account and
then get the access keys for this account. This allows us to make requests to the Twitter
API. There are several types of requests that we made to the API. The first type requests
the timeline of a user. To do this, we specify the screen name or Twitter ID for the user
in question. The timeline is a list of all available tweets for the given user. Twitter puts
a limit on the number of tweets returned by this method. We can get a maximum of the
most recent 3200 tweets with a “get timeline” request. The second type of request gets
the retweets for a given tweet. A request to get retweets will return the 100 most recent
retweets for the given tweet. The tweet can be specified with a tweet ID, which is included
in the tweet object. The two types of requests return a list of tweet objects. A tweet
object is one of the basic units available from the Twitter API. It contains a large amount
of information on the tweet and the user who made the tweet. (The full list is available at


                                            58
https://dev.twitter.com/docs/platform-objects/tweets.) The first key element is the text.
The text contains the actual text of the tweet. This is in unicode, allowing for non-Latin
characters. The text is limited by Twitter’s policy to 140 characters. The tweet also
contains a created-at element which represents when the tweet was published by the user.
This is a UTC time stamp. We primarily limit ourselves to days, however, the time stamp
allows for more granular units of measurement. The tweet also contains an internal ID
that can be used to get other information about the tweet, including retweets.
    To scrape the Twitter data, we run a Python script that downloads the desired data
and stores the resulting tweets in json files. These json files are later moved into a
MongoDb database to make access easier.

A.5.2     The Twitter Databases
Our Twitter analyses are based on the combination of two databases. The first database
covers all the tweets for a list of roughly 318 thousand Egyptian users who tweeted at
least once between July 1, 2013 and September 17, 2013. We obtain this list from an
Egyptian social media firm (25trends.me). We implemented the following procedure to
obtain the tweets of these users. For each of these users, we had a screen name and
were able to get the tweets using the “get timeline” request mentioned above. Due to
the limitations of the “get timeline” request, this database only has the most recent 3200
tweets for each user. While this means that for the majority of users we have their entire
timeline of tweets, there are a number of cases where the user had too many tweets to
get the entire timeline. 262442 users have less than 3200 tweets (i.e., 82.4% of our list
of Egyptian users). The resulting database contains 311302456 tweets made during our
sample period, from January 1, 2011 through July 29, 2013. 71807168 of these 311 million
tweets are retweets of other users’ tweets.
    The second database covers all the retweets of the tweets by Egyptian users identi-
fied by Socialbakers (http://www.socialbakers.com/twitter/country/egypt/)as the most
prominent users. It consists of retweets of a central list of roughly 620 Social Bakers
users. A Social Bakers user is an Egyptian Twitter user who Social Bakers identified
as socially or politically important. We extract the reweets of these 620 users from the
reweets included in our first database explained above. There are two ways to identify a
retweet. First, the retweet tweet object will in some cases contain an identifier indicating
that the tweet is a retweet. This is a more recent feature of tweets and is only active in
some cases. A more consistent method of finding retweets is to identify tweets that start
with “RT”. This is the standard syntax for starting a retweet on Twitter. 34
  34
    We supplement our retweet database with another retweet database that we complied at the beginning
of this project. This database consists of the retweets of roughly 200 Social Bakers users. To build this
database, we first make a request to get the most recent 3200 tweets for each user, and then for each of
these tweets, we get the most recent 100 retweets.




                                                   59
B     Appendix to Section 3
B.1     Adjusted standard errors
To adjust for the possibility that other factors cause correlation in the error term i
across firms, we estimate adjusted standard errors that account for potential cross-firm
correlation of residual returns. We estimate the cross-correlation matrix of residual returns
using pre-event return data on a window between January 1 and December 23, 2010. For
each day during this interval we estimate (2), holding constant the length of the event
measured in trading days (m−n+1). This estimated cross-correlation matrix is then used
to calculate our standard errors, under the assumption that the pre-event cross-correlation
matrix is an appropriate estimate of the cross-correlation matrix during the event. To
calculate the variance-covariance matrix of residuals we then scale the cross-correlation
matrix with the mean squared error of residuals obtained from the actual event window.
We use this scaling to correct for the fact that any missing observations (stocks that do
not trade on a given day) would otherwise yield a downwardly biased estimate of the
volatility of residuals. These adjusted standard errors should account for observed cross-
sectional correlation of returns between firms in our sample (Greenwood, 2005; Becker
et al., 2013).

B.2     Matching Estimator
The construction of our synthetic matching estimator follows the procedure in Acemoglu
et al. (2013). The main idea of this method is to construct a synthetic match for each
NDP-, military-, and Islamic-connected firm by using non-connected firms in such a way
that the synthetic firm has similar behavior to the actual firm before the event of interest.
We construct a synthetic match for each NDP-connected firm by solving the following
optimization problem:
                                                        "                   #2
                                                  XX            X
                ∀i ∈ N, {wji∗ }j∈U = argmin{wji }         Rit −     wji Rjt
                                                  i   t           j


subject to                X
                               wji = 1 and ∀j ∈ U, ∀i ∈ N, wji ≥ 0,
                           j

where Rit is the return on firm i on pre-event date t, wji is the weight of non-connected firm
j ∈ U employed in the optimal weighting for NDP-connected firm i ∈ N. As before, we
use all trading days between January 1 and December 23, 2010 as the pre-event window
for this estimation.
    The return for each synthetic firm is then constructed as
                                             X
                                      Rcit =    wji∗ Rjt
                                              j



                                             60
and the abnormal return is computed as the difference between the actual return and the
synthetic firm return. To estimate the effect of the event we compute
                                          P       Pn+m
                                                    t=n
                                                            d
                                                       Rit −R it
                                              i       σbi
                                   φ̂ =           P −1             ,
                                                    bi
                                                   iσ

where σbi −1 is a measure of goodness of the match in the pre-event window
                                 v
                                 uP                  h          i2
                                 u                          cit
                                 t t∈pre-event Window Rit − R
                           σbi =
                                                  T
and T is the number of trading days in the pre-event window. This formula for the
average effect of intervention on the treatment group is thus a weighted average formula,
with greater weight given to better matches.
    To construct the confidence intervals, we randomly draw 500 placebo NDP-connected
groups from the non-connected firms, with each group having the same size as the real
treatment group, and construct the confidence interval for hypothesis testing of whether
the coefficient is significantly different from 0. The effect of the NDP-connection is sig-
nificant at 5% if it does not belong to the interval that contains the [2.5, 97.5] percentiles
of the effect of the NDP-connection for placebo treatment groups.
    The matching estimators for military- and Islamic-connected firms are constructed
analogously.




                                                   61
   Appendix Table 1: Mubarak’s Fall - Alternative Event Windows


                       (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
                     CR[0,4]   CR[0,5]    CR[0,6]    CR[0,7]    CR[0,8]

NDP                  -0.058** -0.097**    -0.104**   -0.124**   -0.131**
                      (0.025)  (0.032)     (0.038)    (0.046)    (0.049)
Military               -0.010   0.014       0.005      0.020       0.032
                      (0.028)  (0.029)     (0.030)    (0.030)    (0.030)
Islamic                -0.023   -0.033      -0.042     -0.062     -0.064
                      (0.040)  (0.039)     (0.042)    (0.047)    (0.051)
R2                      0.231    0.255       0.258      0.285      0.320
N                        137      147         147        147        143
Sector F.E.              yes      yes         yes        yes        yes
Standard Controls        yes      yes         yes        yes        yes

Notes: Variations of the baseline specification in column 2 of Table 3
using different end-dates, m. The table reports only the coefficients of
interest and omits covariates in order to save space. See the caption of
Table 3 for details.




                                   62
                  Appendix Table 2: Events during Military Rule


                                  (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)              (6)
                                                          Military Crackdown
                                                      CR[91,117]                         CAR[91,117]

NDP                              0.030      0.004        0.005      0.004       0.010        -0.005
                                (0.025)   (0.029)      (0.022)    (0.034)     (0.030)       (0.030)
Military                        0.091**   0.080*       0.079**    0.080**      0.084        0.083*
                                (0.041)   (0.044)      (0.033)    (0.012)     (0.055)       (0.044)
Islamic                          0.008     -0.009       -0.013     -0.009      -0.033        -0.026
                                (0.029)   (0.030)      (0.024)    (0.025)     (0.028)       (0.029)
R2                               0.012      0.025        0.096      0.025      -0.013         0.004
N                                 144        138          138        138         129           138

                                                            Retake Tahrir
                                                     CR[163,165]                         CAR[163,165]

NDP                              0.009      -0.010       -0.009     -0.010      -0.012       -0.022
                                (0.012)    (0.012)      (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.018)
Military                        -0.019*   -0.024**       -0.003   -0.024**    -0.020**       -0.008
                                (0.010)    (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.009)      (0.013)
Islamic                          0.003      0.001        -0.006     0.001       0.003        -0.031
                                (0.013)    (0.012)      (0.011)    (0.005)     (0.013)      (0.031)
R2                               0.077       0.250        0.140      0.250       0.274        0.347
N                                 147         141          141        141         131          141

                                                     Presidential Elections 1st round
                                                     CR[291,292]                         CAR[291,292]

NDP                              -0.009    -0.015        -0.013     -0.015    -0.014*        -0.022
                                (0.009)   (0.010)       (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.008)       (0.014)
Military                         0.004     0.002        0.009*      0.002      0.003          0.008
                                (0.007)   (0.007)       (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.007)       (0.008)
Islamic                          0.011     0.010         0.002     0.010**     0.004         -0.008
                                (0.008)   (0.008)       (0.007)    (0.005)    (0.010)       (0.014)
R2                                0.042     0.068         0.032      0.068     0.028          0.237
N                                  131       126           126        126       114            126

                                                    Presidential Elections 2nd round
                                                     CR[309,310]                         CAR[309,310]

NDP                              0.012    0.018**      0.021**     0.018      0.016**      0.028**
                                (0.008)   (0.008)      (0.009)    (0.012)     (0.007)      (0.013)
Military                         0.010    0.015*        -0.000    0.015**      0.012        0.004
                                (0.009)   (0.009)      (0.008)    (0.004)     (0.008)      (0.012)
Islamic                          0.018    0.022*       0.020*     0.022**     0.020**      0.045**
                                (0.011)   (0.012)      (0.012)    (0.006)     (0.009)      (0.022)
R2                               0.179     0.241         0.113     0.241       0.272        0.291
N                                 143       137           137       137         135          137


Sector F.E.                       yes       yes           no         yes        yes          yes
β W orld , β Egypt , β unrest     no        yes           yes        yes        yes          yes
Size, Leverage                    no        yes           yes        yes        yes          yes
Weights                           no        no            no         no         yes          no
Adjusted S.E.                     no        no            no         yes        no           no

Notes: The table reports specifications analogous to those in columns 1-5 and 7 in Table 3 for all
events shown in Panel A of Table 5. The table reports only the coefficients of interest and omits
covariates in order to save space. See the caption of Table 3 for details.




                                                     63
          Appendix Table 3: Events during Military Rule - Matching Estimators


                             (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)
                           Military         Retake           Presidential Elections
                          Crackdown         Tahrir         1st round       2nd round
                          CR[91,117]      CR[163,165]     CR[291,292] CR[309,310]

NDP                           0.002           -0.006        -0.019**         0.045***
                         [-0.051,0.040]   [-0.022,0.022] [-0.018,0.020]   [-0.019,0.017]
# Non-connected                97               97             97               97
# NDP-connected                20               20             20               20

Military                    0.055***          -0.001          0.006            0.011
                         [-0.044,0.028]   [-0.017,0.017] [-0.015,0.017]   [-0.013,0.019]
# Non-connected                97               97              97               97
# Military-connected           32               32              32               32

Islamic                      -0.009           -0.011         -0.014          0.047***
                         [-0.061,0.047]   [-0.028,0.026] [-0.022,0.024]   [-0.022,0.023]
# Non-connected                97               97             97               97
# Islamic-connected            13               13             13               13

Notes: The table reports specifications analogous to those in column 6 in Table 3
for all events shown in Panel A of Table 5. See the caption of Table 3 for details.
All columns use the synthetic matching estimator described in detail in Appendix
B.2.




                                            64
                   Appendix Table 4: Events during Islamist Rule


                                  (1)       (2)           (3)     (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                           Generals sacked
                                                     CR[343,344]                        CAR[343,344]

NDP                              -0.001    -0.002      -0.002     -0.002      -0.002       -0.003
                                (0.005)   (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.006)
Military                         -0.007    -0.004      -0.008     -0.004      -0.002       -0.006
                                (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.003)     (0.008)      (0.007)
Islamic                         0.009*    0.010*      0.011**    0.010**      0.008       0.015**
                                (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.007)
R2                                0.045     0.069       0.070      0.069       0.142        0.206
N                                  128       122         122        122         117          122

                                                         Consititution passes
                                                     CR[433,433]                        CAR[433,433]

NDP                              -0.000   -0.011**    -0.012**    -0.011      -0.007      -0.011**
                                (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.008)     (0.004)       (0.005)
Military                         0.004      0.003       0.001      0.003       0.003         0.002
                                (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.005)
Islamic                          0.000      -0.005      -0.004    -0.005      -0.003        -0.002
                                (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)
R2                               -0.027      0.050       0.059     0.050       0.132         0.038
N                                 133         128         128       128         123           128

                                                             Mursi sacked
                                                     CR[541,562]                        CAR[541,562]

NDP                               0.020     -0.019      -0.010     -0.019      -0.017       -0.016
                                (0.020)    (0.021)     (0.019)    (0.032)     (0.019)      (0.022)
Military                         -0.005     -0.009      -0.002     -0.009      -0.003       -0.014
                                (0.028)    (0.029)     (0.017)    (0.011)     (0.029)      (0.029)
Islamic                          -0.026   -0.054**    -0.059**   -0.054**    -0.054**     -0.033**
                                (0.019)    (0.016)     (0.017)    (0.020)     (0.016)      (0.014)
R2                               -0.049      0.054       0.097      0.054       0.025       -0.001
N                                  132        127         127        127         126          127


Sector F.E.                      yes        yes           no       yes          yes         yes
β W orld , β Egypt , β unrest    no         yes           yes      yes          yes         yes
Size, Leverage                   no         yes           yes      yes          yes         yes
Weights                          no         no            no       no           yes         no
Adjusted S.E.                    no         no            no       yes          no          no

Notes: The table reports specifications analogous to those in columns 1-5 and 7 in Table 3 for all
events shown in Panel B of Table 5. The table reports only the coefficients of interest and omits
covariates in order to save space. See the caption of Table 3 for details.




                                                     65
Appendix Table 5: Events during Islamist Rule - Matching Estimators


                            (1)              (2)             (3)
                         Generals        Constitution      Mursi
                          sacked           passes          sacked
                        CR[343,344]      CR[433,433]     CR[541,562]

 NDP                       0.008**          -0.008**        -0.002
                        [-0.009,0.007]   [-0.008,0.009] [-0.054,0.054]
 # Non-connected              97               97             97
 # NDP-connected              20               20             20

 Military                    0.002            0.001          0.007
                        [-0.007,0.007]   [-0.008,0.008] [-0.052,0.043]
 # Non-connected              97               97              97
 # Military-connected         32               32             32

 Islamic                   0.015***          -0.003         -0.018
                        [-0.012,0.009]   [-0.011,0.014] [-0.059,0.054]
 # Non-connected              97               97             97
 # Islamic-connected          13               13             13

 Notes: The table reports specifications analogous to those in col-
 umn 6 in Table 3 for all events shown in Panel B of Table 5. See
 the caption of Table 3 for details. All columns use the synthetic
 matching estimator described in detail in Appendix B.2.




                                 66
Appendix Table 6: Mean Net Purchases of Stock by Insiders as a Percentage of Total Stock Outstanding



                                           (1)        (2)                  (3)           (4)
                                        Mubarak’s Military              Islamist       Post-
                                           Fall      Rule                 Rule        Islamist
                                        -04/17/11 -08/12/12            07/04/13      07/29/13

                 NDP-connected             -0.02           -0.04         -0.00         -0.01
                 Military-connected        0.00            -0.47         -0.16         0.00
                 Islamic-connected         -0.00           -0.11         -0.00         -0.01
                 Non-connected              0.08           -2.89         -0.60         -0.08

                 Notes: The table shows the mean across firms of net purchases of stock
                 by insiders of the firm as a share of total stock outstanding in percent
                 for NDP-, military-. Islamic-, and Non-connected firms. For each of
                 the four groups the table also reports the minimum and maximum net
                 purchases across firms.




              Appendix Table 7: Effect of Protests on Stock Market Valuation by Phase


                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                Mubarak’s Military Islamist      Post-
                                                  Fall       Rule       Rule    Islamist
                                                        Daily Log Returns × 100

             Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters         -1.193**        -0.912***      0.706    -1.370*
                                                    (0.560)         (0.328)      (0.573)   (0.799)
             Connected x Tahrir Protesters          -0.195           0.082        -0.413    -0.199
                                                    (0.589)         (0.360)      (0.342)   (0.540)
             R2                                      0.610           0.331         0.421     0.424
             N                                       5603            43997        27210      1895
             Incumbent                               NDP            Military     Islamic   Islamic

             Notes: This table shows results from our baseline specification in column 2
             of Table 8, estimated separately for each of the four phases of Egypt’s Arab
             Spring. See the caption of Table 8 for details on the specification and Panel B
             of Table 1 for the beginning and end date of each phase.




                                                      67
                              Appendix Table 8: Results from Regressions that Drop the Post-Islamist Phase


                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)
     Excluding Post-Islamist Rule                                                      Daily Log Returns × 100

     Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters               -0.906***   -0.704***   -0.867***    -0.891***   -0.707***   -0.613**     -0.401   -0.683***   -0.555*
                                                  (0.253)     (0.264)     (0.291)      (0.295)     (0.266)     (0.262)    (0.259)    (0.245)    (0.283)
     Other Connected x Tahrir Prot.                -0.359      -0.155      -0.092       -0.106      -0.161      -0.091     -0.037     -0.268     -0.292
                                                  (0.219)     (0.233)     (0.247)      (0.250)     (0.234)     (0.233)    (0.237)    (0.223)    (0.236)
     R2                                             0.385       0.403       0.337        0.321       0.403       0.403      0.404      0.386      0.404
     N                                             76810       76810       71003        65333       76810       76810      76810      76810      76810




68
     Include time effect ×Xi                        no          yes          yes         yes         yes         yes        yes        no         no
     Drop changes in g’ment or constitution         no          no           yes         yes         no          no         no         no         no
     Drop all events analyzed in section 3          no          no           no          yes         no          no         no         no         no
     Include firm fixed effect                      no          no           no          no          yes         no         no         no         no
     Include time effect ×Xi2                       no          no           no          no          no          yes        no         no         no
     Include sector effect × Tahrir Protesters      no          no           no          no          no          no         yes        yes        no
     Include time effect × firm effect              no          no           no          no          no          no         no         no         yes

     Notes: This table shows specifications identical to those in Table 8 estimated on a restricted sample that drops the post-Islamist phase
     of Egypt’s Arab Spring. See the caption of Table 8 for details.
                                Appendix Table 9: Functional Forms


                                                        (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                                 Daily Log Returns × 100

Incumbent x Tahrir Protesters                        -0.751***
                                                      (0.254)
Connected x Tahrir Protesters                          -0.160
                                                      (0.216)
Incumbent x Tahrir Prot. (standardized)                           -0.065***
                                                                    (0.022)
Connected x Tahrir Prot. (standardized)                             -0.008
                                                                    (0.025)
Incumbent x Log(Tahrir Prot. (standardized))                                  -0.469***
                                                                                (0.174)
Connected x Log(Tahrir Prot. (standardized))                                    -0.063
                                                                                (0.165)
Incumbent x 1T ahrir   P rotesters>100k                                                    -0.547***
                                                                                            (0.193)
Connected x 1T ahrir   P rotesters>100k                                                      -0.110
                                                                                            (0.150)
R2                                                    0.404         0.404      0.404         0.404
N                                                     78705         78705      78705         78705

Notes: This table shows variations of the functional form relating returns to the interaction
between Iit and the number of protesters in Tahrir square. Column 1 reproduces our baseline
specification from column 2 in Table 8, where the number of protesters is divided by and
capped at 500,000. In column 2, the number of protesters is not capped and standardized by
deducting the sample mean and dividing by the sample standard deviation of the number of
protesters (the same functional form as in Table 11). Column 3 interacts Iit with the log of
this standardized number. Column 4 instead uses the interaction between Iit and a dummy
that is one on days with 100,000 or more protesters in Tahrir square.




                                                69
                                           Appendix Table 10: Holding Companies Controlled by the Egyptian Military
     Holdings Fully Owned by Military                       Link to Military                                            Source
                                                                                                                        http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/06/24/
     Arab Organization for Industralization (AOI)           It is one of the three main economic military enterprises   military-crowds-out-civilian-business-in-egypt ;
                                                                                                                        http://fas.org/nuke/guide/egypt/facility/mark0033.htm
                                                                                                                        http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/06/24/
                                                                                                                        military-crowds-out-civilian-business-in-egypt ;
     National Service Product Organization (NSPO)           It is one of the three main economic military enterprises
                                                                                                                        http://fas.org/nuke/guide/egypt/facility/mark0033.htm ;
                                                                                                                        http://www.nspo.com.eg/
                                                                                                                        http://carnegieendowment.org/2014/06/24/
     National Organization for Military Production (NOMP)   It is one of the three main economic military enterprises   military-crowds-out-civilian-business-in-egypt;
                                                                                                                        http://fas.org/nuke/guide/egypt/facility/mark0033.htm
     Other Evidence of Military Control
                                                            At least partially owned by the military;                   http://www.hcmlt.com/e mysite/e board.htm;
                                                            Its chairman is an Admiral;                                 http://www.merip.org/mer/mer262/
     Holding Company for Maritime and Land transport        the chairman, managing director and board members           egypts-generals-transnational-capital;
                                                            of affiliated firms are generals                            http://www.jadaliyya.com/pages/index/4311/
                                                            (Direct Transport company and Canal Shipping Agencies)      egypts-other-revolution modernizing-the-military-i
                                                            Affiliated firms are run                                    http://www.zawya.com/middle-east
                                                            by generals (National Cement);                              /company/profile/575361/Chemical
     Chemical Industries Holding Company
                                                            Major shareholders                                           Industries Holding Company/;
                                                            supervised by members of the military                       http://www.cihc-eg.com/
                                                            Major shareholder of                                        https://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company
                                                            affiliated firms                                            /profile/361753/Egyptian Petrochemicals Company/;
     Egyptian Petrochemicals Company
                                                            is the main business partner of the military;               https://www.zawya.com/company/profile
                                                            Affiliated firms have generals on the board                 /1000990/Egyptian Petrochemicals Holding Company/ ;




70
                                                                                                                        www.merip.org/mer/mer262/egypts-generals-transnational-capital
                                                            Joint venture with one                                      http://www.tharwa.com.eg/wps/portal/tharwa
                                                            of the military enterprises (NOMP),                          inner?WCM GLOBAL CONTEXT=/wps/wcm/connect
                                                            they both own Tharwa Petroleum;                             /tharwa/Tharwa/Investors/Investors;
     Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company
                                                            Major shareholder                                           www.merip.org/mer/mer262/egypts-generals-transnational-capital;
                                                            is prominent business                                       https://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company/profile/4898
                                                            partner of the military                                     /Egypt Kuwait Holding Company via National Energy Company/
                                                            Its subsidiary                                              http://www.zawya.com/company/profile
                                                            is managed by                                               /306066/Metallurgical Industries Company/
     Holding Company for Metallurgical Industries
                                                            a general (National Cement)                                 http://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company
                                                                                                                        /profile/4897/Egyptian Iron Steel Company/;
                                                            The chairman and managing directors and board members of    https://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company/profile
                                                            affiliated firms are generals (General Silos                /4947/Holding Company for Food Industries/ ;
     Holding Company for food industries                    and Storage). Affiliated firm (Egyptian                     https://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company/profile
                                                            Sugar and Integrated Industries Company) has a general      /1001684/Egyptian Sugar
                                                            representing its ownership stake in Delta Sugar              and Integrated Industries Company/
                                                            The products of its                                         http://www.egypt-business.com/Paper/details/1206-xg-The-
                                                            affiliated firms (KABO)                                     Egyptian-Military-between-Politics-and-Economy/3808);
     Holding Company for spinning and weaving
                                                            are described as part of the                                http://deficientbrain.blogspot.co.uk/2013
                                                            military economic empire                                    /08/al-sisis-underwear-manufacturer-hacked.html
                                                            It holds its shareholder meetings                           http://alexcopharma.net/En/Assembly.aspx;
     Holding Company for Pharmaceuticals                    regularly in a military installation                        http://www.holdipharma.com
                                                            (The Engineering Authority of the Armed Forces)             /en/home/Pages/alexandria.aspx
                                                            Its main subsidiary (The Egyptian General Company           https://www.zawya.com/middle-east/company/profile
                                                            for Tourism and Hotels) hires a general as the              /438653/Holding Company for Tourism Hotels Cinema/;
     Holding Company for Tourism, Hotels & Cinema
                                                            chairman and managing director of one of                    https://www.zawya.com/company/profile/421198/The
                                                            its main affiliated firms                                    Egyptian General Company for Tourism and Hotels/
Appendix Table 11: Sample of Mapping from Words in Newspaper Articles to Numb ers


                                     Word            Number
                                  a thousand           1,000
                                few thousand           2,000
                              several thousand         3,000
                        less than several thousand    2,500
                            less than a thousand        750
                              under a thousand          750
                          more than a thousand        1,250
                               over a thousand         1,250
                                  thousands            5,000
                              tens of thousands       50,000
                          hundreds of thousands      500,000
                           over a quarter-million    300,000




                                         71
Appendix Table 12: List of Twitter Accounts of Prominent Opposition Figures



Phase of Egypt’s Arab Spring   Twitter Users Included in Opposition Count
Mubarak’s Fall                 ElBaradei HamdeenSabahy HamzawyAmr shabab6april GhostyMaher
                               moussacampaign M6april Khaledali251 GalalAmer Dr Heba Raouf DrEs-
                               samSharaf DrAbolfotoh AsmaaMahfouz DrBassemYoussef amrkhaled be-
                               lalfadl YosriFouda amrwaked Ghonim AlaaAswany NaguibSawiris Ay-
                               manNour GameelaIsmail Youssefalhosiny amremoussa HamdyKandil al-
                               nagar80 nawaranegm bothainakamel1 Ibrahim essa3 Reemmagued Elsha-
                               heeed Dinabdelrahman SalmaSabahy MohamedAbuHamed ElBaradeiOf-
                               fice MohammadSawy Ibrahim 3eissa FatimaNaoot waelabbas moiegy Mah-
                               moudSaadpage ONtvLIVE SamiraIbrahim4 SabahyCampaign Masrey-
                               eenAhrrar Madaneya2012 waelabdelfattah SalafyoCosta Hezb Elnoor nader-
                               bakkar Alwasatpartyeg arahmanyusuf MoatazAFattah MuhammadMorsi Es-
                               sam Sultan Essam Elerian MustafaHosny alqaradawy Saad Elkatatny FJ-
                               party HazemSalahTW ajmmisr almorshid khairatAlshater FadelSoliman
                               El Awa MohmedAlbeltagy m abotrekh ikhwantawasol ANAS ELSHAER
                               NabdAlekhwan khairatelshater
Military Rule                  ElBaradei HamdeenSabahy HamzawyAmr shabab6april GhostyMaher
                               moussacampaign M6april Khaledali251 GalalAmer Dr Heba Raouf DrEs-
                               samSharaf DrAbolfotoh AsmaaMahfouz DrBassemYoussef amrkhaled be-
                               lalfadl YosriFouda amrwaked Ghonim AlaaAswany NaguibSawiris Ay-
                               manNour GameelaIsmail Youssefalhosiny amremoussa HamdyKandil alna-
                               gar80 nawaranegm bothainakamel1 Ibrahim essa3 Reemmagued Elshaheeed
                               Dinabdelrahman SalmaSabahy MohamedAbuHamed ElBaradeiOffice Mo-
                               hammadSawy Ibrahim 3eissa FatimaNaoot waelabbas moiegy Mahmoud-
                               Saadpage ONtvLIVE SamiraIbrahim4 SabahyCampaign MasreyeenAhrrar
                               Madaneya2012 waelabdelfattah SalafyoCosta arahmanyusuf MoatazAFattah
Islamist Rule                  ElBaradei HamdeenSabahy HamzawyAmr shabab6april GhostyMaher
                               Khairy Ramadan moussacampaign M6april Khaledali251 GalalAmer
                               Dr Heba Raouf DrEssamSharaf AsmaaMahfouz DrBassemYoussef belalfadl
                               YosriFouda amrwaked Ghonim AlaaAswany NaguibSawiris AymanNour
                               GameelaIsmail Youssefalhosiny amremoussa HamdyKandil alnagar80
                               nawaranegm bothainakamel1 Ibrahim essa3 Reemmagued Elshaheeed Dinab-
                               delrahman SalmaSabahy MohamedAbuHamed ElBaradeiOffice Mohammad-
                               Sawy Ibrahim 3eissa FatimaNaoot waelabbas moiegy MahmoudSaadpage
                               ONtvLIVE SamiraIbrahim4 SabahyCampaign tamarrod MasreyeenAhrrar
                               Madaneya2012 waelabdelfattah SalafyoCosta arahmanyusuf MoatazAFattah
                               lameesh BakryMP EgyArmySpox Lamees Alhadidi AhmedShafikEG
Post-Islamist Rule             ElBaradei HamdeenSabahy HamzawyAmr Khairy Ramadan moussacam-
                               paign Khaledali251 GalalAmer Dr Heba Raouf DrEssamSharaf AsmaaMah-
                               fouz DrBassemYoussef belalfadl YosriFouda amrwaked Ghonim AlaaAswany
                               NaguibSawiris AymanNour GameelaIsmail Youssefalhosiny amremoussa
                               HamdyKandil alnagar80 nawaranegm bothainakamel1 Ibrahim essa3 Reem-
                               magued Elshaheeed Dinabdelrahman SalmaSabahy MohamedAbuHamed
                               ElBaradeiOffice MohammadSawy Ibrahim 3eissa FatimaNaoot waelab-
                               bas moiegy MahmoudSaadpage ONtvLIVE SamiraIbrahim4 SabahyCam-
                               paign tamarrod MasreyeenAhrrar Madaneya2012 waelabdelfattah Salafy-
                               oCosta arahmanyusuf MoatazAFattah lameesh BakryMP EgyArmySpox
                               Lamees Alhadidi AhmedShafikEG Hezb Elnoor naderbakkar




                                                 72
                         Appendix Figure 1: Number of Protesters by Weekday




                                                              6.105%
                                                     2.054%
                                                   4.961%


                                       32.55%                          27.63%




                                                12.45%        14.25%




                                         Sunday                         Monday
                                         Tuesday                        Wednesday
                                         Thursday                       Friday
                                         Saturday




Note: The figure shows the percentage of all protesters that turned out in Tahrir Square between January
25, 2011, and July 30, 2013, by weekday. See Section 2 of the main text for details.




                                                         73
         Appendix Figure 2: Persistence of the Effect of Mubarak’s Fall on NDP-connected Firms



                        Mubarak's                                                                                                                                    Post
                                                        Military Rule                                                  Islamist Rule                               Islamist
                  .2




                          Fall
                                                                                                                                                                     Rule
                  0
                  -.2




                                                                                 Presidential Elections

                                                                                 Presidential Elections




                                                                                                                           Constitution Passes
                               NDP Dissolved




                                                                                                                                                   Mursi Toppled
                                                            Parliamentary
                                                            Retake Tahrir
                                               Crackdown




                                                                                                          Mursi coup
                  -.4




                                                                                      2nd round
                                                                                       1st round
                                                              Elections
                                                 Military
                  -.6




                  01jan2011          01jul2011              01jan2012         01jul2012                                01jan2013                 01jul2013
                                                                            date



Note: Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals on the dummy variable for NDP-connected firms in speci-
fications corresponding to column 2 of Table 3. The figure shows coefficients for cumulatively longer event
windows beginning on January 25, 2011 (event trading day 0), and ending on the date indicated.




                                                                            74
                   Appendix Figure 3: Placebo Regressions for all Trading Days in 2010




Note: Histograms on T-statistics on the dummy variables for connected firms in specifications corresponding
to column 2 of Table 3. The figure shows histograms of T-statistics obtained from running the baseline
specification in column 2 of Table 3 for each trading day between January 1, 2010, and November 30, 2010.




                                                    75
