NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF HIGH-SKILLED IMMIGRATION POLICY ON FIRMS:
EVIDENCE FROM H-1B VISA LOTTERIES
Kirk Doran
Alexander Gelber
Adam Isen
Working Paper 20668
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20668
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014
This is a greatly revised version of NBER Working Paper 20668, previously titled “The Effect of High-Skilled
Immigration on Patenting and Employment: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries.” We thank U.S.
Customs and Immigration Services for help with the H-1B lottery data. We thank Sunil Vidhani for
outstanding research assistance. We thank Notre Dame and the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania for research support. We are grateful to George Borjas, John Bound, Sean Farhang, Richard
Freeman, Hilary Hoynes, Jenny Hunt, Damon Jones, Larry Katz, Bill Kerr, Norman Matloff, Ankur
Patel, Dina Pomeranz, Jesse Rothstein, and seminar participants at the Fed Board, HBS, NBER, CEMIR,
U.S. Treasury, and WIGE for helpful comments. We thank Lee Fleming for sharing the patent data
with us. We thank Danny Yagan for sharing his code to probabilistically identify natives and foreigners
in the Treasury data. The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should
not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the U.S. Treasury Department, any other person associated
with the U.S. Treasury Department, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our
own.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20668.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kirk Doran, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration Policy on Firms: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries
Kirk Doran, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen
NBER Working Paper No. 20668
November 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. J18,J21,J23,J24,J44,J48,J61,O3,O32,O34,O38
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of a firm winning an additional H-1B visa on the firm’s outcomes, by comparing
winning and losing firms in the Fiscal Year 2006 and 2007 H-1B visa lotteries. We match administrative
data on the participants in these lotteries to the universe of approved U.S. patents, and to IRS data
on the universe of U.S. firms. Winning additional H-1B visas has insignificant effects on firms’ patenting
and use of the research and experimentation tax credit, with confidence intervals that generally rule
out more than modest effects. Additional H-1Bs cause at most a moderate increase in firms’ overall
employment, and these H-1Bs substantially crowd out firms’ employment of other workers. There
is some evidence that additional H-1Bs lead to lower average employee earnings and higher firm profits.
Kirk Doran
438 Flanner Hall
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
kdoran@nd.edu
Alexander Gelber
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California at Berkeley
2607 Hearst Ave
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
agelber@berkeley.edu

Adam Isen
Office of Tax Analysis
U.S. Department of the Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20220
adam.isen@gmail.com

1. Introduction
What are the effects of high-skilled immigration policy on the economy receiving
the immigrants? In the U.S., high-skilled immigrants represent 24 percent of workers in
occupations closely tied to innovation (Pekkala Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln forthcoming). In
recent years, prominent voices from government, business, labor, and academia have
discussed major changes to U.S. immigration law, often debating the impacts of changes
in high-skilled immigration policy on economic outcomes. Many proposals have
envisioned changes to the largest U.S. high-skilled immigration program: H-1B visas for
temporary immigration, which allow U.S. firms to employ foreign workers for three
years. How these workers affect firms is the subject of much public discussion.
One common narrative argues that H-1Bs given to a firm could lead the firm to
increase innovation because H-1B workers have exceptional skills that firms cannot
otherwise easily obtain. If H-1Bs have special skills, they generally would not be
employed instead of others who otherwise would have worked at the firm—consistent
with firms’ legal obligation that the employment of H-1Bs “will not adversely affect the
working conditions of workers similarly employed.”2 In fact, many have argued that extra
H-1Bs lead a firm to increase employment of other workers. This is exemplified by
former Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates’ congressional testimony, arguing that H-1Bs have
special, innovative skills and that technology firms on average hire five additional
employees to support each new H-1B worker (Gates 2008, based partly on National
Foundation for American Policy 2008).
In a competing, frequently encountered narrative, H-1Bs have more muted effects
on firm outcomes like innovation and employment.3 If an H-1B is employed rather than
another worker, and the alternative worker otherwise would have innovated at the firm as
much as the H-1B, then we would not expect innovation or employment to increase at the
firm that received the H-1B. Moreover, many H-1Bs are not in scientific industries, and
many H-1B workers perform jobs (e.g. technical support) that might be expected not to
lead to innovations in the great majority of cases. Economic theory predicts that firms
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) §212(n)(1)(A)(ii).
These two competing narratives do not cover all possible combinations of effects of H-1Bs on innovation,
employment, profits, wages, and other outcomes, but they tend to dominate the policy debate.
2
3

1

will apply to hire an H-1B worker as long as this increases the firm’s profit in
expectation. H-1Bs could increase the firm’s profit even if they have no effect on the
firm’s innovation and/or crowd out other workers to some extent, as in the case studies in
Matloff (2003) or Hira (2010)—for example, if the H-1B is substitutable with other
workers and the firm pays the H-1B less than the worker whose employment is crowded
out.4 Firms submit legal attestations that they will pay the H-1B a “prevailing wage”
comparable to other similar workers, but it is possible that these regulations are
ineffective in some cases. Indeed, profit-maximizing firms apply for H-1Bs even though
they must pay a fee to the U.S. government to apply, suggesting that H-1Bs are paid less
than alternative workers with the same marginal product of labor.
Our paper investigates these narratives by estimating the causal impact of extra H1B visas on the receiving firm, examining outcomes relevant to assessing the narratives.
We use randomized variation from the Fiscal Year (FY) 2006 and FY2007 H-1B visa
lotteries. In each of these years, on the date when the cumulative number of H-1B visa
applications exceeded the maximum allowed for a given visa type, the applications
submitted on this day were subject to a lottery. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS) randomly chose some of these visa applications to win the lottery, and
the remaining applications lost the lottery. Across both years and across visa lotteries for
those with and without advanced degrees, 3,050 firms applied for 7,243 visas, of which
4,180 visa applications won the lottery. We use administrative data from USCIS on the
entrants in these lotteries, matched to U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) data
on the universe of patents at U.S. firms, and matched to Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
microdata on the universe of U.S. firms.
We study patenting as a measure of innovation because it is an innovation
outcome we can readily observe, following much previous literature (see the surveys by
Nagaoka, Motohashi, and Goto 2010, and Hall and Harhoff 2012). Our patenting
specifications examine the impact of additional H-1B visa wins on the firm’s approved
patents up to nine years after the start of the visa. The point estimates are near zero, and
are insignificantly different from zero. We focus on the confidence intervals, which show
4

Profit could also increase if H-1Bs increase a firm’s productivity but not its employment of other workers.

2

that any increase in patenting is at most small—particularly in small and medium-sized
firms, where an additional H-1B represents a meaningful change in overall employment.
For example, in firms with 10 or fewer employees, we bound any increase in patenting at
or below 0.47 percent, on a base mean of only 0.0098 patents per year. Such results also
hold when we exclude firms that likely provide temporary technical support services. The
confidence intervals similarly rule out more than a modest positive impact on firms’ use
of the research and experimentation (R&E) tax credit, another measure of innovative
activity.
Parallel to the innovation results, we find that new H-1Bs cause no significant
increase in firm employment. Our primary finding is that we can robustly rule out more
than a moderate increase in overall firm employment (including employment of H-1Bs).
New H-1Bs substantially crowd out employment of other workers at the firm. This
evidence is again particularly strong in small and medium-sized firms.
We find some evidence that additional H-1Bs increase median profits, and some
evidence that additional H-1Bs decrease median payroll costs per employee. Overall our
results are more supportive of the second narrative, in which marginal H-1Bs crowd out
other workers to some extent, are paid less than alternative workers, and increase the
firm’s profits—despite little effect on measures of the quantity of firm innovation (though
our estimated effects on other measures likely related to productivity are imprecise).
Relative to other studies on H-1Bs and other immigration programs, ours is the
only to our knowledge to leverage randomized variation to estimate the effect of
immigration on outcomes in the receiving economy.5 Our paper relates to previous work
on the effects of immigration on measures of innovation (e.g. Stuen, Mobarak, and
Maskus 2012; Borjas and Doran 2012; Foley and Kerr 2013; Moser, Voena, and
Waldinger 2014; Grogger and Hanson forthcoming; see the Kerr 2013 survey), as well as
on the labor market (e.g. Card 1990; Borjas, Freeman, and Katz 1997; Card 2001;
Friedberg 2001; Borjas 2003; Edin, Fredriksson, and Åslund 2003; Lubotsky 2007;
Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson 2012; see surveys in Borjas 1994; Friedberg and Hunt
1995; Freeman 2006; Dustmann et al. 2008; Hanson 2009; and Pekkala Kerr and Kerr
5

Edin, Fredriksson, and Åslund (2003) and Åslund et al. (2011) use variation that appears quasi-random.

3

2011). Previous studies in the economics literature of the innovation or labor market
impacts of the H-1B program specifically or similar programs include Kerr and Lincoln
(2010), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), Hunt (2011), Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2013),
Pekkala Kerr, Kerr and Lincoln (forthcoming), and Bound et al. (forthcoming).6 The
literature has found that H-1Bs lead to large positive impacts on innovation (specifically
patenting). Regression analysis has found no clear evidence of crowdout of other
employment, and in some cases has found crowd-in.7
Our paper isolates the effect of additional H-1B visas given to a particular firm on
outcomes at that firm (holding constant H-1Bs given to other firms).8 As such, our
findings are compatible with the possibility that an aggregate increase in H-1Bs raises
firm or aggregate innovation and/or employment, as found in previous studies cited
above. For example, at the firm level, our results show that new H-1B workers crowd out
other workers; the crowded-out workers may find employment elsewhere (unless demand
is perfectly inelastic), and they could increase innovation in these other firms relative to
the counterfactual (which could lead to further positive spillovers, as in e.g. Bloom,
Schankerman, and van Reenen 2013). If extra H-1Bs do have large positive effects on
aggregate innovation or employment, then our results suggest this is not occurring
because an extra H-1B visa at a given firm leads to increases in measures of these
outcomes at the firm level in our context—in contrast to the first narrative above.
Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015) study H-1B visa lotteries but effectively do not rely on randomized
variation; they mainly use a differences-in-differences design. Their paper uses data on the winners of the
FY2008 and FY2009 H-1B visa lotteries, as well as on firms that submitted an initial H-1B application
(called a Labor Condition Application (LCA)) that was approved. When their paper exploits the H-1B
lottery, the paper’s identification strategy assumes that conditional on having an approved LCA, selection
for an H-1B is random. However, it is not random: in FY 2008 and 2009, at least 20 percent of LCAs were
withdrawn prior to running the H-1B lottery (e.g. USCIS 2014, Department of Labor 2014). Thus, those
results could be confounded because firms in cities experiencing negative shocks could be more likely to
withdraw their applications before the lottery is run (conditional on having an approved LCA).
7
Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find no evidence that H-1Bs crowd out other workers. Pekkala Kerr, Kerr, and
Lincoln (forthcoming) find mixed evidence on the effect of H-1Bs on total firm size. Peri, Shih, and
Sparber (2013, 2015) find that H-1Bs increase native employment. However, the simulations of Bound et
al. (forthcoming) show that the ability to hire foreign computer scientists should reduce equilibrium
employment and wages of natives, while increasing equilibrium aggregate employment and output.
8
Kerr and Lincoln (2010) and Pekkala Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (forthcoming) examine the effect of giving
an additional H-1B to a firm by interacting firm characteristics with the H-1B visa cap, and as such are
among the first to examine the role of firms. Changes in the aggregate H-1B cap could affect outcomes at a
given firm through general equilibrium effects, including effects of the cap increase on other firms. Thus,
this previous work addresses a different question of interest than ours does.
6

4

We study H-1B applications on the days the caps were reached, representing 4.3
percent of total capped H-1Bs in these years. Although these marginal H-1Bs could have
different effects than other H-1Bs, our estimates address the effects on firms of
marginally changing the number of capped H-1Bs they are allowed—a question of great
relevance to firms and policy-makers as they actively propose and consider the
consequences of modest changes in the number of capped H-1Bs. We show that firms
applying on the date the cap is reached are more likely than firms applying on other dates
to have patented prior to the year of the lottery, and are more likely to request workers
who have higher degrees and intended salaries than those in the full sample—arguably
making it more striking that we find little effect on measures of innovation even in this
sample. Although a modest fraction of all H-1B applications is subject to the lottery, our
results will be precise enough to rule out meaningful and relevant alternative hypotheses,
including more than a modest increase in measures of innovation and employment.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the policy environment.
Section 3 discusses our empirical specification. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5
demonstrates the validity of the randomization. Section 6 presents effects on innovation.
Section 7 shows effects on employment. Section 8 shows effects on payroll per employee
and profits. Section 9 concludes. The Appendix contains further results and discussion.
2. Policy environment
H-1Bs are sponsored by firms, which apply to the U.S. government to obtain a
visa for each H-1B worker they wish to hire. In its application for each visa, a firm must
specify the identity of the worker it wishes to hire. An H-1B visa allows a skilled
foreigner to enter the U.S. for three years. The H-1B is considered a “non-immigrant”
visa because it allows those with H-1Bs to stay in the U.S. only temporarily. After these
three years, the worker may leave the U.S., or a firm may seek to renew the worker’s H1B visa. Firms may also sponsor the worker to be a permanent resident.
The firm submitting the H-1B application must attest, among other things, that:
“(a) H-1B nonimmigrants will be paid at least the actual wage level paid by the employer
to all other individuals with similar experience and qualifications for the specific
employment in question or the prevailing wage level for the occupation in the area of
employment, whichever is higher”; and “(b) The employment of H-1B non-immigrants

5

does not adversely affect working conditions of workers similarly employed in the area
of intended employment.”9 Firms are required to pay H-1Bs comparably with workers in
one of four skill categories (defined by experience, education, and level of supervision).10
We study the lotteries for H-1B visas in FY2006 and FY2007. In other years,
USCIS did not keep data on which firms won and lost the lottery (personal
communication with USCIS, 2011). Visas for FY2006 allowed an H-1B to work from
October 2005 to September 2008, and visas for FY2007 allowed an H-1B to work from
October 2006 to September 2009. A fiscal year begins in October of the previous
calendar year (CY), e.g. Q1 of FY2006 corresponds to October to December of CY2005.
The total number of H-1B visas awarded to for-profit firms in a given year is
subject to a maximum number or “cap.” This cap is different for visas given to workers
who have a masters degree or higher from a U.S. institution (the “Advanced Degree
Exemption” (ADE) H-1B visa), and those without such a degree (the “Regular” H-1B
visa). In each of the years we study, the cap for ADE visas was 20,000, and the cap for
Regular visas was 65,000. In each year and for each of the two types of H-1B visa,
USCIS allocated visas by lottery for visa applications submitted on the date when the
total number of applications reached the cap. In each of these lotteries, the total number
of applications that won the lottery was equal to the number of remaining visas necessary
to reach the cap. In a given lottery, firms sometimes applied for multiple visas; in this
case, the probability that the firm won each visa was independent and equal to the
number of lottery winners divided by the number of lottery entrants.
The cap does not apply to a number of H-1B visa categories, which are therefore
excluded from the lotteries: visas for work at non-profit firms, including U.S. educational
institutions; those applying for an extension of an existing H-1B visa; those who have an
existing H-1B visa and are changing jobs during the period the existing visa covers; and
citizens of five countries (Australia, Canada, Chile, Mexico, and Singapore), who are in
effect not bound by H-1B limits. Our results therefore do not speak to the effects of such
un-capped visas, implying that our results are not directly comparable to studies that have
Employers who are “H-1B dependent”—whose workforce is comprised of a sufficiently large fraction of
H-1B employees—face additional requirements to attempt to recruit, and not displace, U.S. workers.
10
Firms may legally hire an H-1B in lieu of a worker who would have been at a higher skill level.
9

6

examined student/trainee or temporary work visas in general (e.g. Hunt 2011).
Firms did not know in advance the date when the cap would be reached, and they
did not know the probability that firms applying on this date would be selected for an H1B. The caps for the FY2006 Regular visa, FY2006 ADE visa, FY2007 Regular visa, and
FY2007 ADE visa, were reached on August 10, 2005, January 17, 2006, May 26, 2006,
and July 26, 2006, respectively (personal correspondence with USCIS, 2011). These
dates were determined by the number of applications received on different dates in these
years, which was unknown to firms at the time—making it effectively impossible for
firms to game the system by applying on the lottery date for more visas than they desire,
on the basis of the anticipated probability of selection. Even across the four lotteries we
study, the probability that an application won varied widely, and would not have been
possible to anticipate. Indeed, these were the first two years USCIS used a lottery to
allocate H-1Bs, and it was not announced in advance that lotteries were going to be run.
Approximately 90 percent of applications filed on dates before the lottery date were
approved. Each lottery was conducted within a month of reaching the relevant cap.
Firms pay fees to USCIS for filing a visa application for initial H-1B status. The
total fees range from $1,575 to $3,550 depending on firm size and whether the firm asks
for expedited processing. These fees appear in firms’ costs in the year of submitting the
application. When applications lost the lottery, fees were refunded to firms. Firms also
typically incur legal fees of several thousand dollars for submitting the applications.
The H-1B worker may stay at the initial sponsoring firm or move to another firm,
though several frictions pose barriers to a move: the new firm must pay USCIS
application and legal fees; upon moving, an H-1B goes to the “back of the line” for
gaining permanent residency; some H-1Bs may not know that they can change jobs; and
in the years we study, the worker had to wait for several months until the new firm’s H1B application was approved, but a gap of only two weeks was allowed between jobs.
If a firm is denied an H-1B, it has a number of alternatives to hiring no one. Other
than hiring U.S. citizens or permanent residents, firms can hire foreigners on other visas,
including L-1 temporary work visas, Optional Practical Training (OPT) extensions of F-1
student visas, or H-1Bs not subject to the cap. L-1s allow multinational firms to bring a
worker at a foreign branch to the U.S. temporarily. Visa lottery losers would likely not

7

resort to bringing the same worker to the U.S. on an L-1, since a firm would have
typically applied for an L-1 rather than an H-1B if the L-1 were feasible (as the L-1 is
typically considered more advantageous to the firm than the H-1B). Only 15 percent of
lottery participants are multinationals, further limiting the importance of the L-1 in our
context. In FY2006 and FY2007, OPT extensions allowed F-1s to extend their stays in
the U.S. for only 12 months, also limiting the degree of substitutability with an H-1B.
For a given lottery year (i.e. FY2006 or FY2007), we refer to the calendar year
the lottery occurred (e.g. 2005 in the case of the FY2006 lottery) as “Year 0.” The year
before this calendar year is “Year -1”; the year after Year 0 is “Year 1”; etc. We refer to
the first quarter when an H-1B employee would begin work at a firm (e.g. the first quarter
of FY2006 in the case of the FY 2006 lottery) as “Q1”; the next quarter as “Q2”; etc.
3. Empirical strategy
Our empirical strategy exploits the random assignment of H-1B visas in the
lotteries. Thus, we consider only firms that entered the FY2006 or FY2007 H-1B
lotteries. Our main outcomes of interest are patenting and number of employees. We also
consider the effect on the R&E tax credit, the firm’s wage bill per employee, and profits.
Our strategy must accommodate firms that applied for multiple H-1B visas. If a
firm submits n visa applications to a lottery in which p percent of applications won a visa,
and W is the random number of H-1B visas given to the firm, then the expected number
of H-1B visas given to the firm is E[W]=pn. If w represents the random realization of W,
then the number of “unexpected” wins u=w-pn reflects the random realization of the net
number of wins relative to the expected value, and will be exogenous in the regression we
specify below.11 Thus, our main independent variable is the random variable U, the net
number of unexpected wins (or losses) for a given firm, whose realization is u.
To find the causal effect of U on an outcome Y, we estimate:
YitT = 0+1UiT+ɛitT

(1)

t is the number of calendar years since the lottery in question occurred; for example, t=0
corresponds to Year 0. T indexes the year of the lottery in question, i.e. FY2006 or
FY2007. UiT is the number of unexpected H-1B visa lottery wins for firm i in the lottery
11

By “unexpected,” we are not necessarily referring to firms’ actual expectations, which are unobserved.

8

in year T. ɛitT is an error term. 1 represents the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect of an
additional unexpected H-1B visa win.12 In (1) and all other specifications, whenever we
examine an outcome across multiple time periods t, we pool and stack the data across
these periods in the same regression. We cluster the standard errors at the firm level.
After a firm wins an H-1B lottery, its application may be approved, denied, or
withdrawn. For example, the application may not meet the eligibility criteria, leading to a
denial, or the applicant firm may go out of business, leading to a withdrawal. It can be
relevant to estimate the effect of an approved capped H-1B visa on firm outcomes, in
addition to examining the ITT effect. The total number of capped H-1B visas approved
for a firm in any given year is potentially endogenous, because it depends on the fraction
of those that win the lottery that are also approved. We can use lottery wins as an
instrument for approved capped H-1B visas in a two-stage least squares (2SLS) model:
AiT = 0+1UiT+νiT

(2)

YitT = γ0+ γ1AiT+ηitT

(3)

AiT represents the number of capped H-1B visas approved for firm i in the lottery that
occurred in year T. In the first stage (2), we regress AiT on UiT. In the second stage (3), we
regress YitT on AiT (instrumented using UiT). The coefficient γ1 represents the local
average treatment effect (LATE) of an extra approved capped H-1B visa among the
compliers (i.e. those induced by winning the lottery to change their number of approved
capped H-1B visas). νit and ηit are error terms.
The ITT and LATE estimates represent different empirical objects, which are both
of interest. The ITT estimates show the effects of granting another visa to a given firm.
This is relevant because firms and policy-makers are interested in the raw effects on firms
of allowing a marginal capped visa to the firm. Thus, for all of our main outcome
variables we show our main ITT specification (1). The LATE estimates are particularly
relevant when we are testing the hypothesis that additional H-1Bs crowd out other
employment. This is because in the employment context we are interested in comparing
the coefficient on approved capped H-1Bs to a specific non-zero level, namely to the
coefficient in the scenario in which H-1Bs do not crowd out or in employment of other
This specification makes a linearity assumption: moving from no visa to one has the same effect as
moving from one to two, etc. We estimate insignificant coefficients on higher-order terms in visa wins.
12

9

workers—i.e. a coefficient of 1, because our employment data measure a firm’s total
employment, including H-1Bs. Thus, for employment we additionally show LATE
estimates. (Doran, Gelber, and Isen 2014 show LATE estimates of effects on patenting.)
The first-stage regressions (Appendix Table 1) have coefficients 1 near 1 (ranging from
0.88 to 0.89 for employment, and from 0.86 to 0.88 for patenting), and have F-statistics
in the hundreds. Thus, there is generally little difference between the ITT coefficient and
standard error on unexpected lottery wins, and the LATE coefficient and standard error
on approved capped H-1B visas.
In those rare cases (comprising 2.69 percent of firms) in which a firm participates
in more than one lottery in a given fiscal year T (e.g. a firm participates in both the 2006
Regular and ADE lotteries), we calculate UiT by summing the total number of unexpected
wins across both of the lotteries that the firm enters in year T (except for specifications in
which we run separate regressions for the Regular and ADE lotteries).13 We seek as much
statistical power as possible, so we pool the FY2006 and FY2007 Regular and ADE
lotteries in our baseline. In these pooled regressions, for a given firm, we stack data from
the FY2006 lottery and data from the FY2007 lottery, so that we can capture the effects
of winning the lottery in Year 0 on employment in each subsequent year (measured
consistently as the number of years since the relevant lottery occurred).
Although the randomization implies that Ui should be exogenous in (1), it is also
possible to control for various pre-determined covariates. For example, we can control for
a lagged value of an outcome variable at the firm (e.g. when the dependent variable is the
number of patents, we can control for Yi,pre,T, the number of patents in firm i observed in a
“pre-period,” meaning a period before Year 0); for the expected number of lottery wins
pn; or other covariates.
We find that unexpected H-1B wins in earlier lotteries have no significant effect on future H-1B
applications. In both the cases of FY2006 and FY2007 visas, the Regular visa lottery chronologically
occurred on a date before the ADE cap was reached. When we pool FY2006 and FY2007 and regress total
ADE H-1B visa approvals in a given year on unexpected lottery wins in the Regular lottery in that year, the
coefficient on unexpected lottery wins is -0.20, with a standard error or 0.18 (p=0.26). Additionally,
unexpected lottery wins in 2006 have no effect on approved 2007 visas; for example, when regress total
FY2007 Regular and ADE approvals (summed) on unexpected lottery wins in the FY2006 Regular and
ADE lotteries combined, the coefficient on unexpected lottery wins is -0.05, with a standard error of 1.45
(p=0.97). Finally, we verified that winning one lottery also does not affect the probability of winning a
subsequent lottery conditional on entering the subsequent lottery.
13

10

We expect our results to be most compelling in small and medium-sized firms,
where the variances of the outcomes are modest and the impact of an additional employee
should be most clearly statistically distinguishable from the error term. Small and
medium-sized firms in the aggregate contribute in important ways to innovation (Acs and
Audretsch 1990), and comprise a substantial fraction of all H-1B lottery applicants. To
evaluate how the effects vary across firms of different sizes, we investigate the sample of
firms with 10 or fewer employees in Year -1 (roughly the 25th percentile of firm size in
our sample); those with 30 or fewer employees in Year -1 (roughly the 50th percentile);
many other firm size cutoffs; and the sample of firms of all sizes.
As noted, our measure of total employment reflects total employment at the firm
and therefore includes the H-1B worker if the H-1B worker works at the firm; in this
case, the effect of an additional H-1B visa on total firm employment will equal one plus
the effect on employment of workers other than the new H-1B. One question of interest is
a two-sided test of whether the coefficient 1 on unexpected H-1B visas is significantly
different from 0. If 1 is positive and significant, it would indicate that the extra H-1B
visa lottery win increases total employment at the firm—as opposed to crowding out a
worker that the firm would have otherwise hired, in which case the coefficient would be
0. In principle, an extra H-1B visa could even decrease employment at the firm, for
example if the new H-1B worker works more hours or works harder than others (for
example, to secure another visa or green card for continued employment in the U.S.) and
therefore crowds out more than one other worker.14 Another question of interest is a twosided test of whether 1 is significantly different from 1. If 1 is greater than 1, this would
indicate that an additional H-1B visa leads to employing a greater number of other
workers. If 1 is less than one, this can indicate that an extra H-1B worker at least
partially crowds out other worker(s) who would otherwise have worked at the firm.
Due to the long right tail of the distribution of patents, previous literature has
typically examined transformations of the number of patents. Given the approximate
lognormality of patents, one may wish to run a specification in which the dependent
variable is log patents (e.g. Kerr and Lincoln 2010). In our context, this specification
14

Hours worked is unobserved in our data, as in many administrative datasets on employment.

11

would lead to a problem: we would like to include firms in the regressions that have zero
patents, as the majority of firms have zero patents in our context, but the log of zero is
undefined.15 Thus, we approximate the log of the number of patents using the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) of the number of patents, which is defined at zero and negative
values (e.g. Burbidge, Magee, and Robb 1988, Pence 2006, or Gelber 2011). The IHS of
patents Y is defined as:

IHS(Y ) = ln(Y + 1+ Y 2 )
When the IHS of patents is the dependent variable in the ITT regressions, the coefficient
1 reflects the approximate percent increase in patents caused by an extra unexpected H1B visa. We also show that our results are similar with a log transformation.
We additionally examine the effect of unexpected H-1Bs on a dummy for whether
the firm patented. When this dummy is the outcome, we control for a dummy for whether
the firm patented in a pre-period. When we investigate binary outcomes in our panel data,
we run a linear probability model to avoid econometric complications relating to panel
data specifications with lagged dependent variables in nonlinear contexts. (The same
point applies to logits or probits in the case of binary outcomes, or to negative binomial
or Poisson regressions in the case of count outcomes.)
To tailor our specifications to the relevant features of each context, our baseline
specifications differ in the patenting and employment contexts. We will show that when
we run exactly parallel specifications in the employment and patenting contexts, we
obtain comparable results to the baseline.
To address the long right tail of the employment distribution, we use median
regressions in our baseline specification. (The median value of patents is zero, so it does
not make sense to run median regressions in this context.) Because instrumental variables
quantile regressions typically did not converge, instead we run ITT median regressions
corresponding to model (1) above.
As in the patenting context, previous literature on H-1Bs has not examined effects
on the level of employment, but has instead examined transformations of employment,
This is not a problem in the context of Kerr and Lincoln (2010). They examine patents at the city level,
where patents are greater than zero.
15

12

such as the log, that reduce volatility (e.g. Pekkala Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln forthcoming).
Again, zeroes in employment imply that it is not straightforward to use the log in our
context. Thus, a second way of addressing the long right tail of the employment
distribution is to estimate the effect on the (first-differenced) IHS of employment. In this
specification, before testing whether the coefficient on unexpected H-1B visas is equal to
1 (reflecting a scenario with no crowdout), we must transform the coefficient from the
regression (which reflects the approximate percentage increase in employment) by
multiplying it by the mean level of employment in a control group. We can then test
whether this transformed coefficient, which should reflect the increase in the absolute
level of employment for the mean firm, equals 1. However, the coefficient could instead
be multiplied by any employment level other than the mean, thus generating different
estimates of the implied effect on the level of employment. In light of this issue, we
present the IHS employment results only in the Appendix. (In the patenting context, our
interest is less in testing whether the patenting effect is different than a specific non-zero
number—but in the employment context, we test for a coefficient difference from 1.)
To find another method of running mean (not median) regressions while
addressing the long right tail of the employment distribution, we let the dependent
variable be the winsorized first difference of employment, and we run the 2SLS
regressions (2)-(3) (recall that 2SLS is most relevant in the employment but not the
patenting context). The first difference YitT is taken from before the lottery (i.e. the first
quarter of CY2005 for FY2006 visa applicants, and the first quarter of CY2006 for
FY2007 visa applicants), to period t after the lottery. Winsorization is common in
administrative data (e.g. Chetty et al. 2011) and in survey data (e.g. the Current
Population Survey).16 Winsorized regressions would not capture large effects on
employment outcomes. However, when we run our 2SLS regressions without
winsorizing, the point estimate of the effect is negative and insignificant, lessening the
concern that winsorization dulls an actual positive effect. We also find that an extra H-1B
We winsorize the first difference of employment and control for lagged employment, rather than
winsorizing the level of employment in period t after the lottery and controlling for lagged employment,
because in the context of examining firms of all sizes, winsorizing the first difference is more effective in
removing large outliers than is winsorizing the level of employment. When we limit the sample to smaller
firms, the two specifications show very similar point estimates and confidence intervals.
16

13

visa has an insignificant effect on the probability that the change in employment is
outside the 95th percentile. Nonetheless, because of these issues, the median regressions
are our primary specification in the employment context.
Parallel to examining whether the firm patented, we also examine the effect of
unexpected H-1Bs on a dummy for whether the firm has a positive number of employees,
a measure of whether the firm is in business.
For each outcome, the baseline time period we investigate is also chosen to be the
most appropriate for that outcome. For employment, we are most interested in comparing
the coefficient on unexpected H-1Bs to 1, to test the “no-crowdout” hypothesis. Thus, in
our baseline we focus on the effect on employment from Q1 to Q4, when the H-1B
worker is almost always working at the firm and when a coefficient below 1 will
therefore most reliably indicate crowdout. (In later quarters, there is more attrition as
some H-1Bs leave the initial firm.) For other outcomes, we are less interested in
comparing the coefficient to any specific non-zero level; instead we are more interested
in investigating periods when the H-1B likely could have had a measurable effect on the
outcome. For payroll costs per employee, if H-1Bs are paid less than alternative workers,
then we would expect to measure effects on payroll per employee primarily while the H1B is usually at the firm. Thus, as a baseline for this outcome it makes sense to examine
the duration of the visa, Years 0 to 3, when the H-1B is typically working at the firm.
With this motivation, as a baseline we also examine the R&E credit and profits over
Years 0 to 3.17 Given the sometimes substantial time taken to develop and approve
patents, it makes sense to investigate as long a time period as possible for patents. Thus,
our baseline patenting specification examines patents from Year 0 to the latest year
available in the data, Year 8.
Beyond the baseline period, for each outcome we also show the results in all other
relevant periods. For example, we additionally show the employment, R&E, payroll per
employee, and profits results until Year 8, and we show patenting for Years 0 to 3 alone.
4. Data
Match between USCIS data and patenting data
H-1Bs typically worked at the firm for only one-quarter (i.e. October to December) of the calendar year
in Year 0, and for three-quarters of calendar Year 3 (i.e. January to September).

17

14

We merge several administrative datasets. First, we use USCIS administrative
data on the H-1B lotteries for FY2006 and FY2007. The data contain information on each
H-1B visa application that entered the lottery in each of these years: Employer
Identification Number (EIN); the date the firm applied for a visa; the type of H-1B
(Regular or ADE); the name of the firm applying; how many of each firm’s applications
won or lost the lottery; whether each application was approved by USCIS; and firmreported worker characteristics from the LCA such as highest degree completed.
We obtained the Patent Dataverse on the universe of granted U.S. patent
applications from 1975 to 2013 at each firm, based on USPTO data.18 Granted patents are
classified by the calendar year a firm applied for the patent. For example, our measure of
the number of patents at a firm in Year 0 refers to patents the firm applied for in Year 0
that were approved by 2013. We also observe total patent citations until 2010.
The time to develop a patent can range from months to years, with substantial
variance. The mean approval time reported by USPTO for patents filed in FY2008 is 32.2
months, again with substantial variance (USPTO 2012). Our data will allow us to
estimate the effect on an important set of patents, namely those within up to nine years of
the initial H-1B visa period, but the effect on subsequent patents is unobserved.19
Since the Patent Dataverse does not contain EIN, but does contain firm name, we
matched firms between the Patent Dataverse from 1975 to 2013 and the USCIS lottery
data using firm names. As described further in Appendix 1, to match firms between these
two datasets, we performed an intentionally liberal automatic match between the datasets
to obtain all plausible matches. We then searched through these matches by hand to
detect and remove all matches that appeared spurious. We classified firms into three
categories: (1) 392 firms that definitely matched between the datasets; (2) 63 firms for
which it was ambiguous whether they matched; and (3) the remaining 2,595 firms that
definitely did not match. In our main results, we classify the 63 ambiguous matches as
See https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/patent (accessed 5/24/2015).
The majority of H-1B petitions are for workers aged 25 to 34, whereas patents of academic life scientists
peak around mid-career (Azoulay, Ding, and Stuart 2007), and noted innovations peak around age 40
(Jones 2010). This raises the possibility that some H-1B workers who stay in the U.S. will innovate more
beyond our sample period (though Levin and Stephan 1991 find that scientists’ productivity is greatest at
the beginning of their careers). However, in all of these studies innovation in the 25-to-34 age range is a
substantial fraction of its peak. We leave examination of effects at longer time horizons to future research.
18
19

15

non-matches. In the Appendix, we show that the results are comparable when assuming
that the possible matches are true matches. In general, our results are robust to similar
matching procedures. A firm would not match between the datasets if it did not patent
during this time period, so these firms appear in our data as having zero patents.
Match between USCIS data and IRS data
Using EINs, we merged firms from the USCIS lottery data to IRS data on the
universe of U.S. firms. Data from IRS form 941 contain information for each EIN on
overall quarterly employment in the U.S. (where overall employment includes workers in
the U.S. of both foreign and U.S. nationality), which we call “employment.” Our measure
of employment in Q1 (which reflects the first quarter of the fiscal year, i.e. the last
quarter of the preceding calendar year) reflects employment as measured in midDecember of that quarter. Thus, between the time when a firm learned that it won or lost
the lottery in June to August of Year -1, and the end of Q1, when workers generally begin
working at the firm and when employment is measured, firms had a number of months to
react. For example, firms were notified of the FY2007 Regular visa lottery results in June
of CY2006, which gave firms over six months until December of CY2006. However, in
the sole case of the FY2006 ADE lottery, the lottery was held on January 17, 2006, after
Q1 of FY2006 ended. Thus, in the employment regressions, we drop data from Q1 of the
FY2006 ADE lottery, since firms’ decisions in Q1 could not have been influenced by the
results of this lottery.
We use data from 2004 to 2013. The first available form 941 data are from the
first quarter of CY2004. These data are missing in the second through fourth quarters of
CY2004, so we measure employment in CY2004 using data on its first quarter.
Another measure of innovative activity is the R&E tax credit, as reported to IRS
(see Hall and Van Reenen 2000 or Hall, Mairesse and Mohnen 2010 for surveys). The
R&E credit goes to firms that have research and development costs in the U.S. To our
knowledge, our paper is the first to investigate the effect of immigration on the R&E. In
our IRS data, we observe the amount of the R&E credit claimed (not R&E expenses), and
we only observe this for C-corporations. We match firms’ patents to the USCIS data
using a fuzzy match of firm name, and patents can take time to develop—but neither of
these issues affects the R&E outcome, because we match R&E data to USCIS data using

16

EIN, and we can measure firms’ contemporaneous R&E credits. We also estimate the
effect on firms’ yearly net income (“profit”) and wage bill per employee, both as reported
to IRS. In general, profits measured in the IRS data are not the same as economic profits.
We drop the 2.0 percent of firms in the USCIS data that did not match to the EIN
master list in the IRS data. Pooling over all quarters, 4.5 percent of the remaining firms in
the USCIS data did not match to the IRS data on quarterly firm employment; we treat
these data as missing. Of the remaining firms, 17.9 percent have missing employment
data in Year -1, which makes it impossible to run our specifications in which we control
for Year -1 employment, and we drop these data for the purpose of the employment
specifications. Of the remaining observations, pooling over Q1 to Q4, 2.2 percent are
missing in a given quarter.
The USCIS data do not contain identifying information on individual H-1B
applications like Tax Identification Numbers that can be linked to the IRS data.20 Thus,
we cannot distinguish the employment of a particular H-1B worker whose application
entered the lottery from employment of others. Like previous literature on the effects of
H-1Bs (e.g. Kerr and Lincoln 2010), the data also do not distinguish H-1Bs in general
(whether lottery winners or other H-1Bs) either from non-H-1Bs, or from workers on
other visas like the L-1. As a result, we cannot directly assess how new H-1Bs affect
employment of foreign workers on other visas. In the IRS data, we do observe the most
recent report to the U.S. government of a worker’s citizenship status, which is an
imperfect measure of whether a worker was a U.S. citizen at the time of the lotteries.
Summary statistics
Table 1 shows summary statistics. We use data on 2,750 firms (i.e. EINs) in the
full sample. In 300 cases (9.84 percent), firms apply for at least one visa in both FY2006
and FY2007. Thus, over both lottery years, there are 3,050 firm-lottery year observations,
where “year” refers in this context to a year of the lottery, rather than a year when an
outcome is observed.21 In the full sample, the mean (4.52) and especially standard
We were given the lottery data to link firms, not workers. The LCAs cannot usefully be used to link
USCIS applications to the IRS data, as this would introduce substantial measurement error.
21
Since larger firms tend to apply in both years, the means and standard deviations tend to be moderately
lower at the firm (rather than firm-lottery year) level. The results of later regressions also tend to be more
precise when weighting each firm equally, strengthening our conclusions (available upon request).
20

17

deviation (56.11) of patents measured at the yearly level are large, due to a small number
of firms that patent in large numbers. The mean (0.15) and standard deviation (0.80) of
the IHS of patents are much lower. The means and standard deviations are smaller among
the 1,276 firm-lottery years (or 1,192 firms) with 30 or fewer employees, and smaller still
among the 749 firm-lottery years (or 719 firms) with 10 or fewer employees. As a result,
we generally focus on such small or medium-sized firms. A modest fraction of the
sample patents in a given year—e.g. 4.8 percent of the full sample of firms,
corresponding to 9.3 percent of these firms that patented at any point during Years 0 to 8.
Similarly, a modest fraction claims the R&E credit, but the mean (IHS of the) amount
claimed is substantial.
Table 1 shows that the mean (1,877.84) and standard deviation (39,721.31) of the
number of employees during Q1 to Q4 in the full sample are very large. In firms with 30
or fewer, or 10 or fewer, employees in Year -1, the mean and standard deviation of Q1 to
Q4 employment are much lower but still quite large. Median employment is much lower
than the mean. Winsorizing also reduces the mean and standard deviation greatly.
In the FY2006 Regular lottery the vast majority of applications lost the lottery,
and in the FY2007 Regular lottery the vast majority of applications won the lottery. The
ADE lotteries have a more even fraction of winners and losers. The fact that the vast
majority either won or lost the Regular lotteries will not directly pose an issue for our
estimates: the confidence intervals will show the degree of precision of the results.
The sample contains 7,243 visa applications, with an average of 2.37 H-1B
applications per firm summing over both years. The average firm in our sample won 0.57
H-1B visas when aggregating across both years. The standard deviation of the number of
unexpected lottery wins (as defined above) is 0.33, and its range runs from -2.65 to 2.96.
Over half of firms are in North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code
54, representing professional, scientific, and technical services.
LCAs show that across all lotteries, around half of applications were for
computer-related jobs. Around one-tenth were for engineering-related jobs.
Comparison of lottery firms to other firms
As our regressions use firms that applied on the day the cap was reached, it is
relevant to compare this sample to the broader sample of firms applying for H-1B visas in

18

these years. In Table 2, we regress characteristics of the firms or workers on a dummy for
applying on the last day and lottery fixed effects. Firms applying on the last day are more
likely to have patented in the past, and patented more in the past. Similarly, firms
applying on the last day are 17 percentage points more likely to be in NAICS code 54.
Applications on the last day tend to be from larger firms. On the last day, firms
disproportionately submit applications for workers with higher educational degrees; for
those with higher intended worker salaries; for “systems analysis and programming”
jobs; and for younger workers. If H-1Bs hypothetically have more positive innovation
effects in firms that patented more in the past and/or are in scientific industries, or among
workers with more advanced degrees or higher salaries, then our sample will arguably be
primed to find a particularly positive effect on measures of innovation.
5. Validity of the randomization
Table 3 verifies the validity of the randomized design by regressing variables that
should not be affected by the lottery on unexpected lottery wins. The table confirms that
none of the lagged dependent variables is significantly related to unexpected lottery wins:
various measures of patenting, the R&E, employment, firm wage bill per employee, and
profits.22 Dummies for whether firms from the USCIS lottery data match to other datasets
(i.e. the sample restrictions discussed earlier), and a dummy for NAICS 54, are also
insignificantly related to unexpected wins.
6. Effects on measures of innovation
A priori, it is not clear whether H-1Bs should raise or lower patenting, or use of
the R&E credit, at the firm level. H-1Bs could have special skills that raise firms’
innovation, but H-1Bs could alternatively lead to lower firm innovation, for example if
firms use H-1Bs in place of higher-skilled alternative workers (as in Matloff 2003). We
begin by measuring effects on patenting and then turn to the R&E credit.
Effect on patenting
We investigate the effects on Year -2 outcomes because we can then control for the dependent variable
measured in Year -1, which is the same control as in our regressions in later tables. By investigating Year 2 outcomes, we can also determine the firm size cutoffs by measuring employment in Year -1, yielding the
same firms in each size category as in our later regressions. When we investigate Year -1 outcomes as the
dependent variable, controlling for Year -2 observations and using firm size cutoffs calculated from Year 2, the regressions are insignificant for all but one of the 27 dependent variables, consistent with random
chance (results available upon request).
22

19

Table 4 estimates the effect on patenting of unexpected H-1B visas, during the
patenting baseline period of Years 0 to 8, as well as over the duration of the initial H-1B
visa in Years 0 to 3. By “Years 0 to 8,” we mean that we pool the FY2006 lottery, for
which we observe Years 0 to 8, with the FY2007 lottery, for which we observe Years 0 to
7. We also examine the effect on a dummy for whether the firm patented in each year, so
that 1 represents the effect on the fraction of years that firms patented. For each of the
outcomes, we show the results with two alternative sets of controls: (a) controlling for the
number of patents in Year -1 (or for a dummy for patenting in Year -1 when the patenting
dummy is the outcome); or (b) additionally controlling for the expected number of lottery
wins (conditional on the number of H-1B applications and the probability of winning the
lottery in question). The results are similar either way; we take (b) as a baseline. The
results are also similar when we add additional controls, such as controlling additionally
for the NAICS code of the firm, for the number of H-1B lottery applications n, or for
dummies for each of the four lotteries. Finally, the results are also similar when preperiod patenting is measured over another time period rather than Year -1.
In Table 4, we estimate a precise zero effect of unexpected visas on patenting.
The point estimates are generally very close to zero. As the estimates are insignificant,
we focus on the confidence intervals to determine what we can rule out with statistical
confidence. When the dependent variable is the IHS of the number of patents in firms
with 10 or fewer employees, the upper end of the 95 percent confidence interval in the
baseline rules out an increase greater than just 0.47 percent, relative to a “base” mean
number of patents of only 0.0098 per year.23 Our main conclusion—that any absolute
increase in the quantity of patenting is at most modest—makes sense given our finding
that only a modest fraction of the sample patents. For firms with 30 or fewer employees,
in the baseline we bound the increase in patents below 1.3 percent, and in the full sample,
below 1.9 percent. When the dependent variable is the patenting dummy, the confidence
interval also indicates at most a small impact (e.g. at most an increase of 0.0020 in firms
with 10 or fewer employees). We also find no evidence that H-1Bs increase high
quantiles of patenting, and bound any increase below a similarly small level.
We calculate the “base” mean by taking the mean number of yearly patents in Years 0 to 8 in a “control
group,” specifically firms whose number of unexpected wins was less than or equal to zero.
23

20

Our choices of the number of employees in our size thresholds (e.g. 10 or fewer)
could be varied. Figure 1 plots the coefficient and confidence interval on unexpected H1B visas when the dependent variable is the IHS of number of patents over Years 0 to 8,
as a function of the employer’s size, from under 10 employees to under 500, in
increments of 10.24 The upper end of the 95 percent confidence interval ranges from near
0 to just above 0.01; across all 50 choices of the employer size threshold shown, in the
most positive case we are able to rule out an increase in patents greater than around 1.5
percent (and usually the upper bound is substantially smaller). The point estimate is
positive in only three of 50 cases—notably, for size thresholds of 10, 20, and 30—though
it is insignificant and very small in all of these cases. We also find no significant effects
in the largest firms (over 500 employees). Overall, we find no evidence of a notable
increase in patenting and robustly rule out more than a small increase.
Other specifications
An important issue is whether our results generalize to H-1B applications
submitted on other days. We cannot directly address this question, but we can re-weight
observations so that the weighted distribution of key firm and worker characteristics from
the day of the lottery matches that among applicants for capped H-1B visas over all days
that applications were submitted. Appendix Table 2 shows that these results are very
similar to the baseline. Throughout the paper, the results are also similar when weighting
by firms’ number of H-1B applications, or by the expected number of lottery wins.
Appendix Table 3 shows that the effect on the absolute number of patents is at
most small relative to the baseline variation. For example, in employers with 30 or fewer
employees, the upper end of the confidence interval rules out an increase in the number
of patents greater than 0.38 percent of a standard deviation. Appendix Table 4 shows that
the effects in only the later period (Years 4 to 8) are comparable to those shown earlier.
Appendix Table 5 shows the effects when we weight each patent by its number of
citations until 2010, i.e. the dependent variable is patent citations through 2010. The
results still rule out more than a small percentage increase in citations.

The necessity of keeping a sufficiently large number of firms in each category, to prevent the potential
identification of any given firm, prevents us from going beyond 500 employees in increments of 10.
24

21

Appendix Table 6 shows that the results are comparable when we assume that
possible matches between the USCIS and patenting data did match, instead of the
baseline assumption that they did not. If anything, this shows more negative effects than
the baseline—occasionally negative and significant at 10 percent, though not robustly so.
In Appendix Table 7, the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of
patents in each year. This is an alternative way of addressing the skewness of the
outcome distribution, while recognizing that the number of patents is often zero, but
without resorting to the less-known IHS transformation. However, this specification has
the limitation that we add an arbitrary constant (i.e. 1) to patents. The results are very
similar to Table 4, with slightly smaller upper bounds on the confidence intervals.
In Appendix Table 8, we examine whether there is heterogeneity in the effect on
patents across type of lottery or type of industry, using our baseline specification. We
find no evidence of significant, or significantly different, effects across the Regular vs.
ADE lotteries; professional, scientific, and technical services firms vs. firms in other
industries; or firms like Infosys or Wipro in industries that often offer outsourcing for
temporary support services (often specifically for temporary technical support services)
vs. other firms. Appendix Table 9 shows that there is also no significant interaction of
winning the lottery with prior firm patenting, or how with early in the application season
the cap was reached. Among firms that patented at any point prior to Year 0, we also find
no significant effect. Finally, there is no significant difference between the effects in the
2006 and 2007 sets of lotteries. Appendix 2 discusses these results further.
Our main focus in this section is on the effect on patents; increasing the quantity
of innovation is often seen as desirable. Appendix Table 10 shows that unexpected H-1B
visas also have an insignificant effect on the firm’s number of patents per employee. At
the same time, the results are compatible with some increase in patents per employee.
Effect on R&E Credit
Table 5 shows the effect on the R&E credit in Years 0 to 3. In firms with 10 (30)
or fewer employees, the baseline rules out that an extra unexpected H-1B increases the
amount of the R&E claimed by more than 4.1 (1.8) percent, and rules out that the fraction
of years when taking any R&E credit increases by more than only 0.0041 (0.0016). The
point estimates are negative. In the largest firms, the results are imprecise. Years 4 to 8

22

also show no evidence of a significant positive impact, and in a minority of cases actually
show barely significant negative impacts (see Appendix Table 11). We again find
comparable results at other size thresholds; no significant interactions with covariates;
and no significant differences across groups.
We only observe the amount of R&E credit claimed, which could be affected by
factors like firm profit: firms with higher profits will on average have higher tax rates and
thus claim more credit per dollar of R&E expenditures, and will also on average claim
more credit because the R&E is non-refundable. However, we later find some evidence
that unexpected H-1Bs raise firm profits, and this impact on profits should push toward
showing that H-1Bs raise R&E claims. This makes our finding of no significant increase
in the R&E all the more striking. We focus less on the R&E than on patenting also
because R&E is an input into innovation, not an output (Lerner and Seru 2015).
7. Effect on employment
Table 6 shows our baseline estimates of the effect of extra H-1B visas on total
firm employment in Q1 to Q4. Our main finding is that we bound any increase in
employment below a moderate level. In the baseline median regressions, the top end of
the 95 percent confidence interval in firms with 10 or fewer employees is 0.11, indicating
that an extra unexpected H-1B visa leads to an increase in total employment of at most
0.11 workers. Although the point estimate is below zero, it is insignificant. We do not
conclude from the point estimate that unexpected H-1B visas decrease employment,
because our confidence interval is compatible with an increase in employment; of course,
this is why confidence intervals are useful in determining what we can rule out with a
standard degree of statistical certainty. Similarly, in this specification in firms with 30 or
fewer employees, the top end of the confidence interval is 0.37. In the full sample of
firms, we can rule out an increase greater than 0.57. All of these estimates are
significantly different from 1 at the 1 percent level, suggesting crowdout of other
employment. In the 2SLS specification among firms with 10 or fewer employees, the top
end of the confidence interval with more controls is 0.68, again significantly different
from 1 at the 1 percent level, but compatible with a moderate positive effect. With 30 or
fewer employees, we can rule out a coefficient of 0.71 or greater (p<0.01). In the full
sample of firms, the 2SLS results are extremely imprecise.

23

Figure 2 plots the coefficient and confidence interval on unexpected lottery wins
from the baseline median employment specification, as a function of the employer size
threshold. We focus on the upper end of the 95 percent confidence interval; across all 50
choices of the employer size threshold, in the most positive case we are able to rule out
an increase in employment of more than 0.6. In all cases, the estimate is significantly less
than 1 at the 1 percent level. The point estimates are always negative and insignificantly
different from zero. We also find no significant effect in firms with over 500 employees.
Appendix Table 12 shows that re-weighting the sample to the characteristics of
the full population of firms and workers again shows comparable results to the baseline.
Appendix Table 13 shows that in each quarter from Q1 to Q4 individually, we are
typically able to rule out a coefficient of 1, particularly in smaller firms. Appendix Table
14 shows that several other specifications yield comparable results: winsorizing instead at
the 99th percentile; letting the dependent variable be the IHS of the first difference in
employment (as in the IHS patenting specifications); winsorizing the IHS of the first
difference in employment at the 99th percentile (to address the long right tail further);
winsorizing the IHS of the level of employment at the 99th percentile; and running
median regressions when the dependent variable is the first difference of employment
(rather than controlling for the lag of employment). Appendix Tables 15 and 16 verify
that unexpected wins are also unrelated to whether the firm is in business.25 Appendix 3
describes how the results are generally similar when other patenting or employment
specifications are run to make the full set of specifications exactly parallel in the
patenting and employment contexts. Quantiles other than the median also show no
evidence of increases in employment.
Other time periods and samples
Table 7 shows employment effects in other time periods. Rows A and B show Q5
to Q8, and Q9 to Q12, respectively, i.e. each of the remaining two of the three years
covered by the H-1B visa in question, after Q1 to Q4. We generally rule out a coefficient
of 1 at the 5 percent significance level in both of these periods. Row D shows results for
Q13 through Q32 (the latest quarter in the sample), when we estimate less significant
Since Appendix Tables 15 and 16 measure the effect on whether the firm has employment in the U.S.,
these results also encompass effects on whether a firm chooses to locate in the U.S.
25

24

results. As a greater proportion of H-1Bs leave their initial firm, the interpretation of a
coefficient below 1 as indicating crowdout becomes weaker; for example, many H-1Bs
have left their initial firm by three years after the start of their visa. Thus, the results are
less informative about crowdout in later years. As Appendix 2 discusses in detail,
Appendix Tables 9 and 17 find no significant differences in the effects across the same
subsamples and interactions we investigated in the patenting context.
Interpreting the estimates
Our ITT employment estimates are relevant for firms and policy-makers
interested in understanding the average employment effects of granting additional capped
H-1B visas to firms. We find no indication that overall firm employment will rise on
average, and we find that overall firm employment will increase on average by at most a
moderate amount for every additional new capped H-1B visa.
Moving beyond the policy-relevant ITT estimates, institutional features of this
context are relevant to determining whether new H-1Bs crowd out employment of other
workers. In the employment context, the ITT does not reflect that some H-1B lottery
winners’ applications are rejected, but our first stage coefficient is extremely precise and
quite close to 1 (ranging from 0.88 to 0.89).26 Meanwhile, after their visas are approved
by USCIS, some workers may not show up for their jobs in the U.S., for example because
they die in the meantime. However, North (2011) estimates that around the time we
study, nearly all (95 percent) of those approved for H-1Bs end up being admitted. Even
after accounting for both of these factors together—i.e. by inflating the confidence
intervals by a factor around 1.05 (=1/0.95) for the 2SLS regressions, or by around 1.19
(=1/(0.95*0.88)) for the median regressions—we would still conclude that new H-1Bs
partially crowd out other workers in Q1 to Q4, particularly in small and medium-sized
firms. After inflating, the upper end of the 95 percent confidence interval for Q1 to Q4
would be 0.87 and 0.92 in the case of the 2SLS regressions for firms of 10 or fewer or 30
or fewer employees, respectively, and would be 0.49, 0.64, and 0.94 in the case of the

Of course, instrumental variables quantile regressions do not rely on a Wald estimate. In practice,
however, in the rare median instrumental variables median regressions that converged, the coefficients on
approved H-1B visas were very similar to the ITT median coefficient divided by the OLS or median first
stage—i.e. only around 10 percent larger than in the ITT median regressions.
26

25

median regressions in firms with 10 or fewer employees, 30 or fewer employees, or all
firm sizes, respectively—all of which are below 1.
As noted, it is possible that new H-1Bs crowd out other H-1Bs who would have
worked at the firm (e.g. H-1Bs not subject to the cap), or other visa types such as L-1s or
those participating in OPT. We find an insignificant impact (coefficient -0.03, p=0.25) of
unexpected H-1Bs on the number of approved H-1B visas for applications received after
the cap was reached (e.g. those for citizens of the five countries not subject to the cap).
As L-1s are only available to multinationals, it is relevant that our results are similar
when we remove multinationals from the sample. OPT applies to workers already in the
U.S., but the majority of H-1B applications were for workers previously locating outside
the U.S. (USCIS 2006, 2007). The ITT results again are policy-relevant effects of
interest, regardless of whether these H-1Bs crowd out other visas.
If firms respond to an extra capped H-1B visa by reducing contracting work or
outsourcing to other firms or countries—neither of which appears in our measure of
employment at the firm itself—then by examining only employment at the firm, new H1Bs will appear to be less substitutable with other potential employees than they actually
are. Thus, it is all the more notable that we are able to rule out a coefficient on
unexpected H-1Bs of one or greater. Fraud has also sometimes been alleged in the
context of H-1Bs; this could lead to a larger coefficient on unexpected H-1Bs (if firms
fraudulently obtain other types of visas for the workers who would have been H-1Bs if
the firm had been awarded an H-1B), or to a smaller coefficient (if the firm responds to
not receiving an H-1B by hiring a worker “off the books”).
Effects on foreigners and non-foreigners
As described in detail in Appendix 4, Appendix Table 18 separately estimates the
effect on employment of foreigners and non-foreigners. Foreigners constitute a majority
of the workforce in our sample of firms, and we find that new H-1Bs crowd out
employment of other foreigners at least to some extent. The point estimates suggest
essentially no crowdout of U.S. natives/citizens. The confidence intervals rule out onefor-one crowdout of U.S. natives/citizens, but are compatible with a more moderate
degree of crowdout of U.S. natives/citizens. We place these results in the Appendix
because our two measures of the number of foreigners and non-foreigners are both

26

imperfect—and, as the Appendix explains, one of these measures is liable to be
somewhat biased toward finding crowdout of foreigners rather than non-foreigners—
though the concordance of the results across two separate measures is reassuring.
Our goal is to examine the effect of additional H-1B visas specifically—a
question of clear policy relevance. Some previous studies examine the effect of skilled
immigrants on outcomes (e.g. Pekkala Kerr et al., forthcoming), but our imperfect
measures of immigration status would hamper such an investigation here.
8. Effects on profits and payroll per employee
Table 8 shows the effect of unexpected H-1B visas on median firm payroll costs
per employee during Years 0 to 3, calculated by dividing total firm payroll costs in a
given year by the total number of employees at the firm in that year. It is possible that
firms sponsoring H-1Bs could pay H-1Bs less relative to other comparable workers, for
example if the frictions described earlier give sponsoring firms monopsony power.
However, a reduction in average pay could appear not only if the firm pays the new H-1B
less than an alternative worker, but also if the unexpected H-1B causes a reduction in
average earnings of other employees at the firm. In firms with 10 or fewer, or 30 or
fewer, employees, we find some evidence that the additional H-1B reduces median
payroll costs per employee (p<0.05 in one estimate, and p<0.10 in two other estimates,
of the four total). The point estimates suggest substantial decreases in payroll costs per
employee in these firms (with larger and more significant estimates in the smaller size
category), though the confidence intervals encompass much smaller effects. In the full
sample of firms, an additional H-1B worker typically reflects only a small percentage of
total employment and would be expected to influence payroll costs per employee little,
and unsurprisingly we find no significant effect in these firms.27 Appendix Table 19
shows insignificant impacts in later years, consistent with the hypothesis that in this later
period the H-1B has typically left the firm and therefore no longer measurably reduces
the firm’s average pay.

At other firm size thresholds, we typically find negative effects, though they unsurprisingly become
increasingly attenuated at larger firm size thresholds. At other quantiles, we generally continue to find
negative and often significant effects.
27

27

Table 9 examines the effect of an unexpected H-1B visa on the firm’s profits in
Years 0 to 3, using median regressions. The point estimate is positive across all the firm
size cutoffs considered and is sometimes significant. The point estimates generally cluster
around showing an increase in profits of five to ten thousand dollars per year (in
$2014).28 The median regressions do not converge for many firm size cutoffs, including
among firms of all sizes and for firm size thresholds over 200 employees; thus, the largest
firm size cutoff we show is 200 employees or fewer. Across thresholds between 30 and
200 for which the regressions converged, the regressions generally also cluster around
showing a positive effect of approximately five to ten thousand dollars per year. Overall,
we find some evidence of a positive effect on profits, though it is not robustly significant.
Profits regressions for later years did not converge.
Profits and payroll per employee are important outcomes, but we consider these
results to be secondary because the results on profits and payroll per employee are less
robust than others in the paper.29
Proxies for firm productivity are also of interest. Appendix Table 20 shows that
the effects on revenue per employee, or total income per employee, are imprecise, which
is again unsurprising given their large standard deviations.30
9. Conclusion
The effect of raising the H-1B visa cap is one of the centrally important U.S.
immigration policy questions. We examine the marginal impact on a firm’s outcomes of
allowing extra capped H-1B visas to the firm, which is relevant information for those
considering changing the number of H-1Bs granted by a modest amount. We find an
insignificant effect of additional H-1B visas on patenting and the R&E credit, and across
a variety of specifications the preponderance of evidence allows us to rule out more than
modest effects, particularly in small and medium-sized firms. Parallel to these results, our
Winsorized OLS regressions also tend to show positive point estimates. At other quantiles, many
regressions did not converge, and those that did often showed imprecise results (though others showed
results comparable to the median results).
29
It is also possible that an unexpected H-1B lottery win affects a firm’s competitors. We find no
significant impact of unexpected H-1B lottery wins on any of the outcome variables among all other firms
in that firm’s 6-digit NAICS code, which is unsurprising given the large size of a six-digit industry.
30
The effects on firm gross income, total firm payroll, or non-payroll costs are also imprecise. Ghosh,
Mayda, and Ortega (2015) study effects of H-1Bs on productivity, firm size, profits, and other outcomes.
28

28

primary finding on employment is that additional H-1Bs at most increase total firm
employment by a moderate amount. The preponderance of evidence indicates that H-1B
workers at least partially crowd out other workers, with the estimates typically indicating
substantial crowdout of other workers. This is consistent with Government
Accountability Office (2011), in which firms reported that when they did not receive an
H-1B, they generally filled the slot with another worker instead. It is notable that we find
at most modest positive effects on patenting, R&E, and employment even among firms
applying on the day the cap is reached, which are more likely than other applicants to
have patented in the past, to be in scientific industries, and to apply for workers with
higher educational degrees and intended salaries. Among firms of any size (including the
largest firms), our results are illuminating in some cases—e.g. in the baseline we bound
any increase in patenting or employment under a modest level—but in some others are
imprecise.
Consistent with firm profit maximization, we find some evidence that extra H-1B
visas increase median firm profits. We also find some evidence that extra H-1B visas lead
to a decrease in median earnings per employee. If this reflects lower pay for H-1Bs than
for alternative workers—which is not necessarily implied by our results, but is
nonetheless consistent with our results—this would suggest frictions allowing such lower
pay, such as firm labor market monopsony power and regulations restricting the free flow
of workers across borders. Future research should try to investigate more directly whether
H-1B workers’ pay is consistent with prevailing wage regulations.
Overall, our results are more supportive of the narrative about the effects of H1Bs on firms in which H-1Bs crowd out alternative workers, are paid less than the
alternative workers whom they crowd out, and thus increase the firm’s profits despite no
measurable effect on innovation. Even though firms attest that hiring the H-1B does not
adversely affect similarly employed workers, our results raise the possibility that in many
cases firms could be employing H-1Bs instead of employing other workers.31 Although
we find little impact on measures of firms’ quantity of innovation, further assessing
impacts on measures related to productivity should be a priority for further research.
Our results do not necessarily imply that firms’ behavior is inconsistent with their attestations, for
example because the Congressional intent may have been to prevent harm to U.S. citizens specifically.
31

29

Our results are consistent with the possibility that H-1B and non-H-1B workers
are perfect substitutes. This is notable in light of frequent claims that H-1Bs have unique
skills that cannot easily be obtained elsewhere. However, one cannot interpret our
estimates as necessarily implying that H-1Bs are perfect substitutes with other technical
workers. Our study focuses on estimating the causal impacts of additional H-1Bs, which
could provide some of the building blocks for estimating parameters such as the elasticity
of substitution between new H-1Bs and other workers in future work. However, such an
estimate would be limited by having one instrument—unexpected wins—but multiple
relevant parameters. The degree of crowdout of other workers should depend not only on
the degree of substitutability or complementarity of additional H-1B and other workers
(and/or labor and capital), but also on factors like possible frictions in matching firms
with workers (e.g. search frictions).32 If the firm faces frictions in finding a new
employee that limit the degree of crowdout of other workers, it would be all the more
notable that we find that a new H-1B worker does partially crowd out other workers, and
that we cannot rule out that a new H-1B worker has no effect on total employment.
In several notable ways, our study is different from previous work on the effects
of H-1Bs on outcomes in the receiving economy. First, ours is the only study that relies
on random variation. Second, we examine the effects of H-1Bs given to a particular firm
on that firm’s outcomes (holding constant H-1Bs at other firms), but our empirical
strategy does not estimate general equilibrium effects like impacts on employment,
innovation, pay, or profits in the entire U.S., or in specific areas of the U.S. Third, some
previous literature examines the effects of temporary visas in general, not specifically
capped H-1B visas (though other literature is identified from changes in the H-1B cap,
e.g. Kerr and Lincoln 2010). Fourth, our results are estimated from the FY2006 and 2007
lotteries, which may differ from other environments (e.g. Kerr and Lincoln 2010 exploit
variation in the cap that also covers other time periods). At first pass, our results also
apparently differ starkly from those in previous economics literature, as previous work
has found very large positive effects of H-1Bs on patenting, and in some cases on

32

Lewis (2011) studies the interaction of immigration with capital.

30

employment.33 Though our paper focuses only on estimating the effects of additional
capped H-1Bs on firm outcomes, future work could try to clarify to what extent the
seeming divergence in results between our study and previous literature relates to any of
the four factors above (or other factors). For example, large aggregate effects could
potentially be reconciled with small firm-level effects through very large spillovers onto
other workers, including very strongly increasing returns to scale. Finally, to address the
effects of H-1Bs in other years, it could be helpful for those running the H-1B lotteries to
begin regularly saving the data on lottery winners and losers.

For example, Kerr and Lincoln (2010) find that a 10 percent increase in a city’s H-1B population led to a
0.3 percent to 0.7 percent increase in total patenting for each standard deviation growth in “city
dependency,” a measure of H-1B applications per capita in each city. Given the standard deviation of city
dependency in their sample, this would imply an increase in patenting at least 10 times as large as the
maximum positive effect allowed by our 95% confidence interval. However, these estimates are not
directly comparable to ours, as described above.
33

31

References
Acs, Zoltan, and David Audretsch. Innovation and Small Firms (1990). MIT Press.
Åslund, Olof, Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson, and Hans Grönqvist. “Peers,
Neighborhoods and Immigrant Student Achievement: Evidence from a Placement
Policy.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3.2 (2011): 67-95.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. “The Determinants of Faculty Patenting
Behavior: Demographics or Opportunities?” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organizations, 63.4 (2007): 599-623.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John van Reenen. “Identifying Technology
Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry.” Econometrica 81.4 (2013): 1347-1393.
Borjas, George. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward-Sloping: Reexamining the Impact
of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2003):
1335-374.
Borjas, George. “The Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature 32
(1994): 1667–1717.
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran. “Cognitive Mobility: Native Responses to Supply Shocks
in the Space of Ideas.” Journal of Labor Economics (forthcoming 2015).
Borjas, George, and Kirk Doran. “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Productivity
of American Mathematicians.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127.3 (2012): 1143203.
Borjas, George, Richard Freeman, and Lawrence Katz. “How Much Do Immigration and
Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
(1997): 1-90.
Borjas, George, Jeffrey Grogger, and Gordon Hanson. “Comment: Substitution between
Immigrants, Natives, and Skill Groups.” Journal of the European Economic
Association 10.1 (2012): 198-210.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Joseph Golden, and Gaurav Khanna. “Recruitment of
Foreigners in the Market for Computer Scientists in the U.S.” Forthcoming, Journal
of Labor Economics.
Burbidge, John, Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. “Alternative Transformations to
Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 83 (1988): 123-127.
Card, David. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 43.2 (1990): 245-57.
Card, David. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19.1 (2001): 22-64.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. “How does Your Kindergarten Classroom
Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126.4 (2011): 1593-1660.
Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. “The Effect of High-Skilled Immigration
on Patenting and Employment: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries.” NBER Working
Paper 20668.
Dustmann, Christian, Albrecht Glitz, and Tommaso Frattini. “The Labour Market
Impact of Immigration.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24.3 (2008): 477-94.
Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund. “Ethnic Enclaves and the
Economic Success of Immigrants—Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.1 (2003): 329-57.

32

Foley, Fritz, and William Kerr. “Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity.”
Management Science 59.7: 1529-1544.
Freeman, Richard. “People Flows in Globalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20.2
(2006): 145–70.
Friedberg, Rachel M. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116.4 (2001): 1373-408.
Friedberg, Rachel, and Jennifer Hunt. “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country
Wages, Employment and Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9.2 (1995): 2344.
Gates, William H. “Testimony before the Committee on Science and Technology.” U.S.
House of Representatives, Washington D.C. 12 March. 2008. Address.
Gelber, Alexander M. “How Do 401(k)s Affect Saving? Evidence from Changes in 401(k)
Eligibility.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3.4 (2011): 103-22.
Government Accountability Office. “H-1B Visa Program: Reforms Are Needed to
Minimize the Risks and Costs of Current Program.” Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office (2011).
Ghosh, Anirban, Anna Maria Maybe, and Francesc Ortega. “The Impact of Skilled
Foreign Workers on Firms: an Investigation of Public Traded U.S. Firms.” CUNY
Working Paper (2015).
Grogger, Jeff, and Gordon Hanson. “Attracting Talent: Location Choices of Foreign-Born
Ph.D.s in the U.S.” Forthcoming, Journal of Labor Economics.
Hall, Bronwyn, and Dietmar Harhoff. “Recent Research on the Economics of Patents.”
Annual Review of Economics 4.1 (2012): 541-565.
Hall, Bronwyn, and John Van Reenen. “How Effective are Fiscal Incentives for R&D? A
Review of the Evidence.” Research Policy 29 (2000): 449–469.
Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse, and Pierre Mohnen. “Measuring the Returns to R&D.”
In Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation (2010): 1033-1082. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hanson, Gordon. “The Economic Consequences of International Migration.” Annual Review
of Economics 1 (2009): 179-208.
Hira, Ron. “The H-1B and L-1 Visa programs: Out of Control”, EPI Policy Paper (2010).
Hunt, Jennifer. “Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
by Entry Visa.” Journal of Labor Economics 29.3 (2011): 417-57.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. “How Much Does Immigration Boost
Innovation.” American Economic Journal:Macroeconomics 2.2 (2010): 31-56.
Jones, Benjamin. 2010. “Age and Great Invention.” Review of Economics and Statistics
92(1): 1-14.
Kerr, William R. “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship:
Empirical Approaches and Evidence.” HBS Working Paper (2013): 14-17.
Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln. “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
Reforms and US Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28.3 (2010): 473508.
Levin, Sharon, and Paula Stephan. “Research Productivity over the Life Cycle: Evidence
for Academic Scientists.” American Economic Review 81.1 (1991): 114-132.
Lerner, Josh, and Amit Seru. “The use and misuse of patent data: Issues for corporate
finance and beyond.” Booth/Harvard Business School Working Paper.
Lewis, Ethan. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126.2 (2011): 1029-1069.

33

Lowell, B. Lindsay. “H-1B Temporary Workers: Estimating the Population.” UCSD Center
for Comparative Immigration Studies Working Paper No. 12 (2000).
Lubotsky, Darren. “Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings.”
Journal of Political Economy 115.5 (2007): 820-867.
Matloff, Norman. “On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-immigrant Work Visa in
Computer-Related Occupations.” University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform 36.4
(2003): 815-914.
Miano, John. “H-1B Visa Numbers: No Relationship to Economic Need.” Center for
Immigration Studies Policy Brief (2008).
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. “German Jewish Émigrés and
U.S. Invention.” American Economic Review 104: 3222-3255.
Nagaoka, Sadao, Kazuyuki Motohashi, and Akira Goto. “Patent Statistics as an
Innovation Indicator.” In Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg, eds., Handbook of
the Economics of Innovation (2010): 1083-1127. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
National Foundation for American Policy. “H-1B visas and job creation.” Policy Brief,
Arlington, VA (2008).
North, David. “Estimating the Size of the H-1B Population in the U.S.” Center for
Immigration Studies Memorandum (2011).
Pekkala Kerr, Sari, and William R. Kerr. “Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey.”
Finnish Economic Papers 24.1 (2011): 1-32.
Pekkala Kerr, Sari, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln. “Skilled Immigration and
the Employment Structures of U.S. Firms.” Journal of Labor Economics
(forthcoming).
Pence, Karen. “The Role of Wealth Transformations: An Application to Estimating the
Effect of Tax Incentives on Saving.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy 5.1 (2006): 1-24.
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and
Productivity in US Cities.” Journal of Labor Economics (forthcoming).
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. “The Effects of Foreign Skilled Workers
on Natives: Evidence from the H-1B Visa Lottery.” UC Davis Working Paper (2015).
Stuen, Eric, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Keith E. Maskus. “Skilled Immigration and
Innovation: Evidence from Enrolment Fluctuations in U.S. Doctoral Programs.”
Economic Journal 122 (2012): 1143-1176.
U.S. Customs and Immigration Services. “Characteristics of Specialty Worker
Occupations.” Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office (2006, 2007).
U.S. Customs and Immigration Services. “Change in H-1B Procedures Trims Weeks Off
Final Selection Process.” Web.
http://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/files/pressrelease/H1Bfy08CapUpdate041907
.pdf (accessed October 7, 2014).
U.S. Department of Labor. Office of Foreign Labor Certification Data. Web.
http://www.foreignlaborcert.doleta.gov/performancedata.cfm#stat (accessed October
7, 2014).
U.S. Patent and Trade Office. “Performance and Accountability Report: Fiscal Year 2012.”
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Yagan, Danny. “Moving to Opportunity? Migratory Insurance over the Great Recession.”
UC Berkeley Working Paper (2014).

34

Figure 1. Effect of Unexpected H-1B Visas on Patents, by Employer Size

Notes: The figure shows the coefficient and 95 percent confidence interval on unexpected
H-1B visas when the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of patents in each
year over Years 0 to 8, among employers of the indicated sizes or smaller in Year -1
(where the maximum employer size in each case is shown on the x-axis). We show the
coefficient for employers of each size range from 0-10 to 0-500, with the upper bound of
the size range in increments of 10. Note that the samples overlap across different
regressions; for example, firms with 10 or fewer employees are included in the samples
in all 50 regressions shown. We use the baseline patenting specification, in which we
control for lagged number of patents and expected lottery wins. After multiplying by 100,
the coefficient should be interpreted as the approximate percentage increase in firm
patenting due to an unexpected H-1B visa lottery win.

35

Figure 2. Effect of H-1B Visas on Total Firm Employment, by Employer Size

Notes: The figure shows the coefficient and 95 percent confidence interval on unexpected
lottery wins from median regressions in which the dependent variable is the total number
of employees in a firm, pooling together Quarters 1-4 of the first fiscal year that an
employee can work at the firm in the regression, among employers of the indicated size
or smaller in Year -1 (where the maximum employer size in each case is shown on the xaxis). The horizontal line at +1 on the y-axis corresponds to the case where hiring an
extra H-1B visa worker leaves other employment unchanged (so that total employment
would increase by exactly one). The horizontal line at 0 on the y-axis corresponds to the
case where hiring an extra H-1B visa worker crowds out other workers one-for-one (so
that total employment would increase by zero). We show the coefficient for employers of
each size range from 0-10 to 0-500, with the upper bound of the size range in increments
of 10. Note that the samples overlap across different regressions; for example, firms with
10 or fewer employees are included in the samples in all 50 regressions shown. We use
the baseline employment specification, in which we control for lagged employment and
expected lottery wins.

36

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean (SD)
n
Number of patents (all)
4.52 (56.11)
3,050
Number of patents (≤30)
0.23 (8.59)
1,276
Number of patents (≤10)
0.23 (0.49)
749
IHS of patents (all)
0.15 (0.80)
3,050
IHS of patents (≤30)
0.017 (0.22)
1,276
IHS of patents (≤10)
0.010 (0.14)
749
Fraction patenting (all)
0.048 (0.21)
3,050
Fraction patenting (≤30)
0.010 (0.10)
1,276
Fraction patenting (≤10)
0.0075 (0.086)
749
IHS of R&E (all)
1.55 (4.74)
1,000
IHS of R&E (≤30)
0.15 (1.39)
470
IHS of R&E (≤10)
0.14 (1.22)
284
Fraction with R&E (all)
0.099 (0.30)
1,000
Fraction with R&E (≤30)
0.013 (0.11)
470
Fraction with R&E (≤10)
0.013 (0.11)
284
Number of employees (all)
1,877.84 (39,721.31)
2,281
Number of employees (≤30)
43.09 (1,904.34)
1,183
Number of employees in Q1-Q4 (≤10)
9.64 (55.63)
712
Median employees (all)
31
2,281
Median employees (≤30)
10
1,183
Median employees (≤10)
6
712
Winsorized emp. first diff. (all)
27.28 (92.39)
2,281
Winsorized emp. first diff. (≤30)
4.35 (9.43)
1,183
Winsorized emp. first diff. (≤10)
3.22 (6.84)
712
Median payroll per employee (all)
$49,331.89
2,191
Median payroll per employee (≤30)
$42,280.76
1,123
Median payroll per employee (≤10)
$38,656.64
636
Median firm profits (≤200)
$80,249.73
1,520
Median firm profits (≤30)
$43,300.70
1,033
Median firm profits (≤10)
$30,397.45
615
Fraction winning lottery
2006 Regular
0.038
2,687
2006 ADE
0.17
306
2007 Regular
0.98
3,954
2007 ADE
0.55
296
Fraction in NAICS=54 (all)
56.43
3,050
Fraction in NAICS=54 (≤30)
65.60
1,276
Fraction in NAICS=54 (≤10)
64.62
749
Notes: The data are from IRS and USCIS administrative sources, and from the Patent Dataverse. “All”
refers to the full sample of firms entering the lottery; “≤30” (“≤10”) refers to those firms with 30 (10) or
fewer employees in Year -1. Number of patents refers to approved patents in each year from Year 0 to
2013. Employment data are observed in Q1-Q4, the first four quarters when the H-1B worker may work at
the firm. R&E, payroll per employee, and firm profits are measured in Years 0 to 3, the duration of the H1B visa. We pool and stack time periods. For profits, we use the size category with ≤200 employees; our
regressions did not converge for larger thresholds. NAICS code 54 is professional, scientific, and technical
services. “n” refers to the number of firm-lottery years in the sample (i.e. firms appearing in both lottery
years count as two observations), except when reporting the fraction winning the lottery, where we report
the number of applications entering the lottery. n’s vary across outcomes because the number of missing
observations in the IRS data varies across outcomes; here and everywhere else, the results are similar when
we restrict to the same sample across outcomes. For R&E, the sample size is also smaller because the data
only measure the R&E credit for C-corporations. The fraction patenting or with the R&E refer to the mean
of a yearly patenting dummy in Years 0 to 8, or to mean of a yearly dummy for taking the R&E in Years 0
to 3. Here and throughout the paper, dollar amounts (e.g. the R&E credit) are measured in real $2014.

37

Table 2. Comparison of Applications on Day of Lottery to Other Applications
Dependent Variable
Coefficient (SE) on “Last
n
Day” Dummy
Panel A: Comparison of firm characteristics
A) IHS of patents in Year -1
0.054
51,483
(0.018)***
B) Fraction patenting in Year 0.011
51,483
1
(0.0054)**
C) IHS of employment in Year
0.10
41,849
-1
(0.052)**
D) Fraction in NAICS=54
0.17
46,706
(0.0097)***
Panel B: Comparison of worker characteristics
E) Fraction with superior
0.040
51,483
degree
(0.0069)***
F) Log intended salary
0.043
50,272
(0.0069)***
G) Fraction in “systems
0.22
51,483
analysis and programming”
(0.0090)***
H) Age
-0.71
51,466
(0.12)***
Notes: Panel A compares characteristics of firms that applied on the day the cap was
reached (so they are subject to the lottery) to all firms whose applications reached USCIS
(including others that applied before the cap was reached). We report the coefficient and
standard error on the dummy for applying on the last day, from an OLS regression of the
dependent variable (shown in the first column) on a dummy for applying on the last day,
plus dummies for each of the four lotteries (FY06 Regular, FY06 ADE, FY07 Regular,
FY07 ADE). Observations on (rare) firms that applied on both the last day and prior to
the last day are included in both the sample of firms applying on the last day and the
sample applying prior to the last day; thus, the table effectively compares firms that
applied only on the last day to firms that applied only on one or more days before the last
day. Panel B compares worker characteristics from firm applications on the last day to
those from firm applications on other days, using firm-reported information on worker
characteristics from LCAs, and reporting the same specification as Panel A. “Superior
degree” is defined as a master’s, professional, or Ph.D. degree for the Regular lottery, and
is defined as a Ph.D. for the ADE lottery (and the results are similar with alternative
definitions). These degrees refer to the highest degree completed in any country (not just
the U.S.). Age is measured in years. NAICS code 54 is professional, scientific, and
technical services. Sample sizes differ across regressions because some outcomes are
missing in some cases (for example, Year -1 employment is missing in some cases
because the firm did not exist in Year -1). The sample size is far below the number of
total visa applications received across these lotteries primarily because a small number of
firms apply for many visas, with a very skewed distribution. Standard errors are clustered
by firm. n’s refer to the number of firm-lottery years; the number of firms is around 75
percent as large. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at
the 10% level.
38

Table 3. Validity of the Randomized Design
Dependent Variable
Coefficient (SE) on Unexpected Wins
Lottery data has firm information
0.0028 (0.0032)
Whether match to tax master file
0.0080 (0.0079)
Whether match to quarterly employment data
-0.0031 (0.0096)
Number of patents in Year -2 (all)
-0.94 (1.34)
Number of patents in Year -2 (≤30)
0.037 (0.036)
Number of patents in Year -2 (≤10)
0.0029 (0.010)
IHS of patents in Year -2 (all)
0.0019 (0.019)
IHS of patents in Year -2 (≤30)
-0.013 (0.019)
IHS of patents in Year -2 (≤10)
-0.0028 (0.0044)
Patented in Year -2 (all)
-0.0024 (0.0089)
Patented in Year -2 (≤30)
-0.0077 (0.011)
Patented in Year -2 (≤10)
-0.0033 (0.0033)
IHS of R&E in Year -2 (all)
-0.30 (0.28)
IHS of R&E in Year -2 (≤30)
-0.0037 (0.015)
IHS of R&E in Year -2 (≤10)
-0.0040 (0.0034)
Fraction with R&E in Year -2 (all)
-0.019 (0.017)
Fraction with R&E in Year -2 (≤30)
-0.00029 (0.0013)
Fraction with R&E in Year -2 (≤10)
0.00 (0.00)
Employment in Year -2 (all, median)
0.50 (1.30)
Employment in Year -2 (≤30, median)
-0.55 (0.81)
Employment in Year -2 (≤10, median)
-0.31 (0.69)
Employment in Year -2 (all, winsorized first-difference)
0.082 (9.71)
Employment in Year -2 (≤30, winsorized first-difference)
0.56 (0.89)
Employment in Year -2 (≤10, winsorized first-difference)
-0.091 (0.57)
Payroll per employee in Year -2 (all, median)
91.01 (594.95)
Payroll per employee in Year -2 (≤30, median)
1,591.82 (1,519.61)
Payroll per employee in Year -2 (≤10, median)
1,645.07 (3,141.91)
Profits in Year -2 (≤200, median)
-6,268.96 (4,528.82)
Profits in Year -2 (≤30, median)
-8,027.92 (5,498.00)
Profits in Year -2 (≤10, median)
-20,306.35 (19,756.56)
Dummy for NAICS=54 (all)
0.007 (0.03)
Dummy for NAICS=54 (≤30)
-0.033 (0.043)
Dummy for NAICS=54 (≤10)
0.010 (0.058)
Notes: The table regresses placebo outcomes on unexpected H-1B lottery wins. We run OLS
regressions for outcomes when our main regressions in later tables are OLS (i.e. for patenting, R&E,
winsorized employment, the NAICS=54 dummy, and the match dummies in the first three rows), and
we run median regressions when our main regressions are median (i.e. for employment, earnings per
employee, and profits). In the first three rows, the dependent variables are dummies for (in order of
appearance): whether the USCIS data contain the firm’s EIN; whether a firm’s EIN in the USCIS data
matches an EIN in the IRS universe of U.S. EINs; and whether a firm’s EIN in the USCIS data
matches an EIN in the IRS form 941 data. Dummies for whether R&E, profits, or payroll match are
also insignificant. We investigate the effects on Year -2 outcomes because we can then control for the
dependent variable measured in Year -1, which is the same control as in our regressions in later tables.
Moreover, by investigating Year -2 outcomes, we can determine the firm size cutoffs by measuring
employment in Year -1, yielding the same firms in each size category as in our later regressions.
When Year -1 outcomes are the dependent variables, and we control for Year -2 values of the
variables, the regressions are insignificant except in one of 27 cases. We investigate the profits
regressions in the sample with 200 or fewer employees because the regressions did not converge for
the full sample. “Winsorized first-difference” means that the dependent variable is the first-difference
of employment between Year -2 and Year -1, winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Table 1 shows sample sizes. *** means p<1%; ** p<5%; and * p<10%.

39

Table 4. Effect of H-1B Lottery Wins on Patenting
IHS of # patents
Patenting dummy
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: ≤10 employees
A) Years 0 to 8
0.00023
0.00026
-0.0010
-0.0010
[-0.0046, 0.0050]
[-0.0042, 0.0047]
[-0.0042, 0.0022] [-0.0041, 0.0020]
B) Years 0 to 3
-0.00033
-0.00015
-0.0023
-0.0023
[-0.0090, 0.0084]
[-0.0082, 0.0079]
[-0.0083, 0.0037] [-0.0081, 0.0035]
Panel B: ≤30 employees
C) Years 0 to 8
0.0017
0.0018
-0.0029
-0.0028
[-0.0096, 0.013]
[-0.0094, 0.013]
[-0.0095, 0.0038] [-0.0094, 0.0038]
D) Years 0 to 3
-0.00053
-0.00030
-0.0047
-0.0046
[-0.018, 0.017]
[-0.018, 0.017]
[-0.016, 0.0064]
[-0.016, 0.0065]
Panel C: All
E) Years 0 to 8
-0.0087
-0.0089
-0.0014
-0.0012
[-0.038, 0.020]
[-0.037, 0.019]
[-0.014, 0.011]
[-0.014, 0.011]
F) Years 0 to 3
-0.021
-0.021
-0.011
-0.010
[-0.052, 0.010]
[-0.052, 0.010]
[-0.026, 0.0039]
[-0.025, 0.0041]
Prior patents
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: The table shows OLS regressions of the IHS of patents in each year over Years 0 to 8
(Rows A, C, and E), or over the duration of the H-1B visa in Years 0 to 3 (Rows B, D, and F), on
unexpected H-1B lottery wins, defined as actual wins minus the expectation of wins conditional
on number of applications and the probability each application wins. We pool and stack years.
The table shows coefficients on unexpected H-1B visas, with 95 percent confidence intervals in
brackets. The “prior patents” specifications control for the IHS of the total number of patents in
Year -1 (for the IHS specifications), or for a dummy for patenting in Year -1 (for the patenting
dummy specifications). The “prior patents, E[wins]” specifications control for patents in this preperiod and expected lottery wins (equal to number of H-1B applications entering a lottery
multiplied by the probability of winning the lottery). The coefficients in the IHS specifications
should be interpreted as the approximate percent effect on the number of patents. “Patenting
dummy” refers to a dummy for whether the firm patented in each year, so that the coefficient
reflects the effect on the fraction of years that the firm has at least one patent. See Table 1 for
additional notes and sample sizes. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *** refers to significance
at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

40

Table 5. Effect of H-1B Lottery Wins on Research and Experimentation Credit
A) ≤10 employees
B) ≤30 employees
C) All
Prior R&E credit
E[wins]

Amount of credit (IHS)
(1)
(2)
-0.13
-0.12
[-0.30, 0.043] [-0.27, 0.041]
-0.073
-0.065
[-0.16, 0.018] [-0.15, 0.018]
0.19
0.19
[-0.33, 0.70]
[-0.33, 0.72]
X
X
X

Claiming dummy
(3)
(4)
-0.012
-0.011
[-0.027, 0.0043] [-0.025, 0.0041]
-0.0069
-0.0061
[-0.015, 0.0016] [-0.014, 0.0016]
0.016
0.016
[-0.018, 0.049]
[-0.018, 0.049]
X
X
X

Notes: The table shows OLS regressions of the R&E credit over the duration of the H-1B
visa (pooling and stacking Years 0 to 3), on unexpected H-1B lottery wins. The table
shows coefficients on unexpected H-1B visas, with 95 percent confidence intervals in
brackets. In Columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is the IHS of the amount of the
R&E credit claimed in each year over Years 0 to 3. In Columns 3 and 4, the dependent
variable is a dummy variable for whether the firm claimed any R&E credit in each year
from Years 0 to 3, so that the coefficient reflects the effect on the fraction of years
claiming any R&E. The “Prior R&E” control refers to controlling for the amount (in
Columns 1 and 2) or presence (in Columns 3 and 4) of the R&E credit in Year -1. The
IRS data only measure the R&E credit for C-corporations; other firms are excluded from
the regressions. We find comparable results at other size thresholds; no significant
interactions with covariates; and no significant differences across groups. The
coefficients in the IHS specifications should be interpreted as the approximate percent
effect on the amount of R&E taken. See Tables 1 and 4 for additional notes and sample
sizes. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at the 10%
level.

41

Table 6. Effect of H-1B Lottery Wins on Employment in First Year
Median Regressions
Two-stage least squares
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A) ≤10 employees
-0.53
-0.52
-0.54
-1.10
[-1.18, 0.12]***
[-1.15, 0.11]***
[-1.95, 0.88]**
[-2.88, 0.68]**
B) ≤30 employees
-0.44
-0.36
-0.97
-1.26
[-1.16, 0.28]***
[-1.09, 0.37]***
[-2.96, 1.01]*
[-3.25, 0.71]**
C) All
-1.27
-1.05
-20.37
-2.41
[-3.08, 0.55]***
[-2.67, 0.57]**
[-230.99, 190.24]
[-17.76, 12.94]
Prior employment
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: The table shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on unexpected lottery wins. The
first two columns show median regressions of total firm employment in Q1 to Q4, on unexpected
lottery wins. The next two columns show 2SLS regressions where the dependent variable, the
difference of total firm employment from the first quarter of Year -1 to the quarter in question from
Q1 to Q4, has been winsorized at the 95th percentile. We pool and stack observations across quarters.
The 5th and 95th percentiles of the first difference in employment are -109 and 352, respectively, in the
full sample; -9 and 30, respectively, among those with 30 or fewer employees; and -6 and 22,
respectively, among those with 10 or fewer. In these regressions, the instrument is unexpected lottery
wins and the endogenous variable is approved capped H-1B visas. The “prior employment”
specifications control for employment from the first quarter of Year -1, and the “prior employment,
E[wins]” specifications additionally control for the number of expected lottery wins. See Tables 1 and
4 for other notes and sample sizes. *** denotes p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.10. If the H-1B worker
works at the firm, a coefficient of 1 corresponds to no crowd-out or crowd-in of other employment,
and a coefficient of 0 corresponds to one-for-one-crowdout of other employment. None of the
estimates is significantly different from 0 at any conventional significance level.
Table 7. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Later Employment
(1) All
(2) ≤30 employees
(3) ≤10 employees
-2.03
-0.95
-0.99
[-4.97, 0.90]**
[-2.29, 0.39]***
[-2.05, 0.065]***
n
2,213
1,142
682
B) Q9-Q12
-1.97
-1.57
-1.02
[-5.46, 1.52]*
[-3.70, 0.56]**
[-2.28, 0.25]***
n
2,120
1,087
647
C) Q13-Q32
-3.24
-0.0096
0.92
[-7.14, 0.67]**
[-2.26, 2.25]
[-1.31, 3.14]
n
2,048
1,045
618
Notes: The table shows the effect of unexpected lottery wins on employment in later time periods,
reporting point estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals in square brackets for median
regressions of employment on unexpected lottery wins. We pool and stack observations across
quarters. All specifications control for employment in Year -1 and expected lottery wins, as in the
baseline. n’s refer to the number of firms in each regression. See Table 6 for additional notes. Sample
sizes fall in later years because fewer firms are still in business. In Q13 to Q32, the H-1B visa has
expired and the worker has typically left the firm, so the test of a difference in the coefficient from 1
no longer indicates crowdout of other workers. *** shows estimates that are significantly different
from 1 at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; * at the 10% level. None of the estimates is significantly
different from zero at any conventional significance level.
Outcome
A) Q5-Q8

42

Table 8. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Payroll per Employee
(A) ≤10 employees
B) ≤30 employees
C) All firm sizes
Prior payroll per employee
E[wins]

(1) Fewer controls
-4,527.58
[-9,258.68, 203.52]*
-2,618.66
[-6,200.56, 963.24]
26.64
[-1,277.42, 1,330.69]
X

(2) More controls
-4,860.54
[-9,552.97, -168.12]**
-2,725.03
[-5,976.60, 526.54]*
80.21
[-1,348.07, 1,508.50]
X
X

Note: The table shows median regressions of payroll costs per employee in Years 0 to 3 on
unexpected H-1B visas and controls, pooling and stacking years. Years 0 to 3 cover the
duration of the H-1B visa. The table shows coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals
on unexpected H-1B visas. The effect on payroll per employee in Years 0 to 1 is comparable
to the estimates shown. Payroll costs per employee in a given year is measured as total firm
payroll costs in that year (in real $2014) divided by the total number of employees in the firm
in that year. We use W-2 data because median regressions using form 941 data generally did
not converge. See Table 1 for sample sizes. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *** refers
to p<0.01; ** to p<0.05; and * to p<0.10.
Table 9. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Profits
(2) More controls
6,518.156
[-6,942.69, 19,979.00]
B) ≤30 employees
11,468.61
[200.86, 22,736.37]**
C) ≤200 employees
2,526.67
[-32,168.54, 37,221.88]
Prior profits
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: The table shows median regressions of profits in Years 0 to 3 on unexpected H-1B
visas and controls, pooling and stacking years. The table shows coefficients and 95%
confidence intervals on unexpected H-1B visas. Profits are measured in real $2014. In Row C
we investigate firms with 200 or fewer employees because regressions above this firm size
cutoff did not reliably converge; they did not converge, for example, in the sample of firms of
all sizes. Years 0 to 3 cover the duration of the H-1B visa. We do not show the effect on
median profits in Years 4 to 8 because it is unstable and often did not converge. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. See Table 1 for sample sizes. *** refers to significance at the 1%
level; ** at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.
(A) ≤10 employees

(1) Fewer controls
8,163.43
[-4,724.93, 21,051.79]
3,970.10
[-6,583.254, 14,523.46]
11,538.41
[-1,490.03, 24,566.86]*
X

43

Appendices (for online publication)
Appendix 1. Description of matching procedure
As noted in the main text, we performed an intentionally liberal automatic
matching procedure between the USCIS and patenting datasets to obtain all plausible
matches between companies and patents. We then searched through the matches by hand
to detect and remove all matches that appeared spurious.
The automatic matching procedure proceeded as follows. First, we assigned
clearly related firm names to single categories (i.e., “Sony”, “Sony Co.”, “Sony
Corporation”, etc.). Then we searched for complete string matches between the name
categories in the patenting data, using the full period from 1975 to 2013, and the name
categories in the USCIS H-1B visa lottery data, and we classified these as matches
between the datasets. After all such matches were made, we then searched for complete
string matches between these two sets of name categories with all spaces in the names
removed and also classified these as matches. Finally, we performed a “fuzzy” match
between USPTO and USCIS firm names. The fuzzy matching procedure calculated a
“distance” between words in each list by determining how many characters in the words
need to be edited to transform a word from one list into a word in the other. This is
necessary to identify all matches because, for example, firm names are occasionally
misspelled. Pairs of words in firm name categories were classified as non-matching if the
number of characters that differed between the words was more than one for words with
six or fewer characters, or when the number of characters that differed between the words
was more than two for words with seven or more characters (using the word as spelled in
the USCIS data to determine the number of characters in the word). Otherwise, this pair
of words was classified as a possible match. If at least 75 percent of the pairs of words in
the firm name were possible matches, then the entire firm name was classified as a
possible match.
We intentionally designed this “liberal” procedure so that it is liable to classify
many non-matches as matches (but not the reverse); thus, if a firm did not match at all
between the two datasets according to the fuzzy match, we can be rather certain that it
was not granted any US patents between 1975 and 2013. The goal of this automatic
matching procedure was to generate a list of all potential matches, which we could then
winnow by hand in the next step.
Once this automatic matching procedure was complete, all of the resulting
matches were checked by hand to determine whether they appeared to be a possible
match. Of the 668 companies in the USCIS lottery list that obtained at least one
automatic match in the patenting data, we identified 208 cases in which all of that
company’s matches were clearly incorrect through by-hand inspection. We further
identified 392 cases in which all of that company’s matches were clearly correct
(legitimate variations on the correct company name) through by-hand inspection. Finally,
we identified 63 cases in which the matches were ambiguous; in our judgment the match
is possibly correct, but we cannot be fully confident that it is correct. We assume that

44

both unmatched companies and those that received clearly incorrect matches did not
patent at all between 1975 and 2013.
In the results that we report in the main tables, we exclude the 63 possible
matches from the list of matched companies. In the Appendix, we show that we find
comparable results when assuming that the possible matches were in fact matches. The
results are also robust to alternative assumptions and similar alternative matching
procedures.
A firm would not match between the datasets if it did not patent during this time
period; thus, under any of our ways of determining which companies were non-matches,
we code the non-matching firms as having zero patents.
Appendix 2. Description of Heterogeneity Results
Heterogeneity in patenting effects
We examine heterogeneity in the patenting effects across subsamples in Appendix
Table 8. Row A examines the Regular H-1B lottery. The results are comparable to those
in the full sample—with point estimates that cluster near zero, and the upper end of the
95 percent confidence interval ruling out more than a modest effect—which should not
be surprising since 85.96 percent of the full sample participates in the Regular lottery.
Row B examines the ADE lottery, where the confidence intervals also rule out more than
a modest effect34
The effect on patenting is particularly relevant in professional, scientific, and
technical services (NAICS code 54), since the bulk of patents occur in this industry. We
find no evidence of an effect on patenting in this group, with confidence intervals that
again rule out more than a modest effect. In firms outside NAICS code 54, the results are
comparable.
Many H-1Bs are given for workers in firms like Infosys or Wipro that primarily
offer outsourcing for temporary support services (often temporary technical support
services). By contrast, other H-1Bs are given to companies like Intel or Google that do
not specialize in such services. Although it is not possible to determine with certainty
which visas fall in the broadly-defined “temporary support services” category, it is
illuminating to investigate the effects in firms that likely specialize in such services. To
probabilistically identify such firms, we first compiled a list of those firms among the
largest 100 H-1B sponsors and that had “outsourcing services” or “IT support services”
in the description of the company on its website. We found that these firms were in only

When we investigate the effect separately in each year of the lottery (i.e. separating the FY2006 lotteries
from the FY2007 lotteries), or separately in each of the four lotteries (FY2006 Regular, FY2006 ADE,
FY2007 Regular, and FY2007 ADE), we again estimate insignificant effects in each year separately, with
comparable point estimates to those in the full sample, though again with larger confidence intervals.
34

45

seven, six-digit NAICS categories.35 We then ran our regressions only in firms in these
industries, and separately ran the regressions only among firms in other industries. The
point estimates and top end of the 95 percent confidence intervals are smaller in
“temporary support services” industries, although the estimates are insignificant in both
sets of industries (and insignificantly different across the two different samples).
Appendix Table 9 shows the coefficients on interactions of unexpected H-1B
visas with continuous covariates. In principle, it is possible that the H-1B visa could tend
to have more (or less) positive effects on firms that apply earlier for the visas. For
example, the visas have the largest positive effects in such firms, motivating their earlier
applications. In Appendix Table 9 Row A we interact the number of unexpected H-1B
visas with the number of days taken to reach the cap in each lottery (which ranges across
the four lotteries from 55 to 291). We find no significant interaction in Column 1.
However, this evidence is merely suggestive: heterogeneity across the lotteries in the
effect of H-1Bs visas that happens to be correlated with the time taken to reach the cap
would confound our estimate of the interaction. In Row B Column 1 we show that the
interaction of the IHS of prior patents (Year -1) with unexpected visa lottery wins is
insignificant. Note that the estimates shown in Row A and Row B are from separate
regressions. The interaction of unexpected visas with prior firm size is also insignificant.
Heterogeneity in employment effects
Appendix Table 17 investigates whether there is heterogeneity in the employment
results across samples, using our baseline employment specification in Q1 to Q4 with
median regressions and the more extensive set of controls. (Other specifications show
similar results.) The point estimates are more negative for the Regular lotteries than for
the ADE lotteries, and they are more negative for scientific services (i.e. NAICS code 54)
than for other industries. In fact, the point estimates are often positive and substantial in
the case of the ADE lotteries, and in the case of non-scientific services—particularly
when we examine firms of all sizes. The point estimates are negative in likely “temporary
support services” employers but positive in other six-digit industries (though the
estimates are insignificantly different across the two samples), and among “temporary
support services” the coefficient estimate can be distinguished from unity in more firm
size categories than in other industries. However, there are no significant differences
across the different samples, including when we compare the 2006 and 2007 lotteries.
In Appendix Table 9 Column 2 shows that the estimated interaction of unexpected
wins with the number of days taken to reach the cap is positive but insignificant. It also
shows that the interaction of unexpected visas with the IHS of prior patents is extremely
imprecise. The interaction of unexpected visas with prior firm size is also insignificant.36

The NAICS codes are 541511, 541519, 541600, 541330, 519100, 423600, and 541512.
More generally, there are many factors that theoretically could influence the size of the impacts, but we
tend to find that the estimates are similar across groups.
35
36

46

Appendix 3. Further description of results when parallel specifications are run in
patenting and employment contexts
It is worth additionally describing further results when we run other parallel
specifications in the patenting and employment contexts. When the first-difference (or
level) of the number of patents (or the IHS of patents) is the dependent variable and we
winsorize at the 95th (or 99th) percentile, parallel to those in the employment context, our
results are very similar to those shown in Appendix Table 3 (or Table 4) but are more
precise and allow us to bound the maximum increase in patenting at a still lower level.
These first differences are taken by subtracting patents in the pre-period (i.e. Year -1)
from patents in Years 0 to 8.
When we run the two-stage least squares employment regressions but do not
winsorize the dependent variable, the results are extremely imprecise among firms of all
sizes or among firms with 30 or fewer employees in Year -1, which is unsurprising given
the very large standard deviation of employment and long right tail. However, when we
do not winsorize and run this specification among firms with 10 or fewer employees in
Year -1, the top end of the 95 percent confidence interval is 0.31, and we are able to rule
out a coefficient of 1 (p=0.015).
In sum, running parallel specifications in these two main contexts does not change
any of our conclusions, except that our results are unsurprisingly imprecise when we
examine employment in a two-stage least squares regression and do not winsorize. All of
these results are available upon request.
Appendix 4. Estimating effects on employment of foreigners and non-foreigners
Measure of foreigners and non-foreigners
In an exploratory analysis, we investigate how additional new H-1Bs affect
employment of other foreigners, and separately affect employment of non-foreigners.
Although citizenship status is available through IRS data on W-2 forms, these data only
have information on the individual’s citizenship status most recently reported to the
Social Security Administration (SSA), as opposed to always being measured in the year
in question in our regressions (e.g. Year 0 or Year 1). Thus, one way to measure
citizenship status is through this measure, which will probabilistically identify those who
were citizens and non-citizens around the time of the lotteries (though with measurement
error). We use W-2 data in this case (rather than form 941 data) because the W-2 data
have this information on citizenship, but the form 941 data have no information on
citizenship.
The data on past citizenship status is not directly available, which is a relevant
limitation because a substantial fraction of H-1Bs go on to become permanent residents
and in many cases citizens (Lowell 2000). At the same time, for many of those who go on
to become permanent residents or citizens, the SSA data will not reflect the their updated
citizenship status, for example because the Tax Identification Number under which they

47

filed taxes as a non-citizen no longer applies once they become a citizen and gain a Social
Security Number; thus, our measure of citizenship status is likely to estimate citizenship
status at the time of being admitted to the U.S. with only modest error.
Given the limitation of the first measure, it is desirable to use a second, unrelated
method to probabilistically determine whether individuals are natives or non-natives.
Using an algorithm developed in conjunction with Yagan (2014), we identify individuals
as natives or non-natives on the basis of individuals’ Social Security Numbers (SSNs) in
the data. Prior to 2011, SSNs were assigned in a way that makes it possible to determine
with a high degree of confidence whether a given individual is an immigrant to the U.S.
or a native. SSNs consisted of: 1) a three-digit “Area Number” representing the area
where an individual applied for the SSN; 2) a two-digit “Group Number” that is assigned
in a specified sequence within each area number; and 3) a four-digit “Serial Number” that
is assigned sequentially within each Group Number.37
Thus, within a given geographic area associated with the Area Number, it is
possible to determine on the basis of the Group Number and the Serial Number whether
the individual applied for the SSN at an earlier or a later date. A majority of H-1Bs arrive
when they are aged in their late 20s and early 30s. Thus, if they eventually apply for an
SSN, they will do so well later in life than natives whose applications are typically
submitted very early in their lives. Individuals whose SSNs indicate that they applied for
the SSN late in life have a substantial probability of being an immigrant, but those whose
SSNs indicate that they applied early in life have a much smaller probability of being an
immigrant. We follow Yagan (2014) in probabilistically classifying individuals as
immigrants when their SSNs indicate that they were in the oldest 10 percent of a given
set of SSNs applicants within an Area Number. Our results are robust to choosing other
thresholds, as well as to assigning different cutoffs (e.g. 15 percent rather than 10
percent) in different geographic areas with different percentages of immigrants as
identified in Census data (results available upon request).38
Estimated effect on employment of foreigners and non-foreigners
We estimate the effect on employment of foreigners vs. natives in Appendix
Table 18. To make the time period investigated with these yearly W-2 data as comparable
as possible to the quarterly data shown elsewhere (where we investigate Q1 through Q4
of the first fiscal year, corresponding to observations from both calendar years straddled
by Q1 through Q4), we pool Year 0 with Year 1.39 We investigate our baseline
See http://www.ssa.gov/history/ssn/geocard.html
Even if both were perfectly measured, citizenship at the time of the lotteries (or in the most recent IRS
data) could be different than whether an individual is a native—namely, in those cases in which a nonnative became a citizen prior to the time of the lotteries. Thus, there is no presumption that regressions with
number of natives as the dependent variable should show the same results as regressions in which the
dependent variable is the number of citizens at a later point in time.
39
When the dependent variable is overall employment, the W-2 data show comparable results to the form
941 data. Of course, in interpreting the median regressions, we must recognize that the effects across
37
38

48

specification across the three employer size categories we investigate elsewhere, though
our results hold robustly across other employer size thresholds and other specifications.
In Rows A and B, we measure citizenship using the most recent measure of
citizenship in the IRS data. When the dependent variable is the number of non-citizens
employed at the firm, in all cases we are able to rule out a coefficient of one or higher—
suggesting that new H-1Bs do at least partially crowd out other non-citizens. We are
unable to rule out that there is no effect of unexpected lottery wins on the median number
of citizens, but we are always able to rule out that the median number of citizens
decreases by one. Thus, we find evidence for crowdout of non-citizens, do not find
evidence for crowdout of U.S. citizens, and are able to rule out one-for-one crowdout of
citizens (though our results are at the same time consistent with substantial crowdout of
citizens).
An important caveat to the results in Rows A and B is that because the IRS data
measure most recent citizenship status rather than citizenship status at the time of
application, these results could mean that new H-1Bs do not crowd out citizens, but could
also mean that H-1Bs sometimes go on to become citizens later. Likewise, the results
could indicate that new H-1Bs crowd out other non-citizens, or they could mean that new
H-1Bs sometimes become citizens later.
To address this ambiguity of interpretation, we also show results in Appendix
Table 18 (rows C and D) where we probabilistically identify natives and non-natives
using their SSNs as in Yagan (2014). Just as when we use the baseline employment
specification, we find evidence for crowdout of non-natives (i.e. can rule out a coefficient
of 1), do not find definitive evidence for crowdout of natives (i.e. the coefficient is
insignificantly different from zero in this case), and are able to rule out one-for-one
crowdout of natives (i.e. can rule out a coefficient of -1)—though the results are also
consistent with substantial crowdout of natives. This concordance of results between two
very different methods (in Rows A and B vs. C and D) increases our confidence that new
H-1Bs at least partially crowd out other foreigners. However, note that whether an
individual is a native is not the same as whether s/he is a citizen, so the results are not
directly comparable across the two measures.

separate regressions for foreigners and non-foreigners do not “add” to the median effect on overall
employment.

49

Appendix Tables (for online publication)
Appendix Table 1. First stage regressions
Sample
Employment First Stage
Patenting First Stage
Coefficient (SE)
First-stage FCoefficient (SE)
First-stage Fon Unexpected
statistic
on Unexpected
statistic
Lottery Wins
Lottery Wins
All
0.88
935.14
0.87
1053.65
(0.029)***
(0.027)***
≤30
0.89
495.51
0.88
435.14
(0.040)***
(0.042)***
≤10
0.88
281.57
0.86
214.04
(0.052)***
(0.059)***
The table shows the first stage regression of the number of approved H-1Bs on the
number of unexpected wins. See Table 1 for other notes and sample sizes. *** denotes
p<0.01; ** denotes p<0.05; * denotes p<0.10.

50

Appendix Table 2. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Patenting, Sample Reweighted
to Match Full Population

(A) ≤10 employees
B) ≤30 employees
C) All
Prior profits
E[wins]

(1) Fewer
controls
0.0025
[-0.0056, 0.011]
0.0027
[-0.0082, 0.014]
-0.0017
[-0.025, 0.022]
X

(2) More controls
0.0016
[-0.0024, 0.0056]
0.0028
[-0.0080, 0.014]
-0.0017
[-0.025, 0.022]
X
X

Notes: the specification is the same as the IHS specifications from Years 0 to 8 in Table
4, except that we weight each observation by weights reflecting the relative proportion of
firm or worker characteristics among applications on the last day relative to applications
for capped H-1B visas on any day (including those on the last day and those before the
last day). Specifically, we run a probit in which the dependent variable is a dummy for
whether a firm applies on a day other than the last day, and the independent variables are
all firm and worker characteristics shown in Table 2. We then calculate the fitted values
p̂ . Finally, we weight each firm by 1/ (1- p̂) . See other notes to Table 4.
Appendix Table 3. Effect of Unexpected H-1B Lottery Wins on the Number of Patents
A) ≤10 employees
0.0024
0.0027
[-0.0089, 0.014] [-0.0077, 0.013]
B) ≤30 employees
0.0085
0.0088
[-0.015, 0.033]
[-0.015, 0.033]
C) All firm sizes
0.43
0.32
[-1.21, 2.08]
[-1.23, 1.88]
Prior patents
X
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: See notes to Table 4. The table runs the same specification as Table 4, except that
in Appendix Table 3 the dependent variable is the number of patents in each year from
Year 0 to 8. When we consider the number of patents in the sample of firms of all sizes,
the results are extremely imprecise, which is unsurprising since the standard deviation of
patents in this sample is so large, and since an extra H-1B worker represents only a small
fraction of mean employment in the full sample of firms. The positive point estimate in
this context is very sensitive to outliers; for example, when we winsorize the number of
patents at the 99th percentile in the sample of all firms, we obtain negative point
estimates, but the estimates are imprecise and insignificant. In the smaller firm size
categories, the effects are far more precise. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; **
at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.

51

Appendix Table 4. Effects of Unexpected H-1B Lottery Wins on Patenting in Years 4-8

IHS of number of patents
Patenting dummy
A) ≤10
0.000041
0.000022
-0.000096
-0.00013
employees
[-0.0022, 0.0023]
[-0.0021, 0.0021]
[-0.0021, 0.0019] [-0.0019, 0.0017]
B) ≤30
0.0043
0.0044
-0.00098
-0.00094
employees
[-0.0054, 0.014]
[-0.0053, 0.014]
[-0.0055, 0.0036] [-0.0055, 0.0036]
C) All firm sizes
-0.00081
-0.0017
0.0063
0.0062
[-0.033, 0.031]
[-0.033, 0.029]
[-0.0095, 0.022]
[-0.0091, 0.021]
Prior patents
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: The table shows the effect of an extra unexpected H-1B visa on patent outcomes over the
indicated years. The table is identical to Table 4, except that the dependent variable is the IHS of
patents in each year over Years 4 to 8. See Tables 1 and 4 for additional notes and sample sizes.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5%
level; and * at the 10% level.

Appendix Table 5. Effect of Unexpected H-1B Visas on Patent Citations

(A) ≤10 employees

(1) Fewer
controls
-0.0059
[-0.023, 0.011]
-0.0053
[-0.032, 0.022]
-0.022
[-0.071, 0.028]
X

(2) More controls

-0.0057
[-0.022, 0.010]
B) ≤30 employees
-0.0049
[-0.032, 0.022]
C) All
-0.025
[-0.074, 0.023]
Prior profits
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: The table investigates the effect on patents when we weight each patent by its
number of citations, i.e. the dependent variable is patent citations. The most recent firmlevel patent citation data in the Patent Dataverse run through 2010, so the last year
covered by these data is Year 4 (for the FY2006 lotteries) or Year 5 (for the FY2007
lotteries). Thus, the dependent variable in these regressions is the IHS of patents in each
year from Year 0 to 2010. Otherwise, the specification is the same as in the Table 4 IHS
specifications. The results here and in all other patenting appendix tables are very similar
when the dependent variable is the patenting dummy instead. The mean of citations in the
≤10 employees, ≤30 employees, and “all” groups is 2.27, 8.94, and 40.77, respectively.
The mean of the IHS of citations in these three groups is 0.22, 0.045, and 0.33,
respectively. See other notes to Table 4. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at
the 5% level, and * at the 10% level.

52

Appendix Table 6. Effect of Unexpected H-1B Lottery Wins on Patenting, using
Alternative Matching Procedure
IHS of number of patents
Patenting dummy
A) ≤10
-0.011
-0.011
-0.012
-0.012
employees
[-0.029, 0.0065]
[-0.029, 0.0068]
[-0.024, 0.0000]* [-0.024, 0.00027]*
B) ≤30
-0.0090
-0.0088
-0.012
-0.011
employees
[-0.026, 0.0084]
[-0.026, 0.0085]
[-0.024, 0.00076]* [-0.024, 0.00079]*
C) All firm sizes
-0.028
-0.027
-0.011
-0.010
[-0.067, 0.011]
[-0.066, 0.011]
[-0.028, 0.0067]
[-0.027, 0.0072]
Prior patents
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: See notes to Table 4. The table is similar to Table 4, except in defining the firms that
match between the USCIS data and the Patent Dataverse, Appendix Table 6 includes those firms
that are “possible” matches (whereas Table 4 excludes those firms). The table examines patenting
in each year from Year 0 to Year 8, as in the baseline. *** refers to significance at the 1% level;
** at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.

Appendix Table 7. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on ln(1+Patents)
(A) ≤10 employees
B) ≤30 employees
C) All firm sizes
Prior patents
E[wins]

(1) Fewer controls
0.00020
[-0.0036, 0.0040]
0.0016
[-0.0068, 0.010]
-0.0068
[-0.030, 0.016]
X

(2) More controls
0.00023
[-0.033, 0.0037]
0.0017
[-0.0067, 0.010]
-0.0069
[-0.030, 0.016]
X
X

Note: The table shows OLS regressions of ln(1+ number of patents) on unexpected H-1B
lottery wins, measuring this outcome in each year from Year 0 to Year 8 and pooling and
stacking the years. This is an alternative way of addressing the skewness of the outcome
distribution while recognizing that the number of patents is often zero, and without
resorting to the less-known inverse hyperbolic sine transformation—but at the cost of
adding an arbitrary constant (i.e. 1). The table shows coefficients on unexpected H-1B
visas, with 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets. The table shows that the results
are similar to those when the dependent variable is the IHS of patents over Years 0 to 8.
See other notes to Table 4. *** refers to p<0.01; ** p<0.05; and * p<0.10.

53

Appendix Table 8. Effect of Unexpected H-1B Lottery Wins on Patenting in Subgroups
(1) ≤10 employees
(2) ≤30
(3) All firm
employees
sizes
A) Regular
0.0017
0.0045
0.0070
[-0.0040, 0.0074]
[-0.011, 0.020]
[-0.011, 0.025]
{654}
{1,062}
{2,327}
B) ADE
-0.0038
0.00076
-0.031
[-0.012, 0.0038]
[-0.0087, 0.010]
[-0.11, 0.046]
{67}
{137}
{494}
C) Professional, sci.,
-0.0010
0.0021
-0.010
and tech. services
[-0.0046, 0.0026]
[-0.012, 0.017]
[-0.041, 0.021]
{459}
{762}
{1,486}
D) Industries other
0.0011
0.0018
-0.0087
than professional,
[-0.0057, 0.0080]
[-0.0075, 0.011] [-0.066, 0.049]
sci., and tech. services
{261}
{432}
{1,273}
E) “Temporary
-0.0015
0.0048
-0.010
support services”
[-0.0057, 0.0028]
[-0.012, 0.021]
[-0.044, 0.024]
industries
{388}
{632}
{1,191}
F) Non-“temporary
0.0014
-0.0015
-0.0051
support services”
[-0.0042, 0.0070]
[-0.0085, 0.055] [-0.056, 0.046]
industries
{333}
{565}
{1,572}
Notes: The table shows OLS regressions of the IHS of patents in each year from Year 0
to Year 8 on unexpected H-1B lottery wins. All specifications control for patents in the
pre-period and expected lottery wins, as in the baseline. The results are comparable when
we investigate the patenting dummy or the number of patents as the dependent variable.
“Temporary consulting industries” refers to 6-digit NAICS codes 541511, 541519,
541600, 541330, 519100, 423600, and 541512; “non-temp industries” refers to all others.
“Professional, scientific, and technical services” refers to NAICS code 54. The number of
observations is in {curly brackets} below the confidence intervals in [square brackets].
See Tables 1 and 4 for additional notes. Some firms participate in both the Regular and
ADE lotteries in a given year; in these cases, we classify the firms as participating in the
Regular (not ADE) lottery, though the results are extremely similar when classifying
them as participating in the ADE lottery instead. Total sample sizes differ slightly in
Rows A+B, Rows C+D, and Rows E+F because whether firms are in the ADE vs.
Regular lottery, and firms’ industries, differ slightly across years. Total sample sizes in
each of these combined groups also differ slightly from those reported in Table 1 because
Table 1 reports n’s at the firm-lottery year level, whereas Appendix Table 8 reports them
at the firm level. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *** refers to significance at the
1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.

54

Appendix Table 9. Interactions of Unexpected Visa Lottery Wins with Covariates
Outcome:
(1) IHS of patents,
(2) Employment in Q1 to
Years 0 to 8
Q4
A) Interaction of unexpected visas with days to reach cap
0.023
0.038
[-0.029, 0.074]
[-0.030, 0.11]
B) Interaction of unexpected visas with IHS of patents in Year -1
-0.018
-5.94
[-0.044, 0.0069]
[-31.48, 19.58]
Notes: The table indicates that there is no significant difference in the effects on patenting
or employment by time taken to reach the visa cap or by amount of patenting in the preperiod. In Column 1, the dependent variable is the IHS of the number of patents in each
year from Year 0 to Year 8, and the specification is an OLS regression. The coefficient
reported is the coefficient on the interaction. In Column 2, the dependent variable is the
number of employees in Q1 through Q4 (pooled and stacked, with each quarter as a
separate observation), and the specification is a median regression (again as in the
baseline). In Row A, the main independent variables are the number of unexpected H-1B
visas; the number of days taken to reach the visa cap in the year and lottery in question;
and the interaction of these two variables. In Row B, the main independent variables are
the number of unexpected H-1B visas; the IHS of total patents in Year -1; and the
interaction of these two variables. The table shows coefficients and 95% confidence
intervals on the interactions. All specifications additionally control for expected lottery
wins, as well as patents in the pre-period (in Column 1) or employment in the pre-period
(in Column 2) as in the baseline specifications. The time taken to reach the visa cap was
291 days in FY2006 Regular lottery, 131 days in the FY2006 ADE lottery, 116 days in
the FY2007 Regular lottery, and 55 days in the FY2007 ADE lottery. When we allow the
time taken to reach the cap to have a different impact in the two ADE lotteries together
and the two Regular lotteries together, we also find no significant interaction in each set
of lotteries taken together. Standard errors are clustered by firm. See Tables 4 and 6 for
sample sizes and additional notes. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5%
level; and * at the 10% level.

55

Appendix Table 10. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Patents per Employee
(A) ≤10 employees
B) ≤30 employees
C) All
Prior patents/employee
E[wins]

(1) Fewer controls
-0.00028
[-0.0021, 0.0016]
0.00070
[-0.0021, 0.0035]
-0.00015
[-0.0013, 0.00098]
X

(2) More controls
0.000021
[-0.0017, 0.0017]
0.00075
[-0.0020, 0.0035]
-0.00020
[-0.0014, 0.00097]
X
X

Notes: The table shows the effect of an extra unexpected H-1B visa on the number of
patents per employee over Years 0 to 8, pooling and stacking years. In calculating the
mean number of employees in a given quarter, when the number of employees is missing
in a given quarter it does not count in the average number of employees from Years 0 to
8. The mean of the dependent variable among all firms is 0.0056; the mean among firms
with 30 or fewer employees is 0.0078; and the mean among firms with 10 or fewer
employees is 0.0049. See Tables 1 and 4 for additional notes and sample sizes. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level;
and * at the 10% level.
Appendix Table 11. Effect of H-1B Lottery Wins on Research and Experimentation Credit in
Years 4 to 8
Amount of Credit (IHS)
Claiming dummy
A) ≤10 employees
-0.44
-0.41
-0.039
-0.036
(n=396)
[-1.02, 0.14]
[-0.97, 0.14]
[-0.089, 0.012]
[-.085, 0.012]
B) ≤30 employees
-0.36
-0.35
-0.031
-0.029
(n=353)
[-0.73, 0.0063]* [-0.70, 0.0097]*
[-0.061, -0.00046]** [-0.059, -0.000079]**
C) All firm sizes
-0.098
-0.10
-0.0088
-0.0089
(n=770)
[-0.85, 0.65]
[-0.85, 0.65]
[-0.056, 0.038]
[-0.056, 0.038]
Prior R&E
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: The table shows OLS regressions of the R&E credit after the duration of the H-1B visa
(i.e. Years 4 to 8), on unexpected H-1B lottery wins. The table shows coefficients on unexpected
H-1B visas, with 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets. In Columns 1 and 2, the dependent
variable is the IHS of the total amount of the R&E credit claimed in each year over Years 4 to 8.
n’s refer to the number of firms in the regressions. In Columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is
a dummy variable for whether the firm claimed any R&E credit in each of the years from Years 4
to 8, so that the coefficient reflects the effect on the fraction of years claiming the R&E credit.
See other notes to Table 5. *** refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at
the 10% level.

56

Appendix Table 12. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Employment, Sample
Reweighted to Match Full Population of Firms

(A) ≤10 employees

(1) Fewer
controls
0.00
[-0.98, 0.98]**
-0.038
[-1.20, 1.12]*
-0.32
[-2.68, 2.03]
X

(2) More controls

-0.29
[-0.95, 0.37]***
B) ≤30 employees
-0.098
[-0.53, 0.33]***
C) All
-1.22
[-3.03, 0.58]**
Prior profits
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: the specification is the same as the IHS specifications in Table 6, except that we
weight each observation by weights reflecting the relative proportion of firm or worker
characteristics among applications on the last day relative to applications for capped H1B visas on any day (including those on the last day and those before the last day).
Specifically, we run a probit in which the dependent variable is a dummy for whether a
firm applies on a day other than the last day, and the independent variables are all firm
and worker characteristics shown in Table 2. We then calculate the fitted values p̂ .
Finally, we weight each firm by 1/ (1- p̂) . See other notes to Table 6.

57

Appendix Table 13. Employment regressions by quarter in Q1 to Q4
Median Regressions
Two-stage least squares
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: ≤10 employees
A) Q1
-0.00
-0.031
0.072
-0.15
[-1.28, 1.28]
[-1.64, 1.58]
[-1.24, 1.39]
[-2.15, 1.86]
B) Q2
-0.00
-0.41
-0.80
-1.46
[-0.68, 0.68]*** [-1.17, 0.36]***
[-2.34, 0.75]**
[-3.29, 0.36]***
C) Q3
-0.78
-0.53
-0.66
-1.33
[-1.78, 0.23]*** [-1.42, 0.36]***
[-2.40, 1.08]*
[-3.47, 0.80]**
D) Q4
-0.76
-0.61
-0.90
-1.72
[-2.05, 0.51]*** [-1.79, 0.57]***
[-3.12, 1.31]*
[-4.52, 1.08]*
Panel B: ≤30 employees
E) Q1
-0.35
-0.32
-1.05
-1.31
[-1.41, 0.72]***
[-1.38, 0.73]**
[-3.17, 1.06]*
[-3.47, 0.85]**
F) Q2
-0.22
-0.17
-0.73
-0.95
[-1.08, 0.65]***
[-1.11, 0.78]**
[-2.57, 1.10]*
[-2.90, 1.00]*
G) Q3
-0.95
-0.76
-1.00
-1.33
[-2.17, 0.27]*** [-1.83, 0.31]***
[-3.23, 1.23]*
[-3.62, 0.96]**
H) Q4
-0.53
-0.53
-0.92
-1.25
[-1.82, 0.76]***
[-1.85, 0.79]**
[-3.51, 1.67]
[-3.99, 1.49]
Panel C: All
I) Q1
-1.41
-1.67
-62.10
-9.40
[-3.40, 0.58]***
[-3.89, 0.54]**
[-768.40, 644.19]
[-22.73, 3.92]
J) Q2
-1.35
-1.00
-17.32
-2.75
[-3.72, 1.02]*
[-3.11, 1.12]*
[-180.09, 145.44] [-18.09, 12.58]
K) Q3
-0.055
0.25
4.76
4.43
[-3.15, 3.03]
[-2.33, 2.83]
[-72.71, 82.24]
[-15.97, 24.83]
L) Q4
1.36
-0.31
-13.70
0.04
[-4.80, 2.07]
[-3.64, 3.01]
[-191.01, 163.60] [-21.57, 21.64]
Prior employment
X
X
X
X
E[wins]
X
X
Notes: None of the estimates is significantly different from 0 at any conventional significance
level. See other notes to Table 6. See Table 1 for sample sizes. *** denotes estimates that are
significantly different from 1 at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; * at the 10% level.

58

Appendix Table 14. Additional Employment Specifications for Employment in the First Year
(1) Winsorize
(2) IHS
(3) IHS of
(4) IHS of level,
(5) First difference
at 99%
difference,
winsorized at 99% of employment, no
winsorized at 99%
controls
A) ≤10 employees
-1.86
-0.18
-0.18
-0.18
-0.53
[-4.34, 0.62]** [-0.43, 0.066]**
[-0.43, 0.067]**
[-0.42, 0.068]**
[-1.37, 0.31]***
B) ≤30 employees
-1.69
-0.16
-0.15
-0.16
-0.69
[-4.55, 1.17]*
[-0.35, 0.035]*
[-0.34, 0.034]**
[-0.35, 0.037]**
[-1.68, 0.31]***
C) All
1.06
0.034
0.045
0.032
-1.07
[-73.91, 76.03]
[-0.15, 0.22]
[-0.14, 0.23]
[-0.14, 0.21]
[-3.05, 0.92]**
Notes: Columns 1-4 of the table show the baseline two-stage least squares regressions of employment outcomes on approved H-1B visas, where
unexpected lottery wins are the instrument for approved H-1B visas. (The corresponding ITT regressions show very similar results.) In Column 1,
the dependent variable is the difference of employment from the first quarter of Year -1 to Q1, Q2, Q3, or Q4 (pooled), and winsorized at the 1st
and 99th percentiles. The 1st and 99th percentiles of the first difference in employment are -5,559 and 2,430, respectively, in the full sample; are -20
and 62, respectively, among those with 30 or fewer employees; and are -10 and 53, respectively, among those with 10 or fewer employees. In
Column 2, the dependent variable is the IHS of the difference in employment over the same periods. In Column 3, the dependent variable is the
IHS of the difference in employment over the same periods, winsorized at the 99th percentile. In Column 4, the dependent variable is the IHS of
the level of employment in Q1 through Q4 (pooled), winsorized at the 99th percentile, and the results are nearly identical to those in Column 3. All
specifications in Columns 1, 2, 3, and 4 control for prior employment and the number of expected lottery wins, as in the baseline; the results are
similar with other controls. In Column 5, we run median regressions (as in Table 6) and the dependent variable is the first difference of
employment (from the first quarter of calendar Year -1 to a given quarter of Year 0, and pooling this measure from Q1 to Q4), but we do not
include any controls. In all columns, we pool across Q1 to Q4, as in the baseline. None of the estimates is significantly different from 0 at any
conventional significance level. In the case of these IHS specifications, before testing whether a coefficient is equal to 1, we transform the
coefficient from the regression (which reflects the percentage increase in employment, rather than the increase in the absolute level of
employment) by multiplying it by the mean level of employment. We then test whether this transformed coefficient is equal to 1. The test results
reported above refer to this test. *** denotes estimates that are significantly different from 1 at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; * at the 10% level.
See Tables 1 and 6 for other notes and sample sizes.

59

Appendix Table 15. Effect of H-1B Visa on Being out of Business
Panel A: ≤10 employees (n=719)
A) Q1 to Q4
0.024
0.033
[-0.016, 0.063]
[-0.022, 0.088]
B) Q1
0.016
0.023
[-0.020, 0.052]
[-0.030, 0.077]
C) Q2
0.017
0.022
[-0.033, 0.066]
[-0.051, 0.095]
D) Q3
0.032
0.046
[-0.014, 0.079]
[-0.015, 0.11]
E) Q4
0.029
0.041
[-0.017, 0.076]
[-0.022, 0.10]
Panel B: ≤30 employees (n=1,134)
F) Q1 to Q4
0.010
0.012
[-0.019, 0.040]
[-0.024, 0.047]
G) Q1
0.0033
0.0033
[-0.028, 0.034]
[-0.034, 0.040]
H) Q2
0.0030
0.0029
[-0.035, 0.041]
[-0.043, 0.049]
I) Q3
0.015
0.017
[-0.020, 0.050]
[-0.023, 0.058]
J) Q4
0.020
0.023
[-0.013, 0.052]
[-0.014, 0.060]
Panel C: All (n=2,292)
L) Q1 to Q4
0.0050
0.0024
[-0.068, 0.078]
[-0.014, 0.019]
M) Q1
-0.032
-0.0053
[-0.39, 0.32]
[-0.022, 0.011]
O) Q2
-0.013
-0.0024
[-0.13, 0.11]
[-0.024, 0.019]
P) Q3
-0.015
0.0054
[-0.10, 0.13]
[-0.014, 0.025]
Q) Q4
0.037
-0.011
[-0.21, 0.28]
[-0.0084, 0.031]
Prior employment
X
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: The table shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on unexpected lottery wins, from
OLS (linear probability) regressions a dummy for whether the firm is “out of business” is regressed on
unexpected lottery wins and controls. We define a firm as being “out of business” if it has either zero
employees or is missing the number of employees. The results are similar with other definitions of being
out of business. The “prior employment” specifications control for employment from the first quarter of
Year -1, and the “prior employment, E[wins]” specifications additionally control for the number of
expected lottery wins. None of the estimates is significantly different from 0 at any conventional
significance level. Since the table measures the effect on whether the firm has employment in the U.S.,
these results also encompass effects on whether a firm chooses to locate in the U.S. “n” refers to the total
number of firms in the regressions. See Tables 1 and 6 for other notes. *** denotes estimates that are
significant at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; * at the 10% level.

60

Appendix Table 16. Effect of H-1B Visa on Being out of Business
Panel A: ≤10 employees (n=719)
A) Q5 to Q8
0.020
0.018
[-0.088, 0.13]
[-0.090, 0.13]
B) Q8 to Q12
0.016
0.023
[-0.020, 0.052]
[-0.030, 0.077]
C) Q13 to Q32
0.065
0.068
[-0.041, 0.17]
[-0.039, 0.17]
Panel B: ≤30 employees (n=1,191)
D) Q5 to Q8
-0.014
-0.013
[-0.081, 0.054]
[-0.081, 0.054]
E) Q8 to Q12
-0.022
-0.022
[-0.092, 0.048]
[-0.092, 0.047]
F) Q13 to Q32
0.023
0.024
[-0.053, 0.099]
[-0.052, 0.10]
Panel C: All (n=2,289)
G) Q5 to Q8
-0.00025
0.00092
[-0.033, 0.033]
[-0.032, 0.034]
H) Q8 to Q12
-0.015
-0.012
[-0.053, 0.024]
[-0.050, 0.026]
I) Q13 to Q32
-0.0097
-0.0079
[-0.052, 0.033]
[-0.050, 0.034]
Prior employment
X
X
E[wins]
X

Notes: The table shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals on unexpected lottery wins, from
OLS (linear probability) regressions a dummy for whether the firm is “out of business” is regressed on
unexpected lottery wins and controls. We define a firm as being “out of business” if it has zero employees
or is missing number of employees. The results are similar with other definitions of being out of business.
The “prior employment” specifications control for employment from the first quarter of Year -1, and the
“prior employment, E[wins]” specifications additionally control for the number of expected lottery wins.
None of the estimates is significantly different from 0 at any conventional significance level. Since the
table measures the effect on whether the firm has employment in the U.S., these results also encompass
effects on whether a firm chooses to locate in the U.S. “n” refers to the total number of firms in the
regressions. See Tables 1 and 6 for other notes. *** denotes estimates that are significant at the 1% level;
** at the 5% level; * at the 10% level.

61

Appendix Table 17. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Employment in Subgroups
(1) ≤10
(2) ≤30 employees
(3) All firm
employees
sizes
A) Regular
-0.41
-0.59
-1.26
[-1.10, 0.27]***
[-1.46, 0.28]***
[-3.33, 0.81]**
{651}
{1,069}
{1,969}
B) ADE
-0.0000002
0.52
1.38
[-1.36, 1.36]
[-1.51, 2.55]
[-5.63, 8.39]
{67}
{134}
{400}
C) Professional, sci.,
-0.58
-0.72
-1.46
and tech. services
[-1.54, 0.39]***
[-1.92, 0.48]***
[-3.60, 0.67]**
{456}
{759}
{1,275}
D) Industries other
0.36
0.65
1.16
than professional, sci.,
[-0.50, 1.22]
[-0.36, 1.65]
[-2.74, 5.05]
and tech. services
{257}
{426}
{1,015}
E) “Temporary
-1.56
-0.68
-1.54
support services”
[-5.70, 2.57]
[-2.09, 0.73]**
[-4.03, 0.95]**
industries
{384}
{628}
{4,738}
F) Non-“temporary
0.65
0.00
0.14
support services”
[-0.42, 1.72]
[-0.95, 0.95]**
[-2.46, 2.74]
industries
{330}
{560}
{1,265}
Notes: The table shows the effect of unexpected lottery wins on employment, displaying
point estimates and 95% confidence intervals in [square brackets] for median regressions
of employment in Q1-Q4 on unexpected lottery wins. n’s in {curly brackets} show the
total number of firms. All specifications have the baseline controls: employment in the
pre-period and expected lottery wins. See other notes to Appendix Table 8. *** shows
p<0.01 for the test of difference from 1; ** p<0.05 ; * p<0.01. None of the estimates is
significantly different from zero.

62

Appendix Table 18. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Employment of Foreigners and nonForeigners
Outcome
(1) All
(2) ≤30 employees
(3) ≤10 employees
(n=2,143)
(n=1,198)
(n=723)
A) U.S. citizen employment,
-0.012
0.00
0.00
IRS measure
[-0.41, 0.39]***
[-0.15, 0.15]***
[-0.19, 0.19]***
B) Non-U.S. citizen
-0.55
-0.12
-0.26
employment, IRS measure
[-1.89, 0.79]***
[-0.97, 0.72]***
[-1.14, 0.62]***
C) Native employment,
-0.073
0.11
0.018
SSN-based measure
[-0.72, 0.58]***
[-0.47, 0.69]***
[-0.41, 0.44]
D) Non-native employment,
-0.37
-0.065
-0.16
SSN-based measure
[-1.32, 0.59]***
[-0.80, 0.67]***
[-1.34, 1.03]*
Notes: The table shows the effect of unexpected lottery wins on employment of foreigners or
non-foreigners, displaying point estimates of the coefficient on unexpected lottery wins and 95%
confidence intervals from median regressions. “IRS measure” refers to a specification in which
we measure employment using IRS data on the most recent measure of citizenship (the only
measure of citizenship immediately available in the data). “SSN-based measure” refers to a
measure of nativity using an algorithm developed in conjunction with Yagan (2014), identifying
individuals as natives and non-natives on the basis of individuals’ Social Security Numbers
(SSNs) in the data. The table shows that the results are similar under both measures. All
specifications control for employment in the pre-period and expected lottery wins, as in the
baseline. The measure of a firm’s employment is taken from the W-2, because the W-2 data
contain information on citizenship. The results are similar when we measure employment as the
total number of employees observed at the firm over the year from the W-2 data. To make the
time period investigated as comparable as possible to the quarterly data shown elsewhere (where
we investigate Q1 to Q4), we pool the snapshot from Year 0 with Year 1. n’s refer to the number
of firms. See Table 6 for additional notes. For Rows A and C (regressions for non-foreigners),
*** denotes estimates that are significantly different from -1 at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; *
at the 10% level. For Rows B and D (regressions for foreigners), the number of stars instead
denotes the significance test for difference from 1. The reason for the difference is that in the case
of foreigners, we are primarily interested in testing whether the additional H-1B crowds out
employment of other foreigners—which corresponds to the test of a difference from 1 because if
the H-1B works at the firm, the coefficient should be 1. In the case of non-foreigners, we are
interested in testing whether the H-1B crowds out non-foreigners one-for-one—which
corresponds to the test of whether the coefficient is different from -1. None of the estimates is
significantly different from zero at any conventional significance level.

63

Appendix Table 19. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Payroll per Employee in
Years 4-8
(1) Fewer controls
(2) More controls
374.49
428.54
[-1,214.22, 1,963.20] [-1,263.43, 2,120.50]
B) ≤30 employees
-258.04
-1,325.10
[-5,625.2, 5,109.12] [-6,443.69, 3,793.48]
C) All
2,645.54
1,123.09
[-658.12, 5,949.20] [-7,018.17, 9,264.35]
Prior patents/employee
X
X
E[wins]
X
Notes: The table shows the effect of an extra unexpected H-1B visa on firms’ payroll
costs per employee over Years 4 to 8. The median of the dependent variable among all
firms is 54,761.65; the median among firms with 30 or fewer employees is 49584.98; and
the median among firms with 10 or fewer employees is 48,551.45. See Tables 1 and 8 for
additional notes and sample sizes. Standard errors are clustered by firm. *** refers to
significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.
(A) ≤10 employees

Appendix Table 20. Effect of Unexpected Lottery Wins on Revenue or Total Income per
Employee
(1) Revenue per
(2) Total Income per
Employee
Employee
(A) ≤10 employees
8,376.40
6,191.85
(n=615)
[-6,483.59, 23,236.40]
[-9,414.77, 21,798.48]
B) ≤30 employees
8,326.45
5,220.35
(n=1,033)
[-2,194.90, 18,845.80]
[-2,660.61, 13,101.31]
C) ≤200 employees
2,600.74
2,730.51
(n=1,520)
[-1,985.04, 7,186.51]
[-1,426.81, 6,887.82]
Notes: The table shows median regressions of revenue per employee (Column 1) or total
income per employee (Column 2) in Years 0 to 3 on unexpected H-1B visas and controls,
pooling and stacking the years. The table shows coefficients and 95% confidence
intervals on unexpected H-1B visas. In Row C we investigate firms with 200 or fewer
employees because regressions above this firm size cutoff did not reliably converge; they
did not converge, for example, in the sample of firms of all sizes. Years 0 to 3 cover the
duration of the H-1B visa. Estimated effects in the shorter or longer term are comparable.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. n’s refer to the number of firm-lottery years. ***
refers to significance at the 1% level; ** at the 5% level; and * at the 10% level.

64

