                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    TRADE ADJUSTMENT DYNAMICS AND THE WELFARE GAINS FROM TRADE

                                        George Alessandria
                                           Horag Choi
                                            Kim Ruhl

                                       Working Paper 20663
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20663


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2014




We thank Mark Aguiar, Roc Armenter, Hal Cole, Lukasz Drozd, Virgiliu Midrigan, Veronica Rappoport,
Natalia Ramondo, Richard Rogerson, MikeWaugh, Kei-Mu Yi, and audiences at the Board of Governors,
BC, Clemson, CMSG, Michigan, NYU, NBER ITI, Philadelphia and Minneapolis Feds, Penn State,
Princeton, SED, Toronto, UCLA, and Wharton for helpful comments. We thank Joseph Steinberg
for an excellent discussion. The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by George Alessandria, Horag Choi, and Kim Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare Gains from Trade
George Alessandria, Horag Choi, and Kim Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 20663
November 2014, Revised August 2018
JEL No. E22,F12

                                              ABSTRACT

We study how the transitions following a trade reform are shaped by the time it takes for new exporters
to grow in the export market. We introduce time and risk into the fixed-variable cost tradeoff central
to general equilibrium heterogeneous firm trade models: Investing in exporting gradually and stochastically
lowers the costs of exporting. The model captures the tendency of new exporters to export on a small
scale, to have low survival rates, and to take time to grow into large exporters. In the model, aggregate
trade dynamics arise from producer-level decisions to invest in lowering their future variable export
costs, and tariff reforms generate time-varying trade elasticities. We show that the gains from reducing
tariffs arise from substituting away from firm creation and towards export capacity. This is in stark
contrast to the static models that dominate the literature. The strength of this substitution is determined
largely by the size of new exporters and their ability to grow into successful exporters. We calibrate
the model and estimate the welfare gains from reducing tariffs, which differ substantially from the
long-run changes in consumption or trade. We show that the welfare gain cannot be recovered from
a static trade model or from formulas based on those models. Because aggregate trade grows slowly,
the long-run effects are strongly discounted and, thus, are not the key determinants of the welfare gains
from a change in trade policy. We also find that policy prescriptions based on static models can predict
a loss from trade reform when our dynamic model predicts a gain.


George Alessandria                                   Kim Ruhl
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Rochester                              University of Wisconsin-Madison
Harkness 204                                         7444 Social Science Building
Rochester, NY 14627                                  1180 Observatory Drive
and NBER                                             Madison, WI 53706
george.alessandria@rochester.edu                     and NBER
                                                     ruhl2@wisc.edu
Horag Choi
Department of Economics
Monash University
900 Dandenong Road
Caulfield East, VIC 3145
Australia
horag.choi@monash.edu
1         Introduction
For the United States, and much of the world, the 1950s–2000s was a period of major trade
reform. Standard models of trade liberalization (e.g., Eaton and Kortum 2002; Melitz 2003)
predict that, as the transitional effects of these reforms wind down, the U.S. economy should
be converging to higher levels of trade, consumption, and income. While international trade
has grown rapidly, it is less clear that income and consumption have grown in the ways that
the models predicted. The highly visible increase in trade, the recent stagnation in income,
and the apparent failure of the expected benefits to materialize have provided fodder for a
growing backlash against trade liberalization.
        Against this backdrop, we argue that understanding the welfare gains from tariff reform
requires accounting for the transition between the high- and low-tariff equilibria and that
simply comparing the two steady states generates misleading predictions. In our model, the
gains in consumption and output occur early in the transition, while trade is slow to adjust.
        Understanding the post-reform transition is crucial for welfare measurement. What is cru-
cial for understanding the post-reform transition? We show that the substitutability between
new firm creation and export capacity—a relationship that remains largely unstudied—is the
key determinant of the gains from trade. A tariff decrease generates a gradual expansion
in trade, but, as the economy cuts back on new firm creation, more resources are devoted
to production, which generates a rapid expansion in consumption that overshoots the new
steady state.
        The substitutability between new firms and export capacity is determined mainly by
the ease with which a firm can expand its exports. We study this relationship in a general
equilibrium heterogeneous firm model in which we introduce time and risk into the fixed-
variable cost tradeoff: Investing in exporting gradually and stochastically lowers the costs
of exporting. The model captures the tendency of new exporters to export on a small scale,
to have low survival rates, and to take time to grow into large exporters.1 In the model,
aggregate trade dynamics arise from producers’ decisions to invest in lowering their future
    1
    Our model integrates the structural, partial equilibrium literature that studies establishment-level export
patterns (Das, Roberts, and Tybout 2007; Kohn, Leibovici, and Szkup 2015; Rho and Rodrigue 2016; Ruhl
and Willis 2017) and the general equilibrium literature focused on measuring the gains from trade.



                                                      1
variable export costs, and tariff reforms generate a trade elasticity that increases over time.
   To see why exporter life cycles are important, consider the standard sunk-cost model of
Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) studied in general equilibrium by Alessandria and Choi
(2014). In this model, new exporters make a single, large upfront investment in export access
in order to export on a large scale. Continuing exporters do not invest in expanding the
scale of exporting—they pay only to maintain market access. With only a small number of
firms investing in market access, tariffs create a smaller reduction in trade, making exporters
and new firms not very substitutable. When tariffs are cut, the decrease in firm creation
is relatively small and the growth in aggregate trade is relatively fast. In this model, there
is some consumption and output overshooting, but much less than in the model with ex-
porter life cycles that match the data. In our benchmark model, in contrast, new exporters
make a small upfront investment to export on a small scale, and they must make repeated
investments in market access to expand their exports. Thus, tariffs discourage investments
on two margins—market access for new exporters and the scale of market access by all
exporters—further distorting trade. In response to a cut in tariffs, the economy cuts back
on firm creation and invests in increasing the export capacity of existing exporters. In the
benchmark model, firm creation falls and exports rise by much more than in the sunk-cost
model. The greater substitution away from firm creation means that consumption overshoots
its steady-state level substantially, creating significant welfare gains along the transition.
   We develop a parsimonious model of producer export entry, expansion, and exit within
a two-country general equilibrium model with capital, roundabout production, and asset
trade. The model nests the standard models of heterogeneous producers with fixed export
costs (Krugman 1980; Ghironi and Melitz 2005; Das, Roberts, and Tybout 2007). To cap-
ture the observed new exporter dynamics, we allow the producer’s exporting technology—in
particular, the fixed versus variable cost tradeoff—to be dynamic. As in the standard mod-
els, nonexporters have an infinite iceberg trade cost. By paying a fixed cost, nonexporters
lower their iceberg cost to a finite level and become exporters. Existing exporters must pay
another, potentially different, fixed cost to continue exporting. In our model, unlike in stan-
dard models, a producer’s iceberg cost is allowed to evolve dynamically. As long as a new
exporter continues to export, its iceberg cost falls stochastically over time. As producers


                                               2
become more efficient exporters, their export intensity increases, consistent with the data.
It takes time, resources, and a bit of luck to become an efficient exporter.2
       With this general export technology, the aggregate volume of trade now depends on tariffs
and the joint distribution of iceberg costs and productivity. Trade expands through accu-
mulated exporters (extensive margin) and a better exporting technology (intensive margin).
Because of the dynamic nature of the extensive and intensive margins, there is no simple
mapping between the structural parameters of the model, tariffs, and the volume of trade
along the transition. By disciplining our model of producer-level exporting technology with
producer-level data, we avoid making any assumptions about how aggregate trade behaves.
In particular, we are not forced to estimate a trade elasticity that will govern the aggregate
behavior of trade—a difficult undertaking given that the trade elasticity is not constant.3
Indeed, a key advantage of our dynamic model is its ability to capture the well-known feature
of the data that the trade elasticity increases with time.
       The generality of our model allows us to estimate the exporting technology without
imposing a priori restrictions. Following the literature, we divide the fixed export costs
into an entry cost and a continuation cost. Consistent with Ruhl and Willis (2017) and
subsequent partial equilibrium structural models of exporting, when the model generates
a data-consistent exporter life cycle, the estimated entry cost is much smaller than those
derived from models that ignore new-exporter dynamics.
       One interpretation of the partial equilibrium literature is that the small producer-level
export costs imply small aggregate export costs. In our general equilibrium model, this is
not the case. In the benchmark model, the aggregate resources devoted to fixed export costs
are larger than in a comparably calibrated sunk-cost model. The larger aggregate cost is due
to the many producers that either exit before becoming successful or invest in lowering their
variable trade costs. In Section 6.1, we show that the canonical sunk-cost model would need
an entry cost almost eight times larger than the one in the benchmark model to generate
the same aggregate expenditure on exporting costs. The benchmark model—despite having
   2
     While the focus is on generalizing the exporting technology, it is isomorphic to allow for export demand
to increase with tenure in the foreign market.
   3
     Baier and Bergstrand (2007) and Baier, Bergstrand, and Fang (2014), for example, provide empirical
evidence on the delayed impacts of trade liberalization and their lagged effect on trade volumes.



                                                     3
a small export entry cost—behaves, in the aggregate, much like a model with a very large
sunk entry cost.
   We use the calibrated model to measure the aggregate effects of a unilateral and global
reduction of a ten-percent tariff, taking into account the transition period. Even though new
exporter dynamics cause the aggregate trade volume to grow slowly along the transition, the
welfare gain exceeds the change in steady-state consumption. In the global tariff reduction
experiment, consumption peaks in year seven, at which point the trade elasticity has grown
to only 75 percent of its long-run value. When we take the transition into account, the welfare
gain is 15 times larger than the change in steady-state consumption. The transition is even
more important when we consider unilateral liberalization: Welfare in the liberalizing country
increases by 0.5 percent, even though its steady-state consumption falls by 2.4 percent.
   In our model, two competing forces shape the transition and long-run effects of a cut in
tariffs. First, trade adjusts slowly as producers make investments in export-specific capacity
that may boost future exports and profits. This force reduces the resources available for
production and consumption in the short run, while improving the efficiency of the economy
in the long run. These investments in exporting in the transition period act to reduce welfare.
The second force is a desire to reduce investments in new varieties. Lowering tariffs increases
the varieties available from foreign exporters. This extra competition reduces entry because
firms strongly discount the future opportunities to export. This frees resources for production
and consumption in the transition and increases welfare. These two forces summarize the
trade-off between new firm creation and export capacity expansion that is at the heart of
the model.
   In Section 9.1, we show how the export cost process shapes the substitution between new
firms and export capacity. Counterintuitively, when new exporters are small, trade grows
more in response to a cut in tariffs: Investing in expanding export capacity is a more efficient
way to increase exports than to create new exporters. In this way, the economy responds to
a policy change (a tariff cut) by endogenously improving its export technology.
   Our model predicts that we should observe firm creation rates falling as trade volumes
rise. In Section 7, we present evidence from the United States that supports this prediction.
The growing literature that addresses the decline in firm creation rates in the United States


                                               4
has paid little attention to international factors (e.g., Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda 2014), but our calibrated model captures much of the decline in firm creation.
While we view this as a preliminary success, a more complete answer requires considering
the other mechanisms that work to decrease firm creation. We see this as important future
research.
   The dynamic features of our model—trade in financial assets, capital accumulation, and
the gradual adjustment of trade—make it ideally suited for studying the impact of a unilat-
eral trade liberalization. We find that both countries gain from unilateral reform, but the
loss of tariff revenue implies that the reforming country’s gain is relatively small compared
to its trading partner’s (0.51 percent versus 5.7 percent). We show that focusing on the
steady-state change or evaluating the policy in a model without an export decision would
lead to the conclusion that welfare in the reforming country would decrease. The reform also
leads to interesting current account dynamics that depend on the nature of export costs.
The reforming country becomes a net lender to the rest of the world, accumulating net as-
sets of almost seven percent of GDP. The initial trade surpluses are substantial, peaking
at 0.7 percent of GDP two years after the liberalization. In a model without export costs,
borrowing and lending are much smaller or even non-existent.
   The non-linear relationship between the trade elasticity and consumption along the tran-
sition implies that the sufficient statistic approach pioneered by Arkolakis, Costinot, and
Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012) (hereafter, ACR) does not extend to our model. We make this point
quantitatively and theoretically. To make the quantitative point, we construct a model with-
out export entry costs, so that all producers export, as in Krugman (1980). To make the
aggregate trade dynamics in this model consistent with our benchmark model, we introduce
an adjustment friction. While the aggregate trade dynamics in the benchmark model and
this no-cost model are identical, the consumption dynamics are very different. Without an
exporter decision, consumption grows smoothly during the transition, and the welfare gain
is only 37 percent of that in the baseline model, even though the steady-state increase in
consumption is larger.
   Given the nonlinear nature of the transitions, we are unable to characterize the welfare
gain in our benchmark model analytically, but we can still say quite a bit about why the


                                             5
simple ACR formula does not hold. First, for a simplified version of our model, we derive
a long-run relationship between new exporters, consumption, entry, and trade. Second, to
quantify the effects of a tariff reform along the transition, we derive a simple decomposition
of consumption into several margins and relate it to the ACR formula. The decomposition is
simple enough to distinguish between the change in steady-state consumption and welfare.
We find that the welfare gain from trade liberalization is higher than the change in steady-
state consumption because the available varieties, labor used in production, capital labor
ratios, and average plant productivity are all relatively high along the transition.
       This paper is part of the growing literature that quantifies the aggregate effects of trade on
welfare. Atkeson and Burstein (2010) and Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012)
find that producer-level exporting details matter little for welfare, while Head, Mayer, and
Thoenig (2014) and Melitz and Redding (2015) find a role for producer-level exporting in
welfare when the trade elasticity depends on the level of trade costs.4 Melitz and Ottaviano
(2008) and Edmonds, Midrigan, and Xu (2015) consider the effects of trade on competition.
While these papers focus on trade and markups, tariffs in our model affect competition
through entry and alter the share of income from profits.
       Our model’s trade elasticity is time-varying because time and resources are required to
expand trade after a decrease in tariffs. This is consistent with the slow adjustment of
trade to changing trade barriers or relative prices documented in the empirical literature.5
A number of researchers have studied the transition following tariff reform. Alvarez, Buera,
and Lucas (2013) study the transition following a change in trade frictions; however, this
study does not model the intensive export margin. Ravikumar, Santacreu, and Sposi (2018)
study trade imbalances following liberalization in a model with capital accumulation and
financial assets. They also find that welfare gains accrue gradually and that the dynamic
gains are larger than the static gains. In their model, gradual adjustment arises primarily
from capital accumulation, whereas our gradual adjustment arises as firms adopt better
   4
     Simonovska and Waugh (2014) show that micro details are important for model parameters.
   5
     A large empirical literature identifies different short-run and long-run trade responses to aggregate shocks
(Hooper, Johnson, and Marquez 2000; Gallaway, McDaniel, and Rivera 2003). Many theoretical studies of
the role of trade adjustment explicitly or implicitly calibrate the trade elasticity differently, according to the
horizon considered (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2007). Some recent theoretical work has endogenized the dynamics
of the trade elasticity; these include Alessandria and Choi (2007), Drozd and Nosal (2012), Engel and Wang
(2011), Ramanarayanan (2007), Ruhl (2008), and Alessandria, Pratap, and Yue (2013).


                                                        6
exporting technology.
        Lastly, in contrast to much of the literature, our model draws a meaningful distinction
between tariffs (a policy choice) and trade costs (a technological constraint). In our model,
producers increase investment in their export technologies in response to a change in trade
policy. In static multi-country models, Alvarez and Lucas (2007), Caliendo and Parro (2015),
and Ossa (2014) also study the aggregate implications of policy frictions.
        In Section 2, we review the data on the exporter life cycle, laying out key producer-level
facts used to discipline our model of the producer’s exporting technology. In Section 3, we
present the model, and in Section 4, we describe our strategy for calibrating the model.
In Sections 5 and 9, we report the results from the baseline model and show how the gain
from trade liberalization is much larger than the steady-state comparisons would suggest.
In Section 8, we present alternative versions of the model, highlighting the importance of
producer heterogeneity in understanding the welfare gain from trade. In Section 10, we
consider a unilateral tariff reform.



2         The Exporter Life Cycle
At the center of our model is a novel generalization of the producer’s exporting technology
that includes a risky time-to-build element. We show that this general technology generates
an exporter life cycle that is consistent with a growing body of empirical work showing that:
1) exporting intensively takes many years of sustained foreign market participation; 2) many
new exporters exit before achieving this status; 3) and many new exporters are not actually
new to the foreign market.
        To set ideas and discipline the importance of these margins, we summarize some salient
features of the exporter life cycle using manufacturing sector plant-level data from Colombia
and Chile and firm-level data from the United States. The results from unbalanced panels
are in the top halves of Tables 1 and 2, while the bottom halves report results for balanced
panels and some statistics from the literature.6
    6
   Our aim is to reorganize facts that others have emphasized, so we do not report the regression tables.
These are available upon request.



                                                   7
        Our focus is on the aggregate implications of the exporter life cycle. We begin by summa-
rizing the importance of new exporters in overall exports at annual and eight-year horizons.7
New exporters are common, but relatively unimportant, at one-year intervals but grow in
importance over longer horizons. Columns 1 and 3 of Table 1 show that, at the end of an
eight-year window, 57 percent of exporters entered the export market during the sample,
and they accounted for just under 40 percent of total exports. These numbers are similar
in both Colombia and Chile. New exporters are less important annually—new exporters
accounted for 17.6 percent of exporters but only 4.2 percent of total exports from Colombia.


2.1         Export Intensity

New exporters account for a small share of annual total exports because new exporters are
relatively small, in terms of both their total sales and their export-sales ratios, what we call
their export intensity. Columns 5 and 6 of Table 1 show that the total sales of new exporters
are 40 to 50 percent of those of an average exporter, and their export intensity is about 45
percent of the average exporter’s.
        New exporters become more important in aggregate trade at longer horizons because
continuing starters gradually expand their overall sales and export intensity. To quantify
the dynamics of export intensity, we regress export intensity of establishment i, exsit , on
lagged export intensity and dummies for incumbent exporters, Iitincumbent , and new exporters,
Iitstarter :8

(1)       exsit = α0 + ρexs exsit−1 + α1 Iitstarter + α2 Iitincumbent + εit .

New exporters are more important for total trade over longer periods because export intensity
is quite persistent, with an autocorrelation of about 90 percent annually (Table 1, column 7).
The low initial value and slow build-up of a new exporter’s export intensity is evident in
Figure 1A (Ruhl and Willis 2017), which plots the average export intensity of new exporters
in Colombia, conditional on continually exporting for five years. The average incumbent
    7
     We focus on eight-year windows due to data limitations and for comparability with the results for the
United States, which are reported in other studies.
   8
     As our interest is in the aggregate importance of the exporter life cycle, in all of our regressions, we do
not control for industry or years and weight by establishment sales.


                                                          8
exporter ships 13 percent of its total sales abroad, while a new exporter ships about six
percent of total sales abroad in its first year. It takes five years for the new exporter to reach
the same export intensity as the existing exporters.
      Using the estimated coefficients from (1), we can predict the export intensity of an average
exporter that has exported continuously for a years as
                                                1 − ρaexs
(2)      xsa = (α0 + α1 ) ρaexs + (α0 + α2 )
        ed                                                .
                                                1 − ρexs
Our estimates imply that it takes between nine and 11 years for a new exporter to export
as intensively as the average exporter (Table 1, column 8). If a new exporter grew for 20
consecutive years, it would export 20–50 percent more intensively than an average exporter
(Table 1, column 9).


2.2      Exporter Survival

The slow growth of new exporters documented above is, of course, conditional on their
remaining in the export market; many new exporters exit. To evaluate the persistence of
export participation, we estimate a linear probability model:

        Iitexporter = β0 + β1 Iit−1          exporter           exporter
                               starter
                                                                          exporter
(3)                                    + β2 Iit−1     + β3 1 − Iit−1      Iit−2     + εit .

The coefficients capture the probability that a producer is exporting at t if it entered the
export market at t − 1, was an incumbent exporter at t − 1, or did not export in t − 1 but
exported in t − 2. This last coefficient captures the importance of export reentry.
      In Table 2, we report the results from (3). The continuation rate for an incumbent
exporter is between 80 and 90 percent, while the continuation rate for an exporter starter is
15–25 percentage points lower. The rising exporter survival rate can be seen in Figure 1B
(Ruhl and Willis 2017), in which we plot the one-period survival rate of exporters, conditional
on their time in the export market.
      In column 3, we report that plants that last exported two years prior are 26 to 30 percent
more likely to export—thus, many new exporters are not truly new to the market. This is
an aspect of the data that is rarely incorporated into models. We show in Section 9 that
allowing for reentry greatly improves the model’s ability to account for the relative size of

                                                       9
new exporters.


2.3       Other Countries

The patterns we document in the Colombian and Chilean data are also present in data from
other countries and other periods. New exporter dynamics are documented, for example,
in Portuguese data by Bastos, Dias, and Timoshenko (2015), in Irish data by Fitzgerald,
Haller, and Yedid-Levi (2017), and in French data by Piveteau (2017).
       We will calibrate our quantitative model to data from the United States. While we
do not have access to the U.S. Census of Manufacturing, we find similar patterns for U.S.
manufacturing firms in Compustat, which is, perhaps, surprising given the selective sample
of firms listed in Compustat. This is a balanced panel, so, for comparison, we also report the
results from a balanced panel of Chilean and Colombian producers. As in the unbalanced
panels, the relative importance of export entrants increases significantly from one-year to
eight-year horizons. The starter size discounts are very similar to those in Colombia and
Chile, but the intensity dynamics are more persistent.
       Finally, in the last rows of Tables 1 and 2, we report some moments for U.S. manufac-
turing plants from other papers. Bernard, Jensen, and Lawrence (1995) report that new
exporters export half as intensively as average exporters. Bernard and Jensen (1999) show
that new exporters are smaller than incumbent exporters but grow much faster in terms of
sales at various horizons. Bernard and Jensen (2004) show that exporting is very persistent
and that having exported in the past increases the probability of exporting. They also show
that, in the U.S. data, about 50 percent of starters from 1984 to 1992 reentered the export
market after spending a year out of the market.9
   9
    Using linked firm-transaction data for the United States (1993–2003), Bernard, Jensen, Redding, and
Schott (2009) show that net entry accounts for two to five percent of trade growth annually, about 20 percent
over five-year horizons, and 24 percent over 24-year horizons. Expanding net entry to include products and
destinations increases the annual and longer-term contribution of the extensive margin.




                                                     10
3        Model
We develop a dynamic general equilibrium model that captures the life cycle of both estab-
lishments and exporters. There are two symmetric countries: home and foreign, {H, F }.
Each country is populated by a unit mass of identical, infinitely-lived consumers that inelas-
tically supply one unit of labor.10
       In each country, competitive final-goods producers purchase home and foreign differ-
entiated intermediate inputs. The final good is not traded and is used for consumption,
investment, and as a production input.11 There exists a one-period nominal bond, denom-
inated in units of the home final good, that pays one unit of the home final good in the
next period. Let Bt denote the home consumer’s holding of bonds purchased in period t, Bt∗
denote the foreign consumer’s holding of this bond, and Qt denote the nominal bond price.
The home final good is the numeraire, so Pt = 1 in every period. With symmetric economies
and symmetric policies, the foreign price level is Pt∗ = 1 and bond holdings are Bt = 0. With
asymmetric policies, the real exchange rate is qt = Pt∗ , and Bt will vary.
       Intermediate-goods producers in each country are characterized by their productivity,
fixed export cost, and iceberg trade cost. Productivity is stochastic. Iceberg costs have an
endogenous and stochastic element, while the fixed cost is exogenous. The shocks to pro-
ductivity and iceberg costs generate movements of establishments into and out of exporting;
unproductive establishments exit and new establishments enter.
       All intermediate goods producers sell to their own country, but only some export. Ex-
porting requires paying fixed and variable costs. All exporters face the same ad valorem
tariff, τ, but differ in their iceberg transportation cost, ξ ≥ 1, and fixed export costs. The
tariff is a policy variable, and the revenues collected from the tariff are rebated lump-sum to
consumers. The transportation cost is a feature of technology. Fraction ξ − 1 of an export
shipment is destroyed in transit. Fixed export costs are paid in units of domestic labor.
       We depart from the literature in allowing for three possible iceberg costs ξ ∈ {ξL , ξH , ∞}
  10
    Results with an endogenous labor supply are available. See Section 9 for more details.
  11
    Capital accumulation is included to more accurately quantify the gains from trade. In most models,
capital accumulation tends to increase the steady-state gains from a cut in trade barriers but makes the
steady-state change overstate the welfare gains. Hence, our results are even more surprising.




                                                  11
with ξL ≤ ξH < ∞ and two possible fixed export costs f ∈ {fL , fH } , fL ≤ fH .12 Fixed export
costs and the variable iceberg costs are related. Producers with an iceberg cost of ξ = ∞
are nonexporters. A nonexporter can deterministically lower its next-period iceberg cost to
ξH by paying a cost fH . An exporter with iceberg costs ξt = {ξL , ξH } can incur a cost fL to
draw its next-period iceberg cost. We assume that the transition probabilities are Markovian
and that the probability of drawing the low iceberg cost, ξL , is lower for an exporter with
a high iceberg cost than for an exporter with a low iceberg cost: ρξ (ξL |ξH ) ≤ ρξ (ξL |ξL ).
Thus, part of exporting is making an investment that may lead to a lower marginal cost of
exporting in the future. If an exporter does not pay fL , it is choosing to exit the export
market, and its next-period iceberg cost rises to ξ = ∞. To reenter, it will have to pay fH
and go through the growth process to accumulate a better ξ.
       This formulation of fixed and iceberg costs is quite general and nests the most common
approaches to modeling trade. When fL < fH , there is a sunk cost of exporting, as in Das,
Roberts, and Tybout (2007). When fL = fH and ξL = ξH , exporting is a static decision.
When fL = fH = 0 and ξL = ξH , there is no export decision, and this is a general version of
the Krugman (1980) model of monopolistic competition.
       An establishment is created by hiring fE domestic workers and begins producing in the
following period. The measure of country j ∈ {H, F } establishments with technology z,
iceberg costs ξ, and fixed costs f is ϕj,t (z, ξ, f ).13 Establishment exit (“death”) is exoge-
nous and depends on the current productivity level.14 The state variables of the economy
include the measure of establishments, ϕj,t (z, ξ, f ), from each country and the capital stock
in each country. For notational ease, economy-wide state variables are subsumed in the time
subscript.
  12
      This is the smallest departure from the standard models that allows for new exporter dynamics yet yields
rich predictions that differ from standard models.
   13
      Here, f is the fixed cost that the producer has to pay if it decides to export: f = fH if ξ = ∞ and
f = fL otherwise. Note that the producer-specific state is given by (z, ξ). However, we describe producers
with (z, ξ, f ) to explicitly denote the producer’s fixed cost.
   14
      Introducing endogenous exit from a fixed production cost is straightforward and yields similar results to
our benchmark model.




                                                      12
3.1      Consumers

Home consumers choose consumption, investment, and bonds to maximize utility subject to
the sequence of budget constraints
                                     ∞
                                     X
                    VC,0 = max E0          β t U (Ct ) ,
                                     t=0

(4)     Ct + Kt + Qt Bt ≤ Wt Lt + Rt Kt−1 + (1 − δ) Kt−1 + Bt−1 + Πt + Tt ,

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective time discount factor; Ct is final consumption; Kt−1 is the
capital available in period t; Wt and Rt denote the real wage rate and the rental rate of
capital; δ is the depreciation rate of capital; Πt is real dividends from home producers; and
Tt is the real lump-sum transfer of local tariff revenue. Investment is It = Kt − (1 − δ) Kt−1 .
      The foreign consumer’s problem is analogous. Foreign prices and allocations are denoted
with an asterisk. The foreign budget constraint is

(5) Pt∗ Ct∗ + Pt∗ Kt∗ + Qt Pt∗ Bt∗ ≤ Wt∗ Pt∗ L∗t + Rt∗ Pt∗ Kt−1
                                                            ∗
                                                                + (1 − δ) Pt∗ Kt−1
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                   + Pt∗ Bt−1
                                                                                          ∗
                                                                                              + Π∗t + Tt∗ ,

where all prices are quoted in units of the home final good.
      The first-order conditions for the consumers’ utility maximization problems are
                                ∗
                   UC,t+1      UC,t+1 Pt∗
(6)     Qt = βEt          = βEt ∗      ∗
                                          ,
                    UC,t        UC,t Pt+1
                                             ∗
                 UC,t+1                     UC,t+1 Pt∗    ∗    ∗
                                                                          
(7)      1 = βEt        (Rt+1 + 1 − δ) = βEt ∗      ∗
                                                       P t+1 Rt+1 + 1 − δ   ,
                  UC,t                       UC,t Pt+1
where UC,t denotes the derivative of the utility function with respect to its argument. Equa-
tion (6) is the no-arbitrage condition for bonds that equates the difference in expected
consumption growth across countries to the expected change in the real exchange rate.
Equation (7) is the standard Euler equation for capital accumulation in each country.




                                                       13
3.2     Final-goods Producers

Final goods are produced by combining home and foreign intermediate goods. The aggrega-
tion technology is a CES function
                                                                       θ
            X         X      Z
                                                 θ−1
                                                                        θ−1
                                   d
(8) Dt =                          yj,t (z, ξ, f ) θ ϕj,t (z, ξ, f ) dz       ,
                               z
                j∈{H,F } ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}
                                                                       

       d
where yj,t (z, ξ, f ) are inputs of intermediate goods purchased from country j’s intermediate-
goods producers. The elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods is θ > 1.
    The final-goods market is competitive. Given the price of inputs, the final-goods producer
                              d
chooses intermediate inputs, yj,t , to solve
                         X          Z
                                                        d
(9) max ΠF,t = Dt −                    PH,t (z, ξ, f ) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz
                              ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}         z
                                     X          Z
                                                                         d
                  − (1 + τ )                            PF,t (z, ξ, f ) yF,t (z, ξ, f ) ϕF,t (z, ξ, f ) dz,
                                  ξ∈{ξL ,ξH }   z


subject to the production technology in (8). Here, Pj,t (z, ξ, f ) are the home-country prices of
intermediate goods produced in country j establishments. Solving the problem in (9) yields
the input demand functions,

      d
(10) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) = [PH,t (z, ξ, f )]−θ Dt ,
      d
(11) yF,t (z, ξ, f ) = [(1 + τ ) PF,t (z, ξ, f )]−θ Dt ,

where the final-goods price is defined as

(12) Pt1−θ =
                 X           Z h                                                                                                   i
                                                          1−θ                                                 1−θ
                                   PH,t (z, ξ, f )              ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) + [(1 + τ ) PF,t (z, ξ, f )]        ϕF,t (z, ξ, f ) dz.
             ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}    z



3.3     Intermediate-goods Producers

An intermediate-goods producer is described by its technology, iceberg cost, and fixed
cost, (z, ξ, f ). It produces using capital, k, labor, l, and materials, x, according to
                                                        1−αx
(13) yt (z, ξ, f ) = ez kt (z, ξ, f )α lt (z, ξ, f )1−α       x (z, ξ, f )αx .
                       



                                                                     14
The markets that the producer serves in the current period are predetermined, so the pro-
ducer maximizes current-period gross profits by choosing prices for each market, PH,t (z, ξ, f )
     ∗
and PH,t (z, ξ, f ), labor lt (z, ξ, f ), capital kt (z, ξ, f ), and materials xt (z, ξ, f ) to solve

                                                            ∗               ∗
(14) Πt (z, ξ, f ) = max PH,t (z, ξ, f ) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) + PH,t (z, ξ, f ) yH,t (z, ξ, f )

                    − Wt lt (z, ξ, f ) − Rt kt (z, ξ, f ) − Pt xt (z, ξ, f ) ,

subject to the production technology (13), a constraint that supplies to home- and foreign-
                                    ∗
goods markets, yH,t (z, ξ, f ) and yH,t (z, ξ, f ), are feasible,

                                         ∗
(15) yt (z, ξ, f ) = yH,t (z, ξ, f ) + ξyH,t (z, ξ, f ) ,

and the constraints that supplies to home- and foreign-goods markets are equal to the de-
mands from final-goods producers from (10) and their foreign analogue,

                        d
(16) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) = yH,t (z, ξ, f ) ,
      ∗                 d∗
(17) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) = yH,t (z, ξ, f ) .

Given its downward-sloping demand curve, the monopolistic producer charges a constant
markup over marginal cost in each market,
                        θ
(18) PH,t (z, ξ, f ) =     M Ct e−z ,
                       θ−1
      ∗                 θ
(19) PH,t (z, ξ, f ) =     ξM Ct e−z ,
                       θ−1
where
                                           "        α              1−α #1−αx
                                                Rt            Wt
(20) M Ct =     αx−αx (1        −(1−αx )
                           − αx )                                                  .
                                                α            1−α

Note that when ξ = ∞, the producer is a nonexporter.
   The value of the producer with (z, ξ, f ), if it decides to export in period t + 1, is
                                       X Z
       1
(21) Vt (z, ξ, f ) = −Wt f + ns (z) Qt              Vt+1 (z 0 , ξ 0 , fL ) φ (z 0 |z) ρξ (ξ 0 |ξ) dz 0 ,
                                                ξ 0 ∈{ξL ,ξH }   z0


and the value of the producer, if it does not export in period t + 1, is
                               Z
       0
(22) Vt (z, ξ, f ) = ns (z) Qt   Vt+1 (z 0 , ∞, fH ) φ (z 0 |z) dz 0 ,
                                    z0


                                                            15
where ns (z) is the probability that the producer will survive until the next period. Note
that this probability varies with the producer’s productivity. In the calibrated model, the
survival probability is increasing in productivity, z. The value of the producer is

(23) Vt (z, ξ, f ) = Πt (z, ξ, f ) + max Vt1 (z, ξ, f ) , Vt0 (z, ξ, f ) .
                                        


Clearly, the value of a producer depends on its fixed cost, iceberg cost, and productivity.
Given that there are three possible levels of iceberg costs, there are now three possible cutoffs,
zm,t , with m ∈ {L, H, ∞}. The critical level of productivity for exporting, zm,t , satisfies

(24) Vt1 (zm,t , ξm , f ) = Vt0 (zm,t , ξm , f ) .

    It is straightforward to show that the threshold for exporting is largest for nonexporters
and smallest for exporters with the low iceberg cost (z∞,t > zH,t ≥ zL,t ).


3.4      Entry

New establishments are created by hiring fE workers in the period prior to production.
Entrants draw their productivity from the distribution φE (z 0 ). Entrants cannot export in
their first productive period. The free-entry condition is
                          Z
(25) Vt = −Wt fE + Qt Vt+1 (z 0 , ∞, fH ) φE (z 0 ) dz 0 ≤ 0.
         E
                                 z0

    The mass of entrants in period t is NE,t , while the mass of incumbents, Nt , consists of
the two types of exporters and the nonexporters,
             Z
(26) NL,t = ϕH,t (z, ξL , fL ) dz,
             Zz
(27) NH,t = ϕH,t (z, ξH , fL ) dz,
             Zz
(28) N∞,t = ϕH,t (z, ∞, fH ) dz.
                  z

    The mass of exporters equals N1,t = NL,t + NH,t ; the mass of nonexporters equals N0,t =
N∞,t ; and the mass of establishments equals Nt = N1,t + N0,t . The fixed costs of exporting
imply that only a fraction, nx,t = N1,t /Nt , of home intermediates are available in the foreign
country in period t.


                                                     16
    Given the critical level of productivity for exporters and nonexporters, zm,t , the starter
ratio (the fraction of establishments among nonexporters that start exporting) and the stop-
per ratio (the fraction of exporters among surviving establishments who stop exporting) are,
respectively,
                    R∞
              z
                   ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ∞, fH ) dz
(29) n0,t+1 = R∞,t                            ,
                 n (z) ϕH,t (z, ∞, fH ) dz
                z s
             P           R zm,t
                m∈{L,H} −∞ ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ξm , fL ) dz
(30) n1,t+1 = P            R                            .
                 m∈{L,H} z ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ξm , fL ) dz

The mass of establishments evolves according to
                         X Z zm,t
            0
(31) ϕt+1 (z , ∞, fH ) =              ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ξm , f ) φ (z 0 |z) dz + NE,t φE (z 0 ) ,
                                      m∈{L,H,∞}    −∞

                                         X                       Z    ∞
                0
(32) ϕt+1 (z , ξH , fL ) =                        ρξ (ξH |ξm )              ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ξm , f ) φ (z 0 |z) dz,
                                      m∈{L,H,∞}                      zm,t

                                         X                       Z   ∞
                0
(33) ϕt+1 (z , ξL , fL ) =                        ρξ (ξL |ξm )              ns (z) ϕH,t (z, ξm , f ) φ (z 0 |z) dz.
                                      m∈{L,H,∞}                  zm,t



3.5     Government and Aggregate Variables

The government collects tariffs and redistributes the revenue lump-sum to domestic con-
sumers. The government’s budget constraint is
             X Z
(34) Tt = τ          PF,t (z, ξ, fL ) yF,t (z, ξ, fL ) ϕF,t (z, ξ, fL ) dz.
                ξ∈{ξL ,ξH }   z


   Nominal exports and imports are, respectively,
              X Z
        N                ∗               ∗
(35) EXt =             PH,t (z, ξ, fL ) yH,t (z, ξ, fL ) ϕH,t (z, ξ, fL ) dz,
                    ξ∈{ξL ,ξH }   z
                       X          Z
(36) IMtN =                            PF,t (z, ξ, fL ) yF,t (z, ξ, fL ) ϕF,t (z, ξ, fL ) dz.
                    ξ∈{ξL ,ξH }   z


Home nominal GDP is the sum of value added from intermediate- and final-goods producers,
                                                                                                   EXtN +IMtN
YtN = Ct + It + EXtN − IMtN . The trade-to-GDP ratio is T Rt =                                        2YtN
                                                                                                              ,   and IM Dt is
the expenditure on imported goods relative to home goods,
                        P            R
               (1 + τt ) ξ∈{ξL ,ξH } z PF,t (z, ξ, fL ) yF,t (z, ξ, fL ) ϕF,t (z, ξ, fL ) dz
(37) IM Dt =       P               R                                                         ,
                      ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞} z PH,t (z, ξ, f ) yH,t (z, ξ, f ) ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz


                                                                 17
so the share of expenditures on domestic goods is
                1
(38) λt =             ,
            1 + IM Dt
and the trade elasticity is
                ln (IM Dt /IM D−1 )
(39) εt = −                               .
              ln ((1 + τt ) / (1 + τ−1 ))
   Labor used in production, rather than to pay fixed costs, LP,t , is
               X     Z
(40) LP,t =             lt (z, ξ, f ) ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz.
              ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}       z


The domestic labor hired by exporters to cover the fixed costs of exporting, LX,t , equals
              X       Z ∞                        Z ∞
(41) LX,t =        fL ϕH,t (z, ξm , fL ) dz + fH    ϕH,t (z, ∞, fH ) dz.
              m∈{L,H}             zm,t                      z∞,t


From (41), we see that the trade cost, measured in units of domestic labor, depends on
the exporter status from the previous period. Aggregate profits are the difference between
profits and fixed costs,
               X       Z
(42) Πt =                Πt (z, ξ, f )ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz − Wt LX,t − Wt fE NE,t .
            ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}     z


Even though there is free entry in the model, aggregate profits are generally positive. These
profits compensate consumers for waiting for their investment in producers to mature. With
β = 1, these profits will equal zero in steady state.


3.6     Equilibrium Definition

In an equilibrium, variables satisfy several resource constraints. The final-goods market-
clearing conditions are Dt = Ct + It + Xt , and Dt∗ = Ct∗ + It∗ + Xt∗ , where Xt is total material
inputs in production, given by
              X       Z
(43) Xt =                xt (z, ξ, f )ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz.
             ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}    z




                                                   18
Each individual goods market clears; the labor market-clearing conditions are L = LP,t +
LX,t + fE NE,t and the foreign analogue; the capital market-clearing conditions are
                 X      Z
(44) Kt−1 =                kt (z, ξ, f ) ϕH,t (z, ξ, f ) dz,
              ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}   z


and the foreign analogue. The government budget constraints are given by (34) and its
foreign analogue. The profits of each country’s establishments, Πt , are distributed to its
consumers. The international bond market-clearing condition is given by Bt + Bt∗ = 0.
    An equilibrium is a collection of allocations for home consumers Ct , Bt , and Kt ; alloca-
tions for foreign consumers Ct∗ , Bt∗ , and Kt∗ ; allocations for home final-goods producers; al-
locations for foreign final-goods producers; allocations, prices, and export decisions for home
intermediate producers; allocations, prices, and export decisions for foreign intermediate
producers; labor used for exporting costs and for entry costs by home and foreign producers;
transfers Tt , Tt∗ by home and foreign governments; real wages Wt , Wt∗ ; real rental rates of
capital Rt , Rt∗ ; and bond prices Qt that satisfy the following conditions: (i) the consumer
allocations solve the consumer’s problem; (ii) the final-goods producers’ allocations solve
their profit-maximization problems; (iii) intermediate-goods producers’ allocations, prices,
and export decisions solve their profit-maximization problems; (iv) the entry conditions hold;
(v) the market-clearing conditions hold; and (vi) the transfers satisfy the government budget
constraint.



4     Calibration
In this section, we discuss the calibration of the model. We also make clear how the nature
of entry and trade costs depends on modeling the growth in exporters’ export intensity.
We calibrate the model to match features of the U.S. economy and first describe the func-
tional forms and parameter values of our benchmark economy. The parameter values are
summarized in Table 3.
                                                    C 1−σ
    The instantaneous utility function is U (C) =   1−σ
                                                          ,   where 1/σ is the intertemporal elas-
ticity of substitution. The discount factor, β, depreciation rate, δ, and risk aversion, σ, are
standard: β = 0.96, δ = 0.10, and σ = 2.

                                               19
   The distribution of establishments is determined by the structure of shocks. To elim-
inate the role of the elasticity of substitution, θ, in establishment dispersion, we assume
                                     1
that producer productivity z =      θ−1
                                          ln a. An incumbent’s productivity has an autoregressive
                                                  iid
component (ρ < 1) of ln a0 = ρ ln a + ε, ε ∼ N (0, σε2 ). With an AR(1) shock process, the
conditional distribution is normal, φ (ln a0 | ln a) = N (ρ ln a, σε2 ) , and the unconditional dis-
                         
                    σε2
tribution is N 0, 1−ρ2 . Entrants draw productivity based on the unconditional distribution
                                    
                       iid     σε2
ln a0 = µE + εE , εE ∼ N 0, 1−ρ    2   , where µE < 0 is chosen to match the observation that
entrants are smaller than incumbents. Establishments receive an exogenous death shock
that depends on an establishment’s previous-period productivity, a; the probability of death
is nd (a) = 1 − ns (a) = max {0, min {e−γ0 a + γ1 , 1}} .
   The parameter θ determines both the producer’s markup and the elasticity of substitution
across varieties. We set θ = 5 to yield a producer markup of 25 percent. We set the tariff
rate to ten percent to include the direct measure of tariff and non-tariff barriers.
   Recall that four parameters determine the dynamics of export intensity: the two iceberg
costs {ξH , ξL } and the transition probabilities, which we denote {ρLL , ρHH }. For simplicity,
we assume that ρLL = ρHH = ρξ , so that three parameters determine the trade intensity
dynamics.
   The labor share parameter in production, α, is set to match the ratio of labor income
to GDP in the United States (66 percent). In the model, αx determines the ratio of value
added to gross output in manufacturing. In the United States, this ratio averaged 2.8 from
1987 to 1992 and implies that αx = 0.81. The entry cost, fE , is set to normalize the total
mass of establishments, N , to one in the initial steady state. The mean establishment size
is normalized to the mean establishment size in the United States in 1992.
   The ten parameters, {γ0 , γ1 , ρz , σz2 , µE , fL , fH , ξL , ξH , ρξ }, are chosen to match the follow-
ing observations:

   1. A mean export intensity of 13.3 percent (1992 U.S. Census of Manufactures, CM).

   2. An initial export intensity of half the mean export intensity (Ruhl and Willis 2017).

   3. A five-year export intensity twice the initial export intensity (Ruhl and Willis 2017).

   4. A stopper rate of 17 percent as in Bernard and Jensen (1999), based on the Annual
      Survey of Manufactures (ASM) of the Bureau of the Census, 1984–1992.

                                                   20
   5. An export participation rate of 22.3 percent (1992 CM).

   6. Five-year exit rate for entrants of 37 percent (Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson 1989).

   7. Entrants’ labor share of 1.5 percent (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh 1998).

   8. Shut-down establishments’ labor share of 2.3 percent (Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh
      1998).

   9. Establishment employment size distribution as in the 1992 CM.

   The first three targets summarize the dynamics of export intensity and determine the
technology for shipping (ξL , ξH , ρξ ). The next two targets relate exporters to the population
of establishments and largely determine the fixed costs (fL , fH ). The next three targets
help pin down the establishment creation, destruction, and growth process (ρz , σε , γ0 , γ1 , µE ):
Newborn establishments and dying establishments tend to have few employees, and newborn
establishments have high failure rates. Finally, we minimize the distance between the model’s
producer size distribution and the size distribution of U.S. establishments.


4.1    The Benchmark Model

The calibration provides an estimate of the establishment creation and exporting technolo-
gies. The cost of starting to export is relatively small, only 3.7 percent of the cost of
creating an establishment, but it is about 40-percent larger than the cost of continuing to
export (0.246 versus 0.176). The high iceberg cost, ξH , is estimated to be 63-percent larger
than the low cost, ξL (1.72 versus 1.07), and the idiosyncratic iceberg cost is persistent,
ρξ = 0.916. Most active exporters have the high iceberg cost and are investing in improving
their export ability. In the aggregate, fixed export costs account for 58.1 percent of gross
export profits.
   Based on the ergodic distribution, Figure 2A shows how the average export intensity,
measured as the ratio of export revenue to total revenue, rises with years of exporting
experience. Export intensity grows gradually beyond the five-year period being targeted.
This reflects a rising probability that a long-term exporter has accumulated the low iceberg
cost. Figure 2B shows that the probability of continuing in the export market rises over time
after the second year in the market, consistent with the Colombian data in Figure 1B. This

                                                21
reflects mainly the fact that older exporters are more likely to have become efficient exporters
and are less willing to give this up by exiting. This model outcome was not targeted and
provides independent validation of the model. These two figures are consistent with the
evidence from Ruhl and Willis (2017).
   The low export intensity and continuation probabilities suggest that export profits are
quite low initially and rise over time. Figure 2C shows how the net profits of a marginal
starter (i.e., a producer with productivity z∞ in period zero) evolve over time when it is
subject to shocks that lead it to continue exporting ( tj=1 πt > 0). In this figure, we plot
                                                      Q


                  E (πt − ft |πj > 0, j = 1, .., t)
(45) µt = 100 ∗                                     .
                                fH

In the year prior to exporting, µ0 = −100 since the producer pays fH and earns π0 = 0. This
measure of net profits to entry costs is rising with time in the market, primarily because
older exporters tend to be more efficient exporters. Given this profile of gross profits, a new
marginal exporter expects to have negative net profits over its first three years in the market,
in addition to the loss incurred in the year prior to entry. Over this period, the new exporter
is willing to take a loss in order to have the chance to become an efficient exporter in the
future. This investment is risky, as many new exporters exit right away.


4.2    The Sunk-Cost Model

Eliminating the variance in iceberg costs, ξL = ξH = ξ, yields the traditional sunk-cost
model of Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007), studied in general equilibrium in Alessandria
and Choi (2014). We report the parameter estimates from this version of the model in the
“sunk-cost” column in Table 3. We estimate the single iceberg cost, ξ, to be 1.43.
   Compared to the baseline model, in which the export entry cost is 1.4 times the continu-
ation cost, the sunk component of the entry cost is much larger in this model: The estimated
export entry cost is 3.8 times the cost of continuing to export. In the sunk-cost model, an
important reason that exporters stay in the market is to avoid paying the large upfront cost
of reentering—sunk costs generate persistent exporting. In the benchmark model, this effect
is much smaller since the gap between the startup and continuation costs is small. Rather, in

                                                   22
the benchmark model, exporters stay in the market to maintain access to the good exporting
technology, ξL , and to avoid going through the growth process again.
       To show how the timing of profits depends on the structure of trade costs, we take
the marginal new exporter from the benchmark model (Figure 2C) and subject it to the
trade cost structure estimated in the sunk-cost model. The new exporter faces the same
productivity shocks and uses the same exit rule as in the benchmark model.15 In this way,
we can see how the path of expected profits varies with exporting tenure for a particular path
of productivity and participation decisions. To make profits comparable across models, net
profits are measured relative to the export entry cost from the benchmark model. Figure 2C
shows that, with the sunk-cost export technology, the upfront investment to enter is about
twice as large, and the producer starts earning a net profit from the first period in the market.
This reflects, in part, a much higher initial export intensity and a smaller continuation cost
(about half that of our benchmark model). Over time, the profit rate does not change much.
Comparing the models, the sunk-cost model front-loads the costs and benefits from exporting
relative to the benchmark model. The rising net profits in the benchmark model make it
clear that the continuation cost in that model is primarily an investment in lowering the
future marginal cost of exporting. Figure 2D reports the cumulative profits in both models.
It takes almost seven years for the cumulative net profits in the benchmark model to exceed
the net profits in the sunk-cost specification.
       In the benchmark model with new exporter dynamics, we find the producer-level cost
of entering the export market to be relatively low but the aggregate cost of maintaining
international trade to be relatively high. In the stationary steady state, payments of fixed
export costs are 58.1 percent of total profits in the benchmark model and only 47.6 percent
in the sunk-cost model. If we recalibrate the sunk-cost model so that the aggregate share of
profits paid to fixed export costs is the same as in the benchmark model, the export entry
cost needs to be 11.1 times the continuation cost.16 We refer to this model as the sunk-cost-
high model and summarize its parameters in Table 3. In the sunk-cost-high model, exporting
  15
    Obviously, this producer would make different exit decisions in this sunk-cost environment.
  16
    The sunk-cost-high model is calibrated to match observations 5 to 9 on page 20. Additionally, the iceberg
cost and the two fixed costs are set to generate the export participation rate (22.3 percent), the ratio of
exports to GDP (9.7 percent), and the ratio of fixed export costs to export profits (58.1 percent), as in the
benchmark model.


                                                     23
becomes a very persistent activity: The exporter exit rate in the data and the benchmark
model is 17 percent; it falls to 3.95 percent in the sunk-cost-high model. We discuss the
sunk-cost-high model in more detail in Section 6.1.



5        Global Trade Liberalization
In this section, we consider the impact of a global change in tariffs on welfare and the
dynamics of trade. In particular, we assume an unanticipated worldwide elimination of the
ten-percent tariff. We focus on an unanticipated change in tariffs to clarify the aggregate
effect of tariffs in the baseline model and a range of simpler models. It is straightforward to
consider the more empirically relevant case of anticipated changes in trade policy, such as a
gradual liberalization.
       Table 4 reports the changes in welfare and trade, and Figure 3 plots the dynamics of some
key variables. Even though trade grows gradually, consumption booms during the transition,
so the welfare gain is about 15 times larger than the change in steady-state consumption (6.30
versus 0.42). Thus, the conventional view that slow trade adjustment should lower the gain
from trade liberalization does not hold in the model with endogenous export participation
and exporter growth.
       With lower tariffs, trade expands substantially, rising from 9.7 percent of manufacturing
shipments to 29.2 percent. Figure 3A shows that this expansion takes time, as the trade
elasticity grows slowly. In the first year, only the intensive margin operates, so the trade
elasticity is θ−1. With time, as more exporters enter, continue, and mature, export shipments
expand. Ten years after the policy change, the endogenous part of the trade elasticity has
increased by only 69 percent of its long-run change: Trade is quite sluggish.17
       A simple way to compare aggregate trade dynamics across models is to measure the
discounted average trade elasticity:

                     ∞
                     X
(46) ε̄t = (1 − β)          β t εt .
                      t=0

  17
    The endogenous part of the trade elasticity is the part due to entry, expansion, and exit rather than to
the static intensive margin.


                                                    24
This measure weights the early periods of trade adjustment more than the later periods and
provides a relevant measure of the speed of trade adjustment. In our model, the short-run
elasticity is four; the discounted trade elasticity is 10.15; and the long-run elasticity is 11.55.
   Slow trade elasticity growth, however, does not lead to slow growth in consumption or
output (see Figure 3B); consumption and output jump initially. Consumption has a hump
shape, peaking seven years after the policy change at 9.75 percentage points above its long-
run change of 0.42 percent. Figure 3C shows how different forms of investment change during
the transition to the new steady state. Investment in capital initially falls and then recovers
strongly as the economy uses capital to smooth out the benefits of the policy change. Capital
dynamics imply that output expands a bit more strongly than consumption. Investment in
establishment creation falls in the first few years and then recovers to a level of establishment
creation that is lower than that in the initial steady state. The stock of establishments falls
gradually to its new steady-state level.
   The desire to reduce the number of establishments following the policy change is key
to the overshooting behavior in the model since it implies that more resources are initially
available for production along the transition (see Figure 3C) and that there is a large stock of
establishments that can be converted to exporting. The decline in establishments is gradual
because the overshooting in aggregate economic activity increases profits enough to offset
the negative effect of increased trade on entry. This mechanism is similar to that discussed
by Alessandria and Choi (2014) in a model with only a sunk cost. Burstein and Melitz
(2013) also argue for overshooting in consumption, but, in their framework with no dynamic
exporting decision or capital accumulation, the overshooting arises because of a sharp drop
in entry.
   The effect of the decline in establishment creation on the aggregate dynamics of the econ-
omy can be seen most clearly in a counterfactual experiment in which the mass of entrants
does not change. For this experiment, we impose a subsidy on establishment creation, which
is financed by a lump-sum tax. We choose the subsidy so that Nt = 1 in every period.
Figure 4 plots the dynamics of the trade elasticity and consumption in this counterfactual
and in the benchmark model. With no change in establishment creation, trade expands
by less, as exporters are discouraged from entering in the face of greater local competition.


                                                25
Consumption declines slightly in the first period, owing to the investments in expanding ex-
port participation. It then grows monotonically to the new steady-state level, which is seven
percentage points above the level in the benchmark model (7.41 versus 0.42). It takes 20
years for this alternative model to reach the same level of consumption as in the benchmark
model.



6     Comparison to other Models
To evaluate the role of producer-level export dynamics in the aggregate effect of tariffs, we
consider two variations of the benchmark model. In the first variation, we eliminate the
sluggishness in producer-level export growth. This version of the sunk-cost model of Das,
Roberts, and Tybout (2007) clarifies the role of export intensity growth in the aggregate
economy. In the second variation, we examine a model without a producer-level export
decision, but the model is calibrated to generate the same aggregate export growth in the
transition and in the new steady state as in our benchmark model. This allows us to explore
whether the idea from ACR—that the welfare gain from trade will be identical across models
that generate the same trade elasticity—extends to a dynamic environment.


6.1      No Exporter Growth (Sunk-Cost Model)

The slow export growth of producers is important for the response of welfare and trade
volumes to a change in trade barriers. To show this, we set ξL = ξH = ξ so that there is
no difference in export intensity between new and old exporters—a variation of the model
studied by Alessandria and Choi (2014). It shares the qualitative features of our benchmark
model, and we recalibrate this model to match the kinds of features of the U.S. economy
that we used to calibrate the benchmark model. Table 3 summarizes the parameters, while
Table 4 summarizes the effect of abstracting from export intensity dynamics on aggregate
outcomes. Figures 5–7 plot the transition to the new steady state.
    Compared to the benchmark model, the sunk-cost model generates a smaller long-run
expansion of trade. The trade elasticity is about 63 percent of the benchmark model (7.2
versus 11.5). The transition, though, is relatively faster, as the discounted trade elasticity

                                             26
is about 68 percent of the benchmark model’s (6.9 versus 10.15). By year three, 90 percent
of trade growth has been realized, while in the benchmark model, only 54 percent of trade
growth has been realized. Compared to the benchmark model, the sunk-cost model also
generates a larger change in steady-state consumption (1.98 versus 0.42) but a smaller welfare
gain (4.75 versus 6.30).
   The benchmark model generates a larger welfare gain than the sunk-cost model because,
even though trade grows more slowly, overshooting is stronger. In terms of consumption,
the models generate similar dynamics in the first two to three years. The sunk-cost model,
however, peaks four years earlier and at a level below the benchmark model. The gap that
opens between the models closes slowly. The more-delayed and more-variable dynamics
of consumption in the benchmark model reflect the dynamics of new exporter growth. In
the benchmark model, since exporters need time to increase export efficiency, more time and
resources are initially used to increase the stock of exporters, so it takes longer to benefit from
this entry. The long-run effect on consumption in the sunk-cost model is stronger because
there is less substitution between trade and establishment creation than in our benchmark
model. Indeed, in the long run, the stock of domestic producers falls by only 4.8 percent in
the sunk-cost model versus 13.1 percent in the benchmark model.
   Relative to the benchmark model, the sunk-cost model generates a smaller gain from
trade reform because new exporters contribute too much to aggregate trade. While both
models are calibrated to have the same number of export entrants each period, new exporters
in the benchmark model face much higher iceberg trade costs. Consequently, a new exporter
in the sunk-cost model will export twice as much as the otherwise-identical new exporter in
the benchmark model.
   We can make the aggregate variables in the sunk-cost model behave more like those in the
benchmark model by increasing the export entry cost. While this may seem counterintuitive—
entry costs are already larger in the sunk-cost model—the slow expansion of new exporters
in the benchmark model implies that the export continuation costs (fL ) are a form of entry
cost as well. We report this parameterization in the column labeled “sunk-cost high” in
Table 3. We calibrate the sunk-cost-high model to match the same moments as in the sunk-
cost model, except that we can no longer target the export exit rate. In its place, we set


                                                27
the share of aggregate export profits paid to export fixed costs at 0.58, as in the benchmark
model. This implies that the sunk-cost-high model and the benchmark model dedicate the
same share of aggregate resources to trade and generate the same aggregate trade share.
   In the sunk-cost-high model, the much larger entry cost (fH /fL = 11.1) increases the
selection on productivity into exporting and decreases the export exit rate from 17 percent
to 3.95 percent. Since we have calibrated both models to match the export participation rate
in the data, the lower exit rate means that the entry rate falls. Cohorts of new exporters in
the sunk-cost-high model are smaller than in the original sunk-cost model.
   Reducing the importance of the new cohort of exporters leads the sunk-cost-high model to
behave more like the benchmark model. Trade grows more and more gradually; the number
of establishments shrinks more; and there is more overshooting than in the model with the
smaller sunk cost. Thus, our benchmark model with a small export entry cost and new
exporter dynamics yields aggregate properties that are more consistent with a traditional
sunk-cost model with a very large export entry cost. The sunk-cost-high model comes closer
to approximating our benchmark model because it requires relatively similar investments in
exporting (measured as fixed costs relative to export profits) to generate a given stream of
export revenue.
   It is evident from Table 4 that the sunk-cost-high model better approximates the bench-
mark model than the calibrated sunk-cost model does. Even so, compared to our benchmark
model, the welfare gain in the sunk-cost-high model is still lower (5.67 percent versus 6.3
percent), and the long-run change in consumption is still higher (1.65 percent versus 0.42
percent).


6.2    No Export Decision (No-Cost Model)

To further explore how the producer-level details of exporting matter for welfare, we now
consider a version of the model in which all establishments export from birth (i.e., there
are no fixed export costs, fH = fL = 0) and face the same iceberg cost (i.e., ξL = ξH ).
This is a variation of the Krugman (1980) model. Without some modification, the trade
elasticity is constant in this model. To generate the gradual increase in the trade elasticity
that we observe in the benchmark model, it is necessary to introduce an adjustment friction

                                             28
to either the final-goods aggregator or the trade cost. We introduce an adjustment cost
into the aggregation of intermediates by final-goods producers.18 Specifically, we modify the
aggregator in (8) to include a time-varying weight on imported goods, gt , such that

                 Z                                          Z                                 θ
                                                                                             θ−1
                                     θ−1                                  θ−1
(47) Dt =                d
                        yH,t   (z)    θ    ϕt (z) dz + gt          d
                                                                  yF,t (z) θ ϕ∗t   (z) dz           ,
                    z                                         z
                                    υ 1−ρg
                  ρg            λt
(48)     gt =    gt−1                                ,   g−1 = 1,
                               λt−1

where λt is the home intermediate goods’ expenditure share. With υ > 0, the term gt implies
that an increase in the import share will lower the weight on imports in the aggregator.19
This demand shifter is assumed to depend on aggregate imports and is external to the final-
goods producer. It can be interpreted as a cost of adjusting inputs. It affects only the
transition and not the steady state.
       The parameters of the final goods aggregator, υ and ρg , are set to minimize the gap
between the trade elasticity in the benchmark model and in this no-cost model,
                                           (   ∞
                                                                                       )
                                               X                               2
             υ ∗ , ρ∗g = arg min
                                                 t
(49)                                              β (εbenchmark,t − εnocost,t )              ,
                                {υ,ρg }
                                               t=0


which yields υ ∗ = 1.89 and ρ∗g = 0.25. In Figure 5, we plot the trade elasticity in the no-cost
model, as well as, in the benchmark and sunk-cost models.
       For the no-cost model to match the long-run trade elasticity in the benchmark model,
we increase the elasticity of substitution, θ, from 5 to 12.54. This lowers markups from 25
percent to about eight percent, which has the effect of changing the labor share of income,
the ratio of gross-output to value added, and the ratio of trade to value added. To maintain
the same macro targets for the ratio of trade to shipments, labor share, and materials usage,
  18
      One can think of this specification as representing the challenges that producers face in adjusting their
inputs in the short run. This adjustment cost shares some similarities with that in Engel and Wang (2011).
Alternatively, we could have generated slow trade growth by making the tariff fall gradually or allowing the
iceberg cost to depend on the change in the import share (i.e., ξt = ξe−v ln λt /λt−1 ). Both of these approaches
yield similar findings in that they reduce consumption along the transition, but the trade elasticity would
be constant in these cases.
   19
      The term gt can be thought of as a wedge that accounts for the changes in trade that cannot be
explained by relative prices. Recent work by Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar (2010) and Alessandria, Kaboski,
and Midrigan (2013) show that there are substantial cyclical fluctuations in this wedge.



                                                                     29
we must adjust α, αx , and ξ. The capital share is doubled from 14 percent to 28 percent; the
material usage is lowered from 80 percent to 70 percent; and the iceberg cost is lowered to
1.11. The parameters are reported in the column labeled “no-cost” in Table 3. The column
labeled “no-cost” in Table 4 summarizes the aggregate effects of the cut in tariffs in this
alternative model, and Figures 5–7 plot some aspects of the transition.
       The key focus is on the change in welfare. In the benchmark model, the welfare gain is
almost four percentage points larger (6.3 versus 2.3), even though the steady-state change
in consumption is about 3.5 percentage points smaller (0.42 versus 3.93). This large gap
in welfare occurs because consumption in the benchmark model overshoots the new steady
state, while in the no-cost model, consumption grows gradually. The gap in consumption
between the models is as large as 7.8 percentage points five years after the policy change. The
gradual consumption growth in the no-cost model occurs because the economy decumulates
establishments only temporarily, with much smaller magnitudes, and capital and trade grow
gradually due to the adjustment cost in the use of inputs in the production of final goods.20
This suggests that focusing on the relationship between the trade elasticity and welfare is
not sufficient to estimate the gain from trade liberalization. Instead, one must also consider
how the scale of the economy is changing.



7        Firm Creation and Trade: The Evidence
We now present some evidence supporting the substantial substitution between firm creation
and trade predicted by the benchmark model. This substitution is key to understanding the
different aggregate effects between dynamic and static trade models. When exporting is
a static decision, there is no substitution between these two margins, but, in the dynamic
models, this substitution is increasing in the gap between the short-run and the long-run
trade response. For the United States, there is ample evidence of this substitution: As the
number of manufacturing establishments per worker has fallen, trade has increased.
       In Figure 8, we plot the number of establishments per working-age person against open-
  20
    Eliminating the adjustment cost in inputs would speed up the transition and increase the welfare gain
in the no-cost model to 3.5 percent. The path of aggregate dynamics, however, would remain quite different
from that in our benchmark model.


                                                   30
ness in the data and the model. Openness is measured as the ratio of trade to gross output
from 1972 to 2015.21 Establishments are measured relative to the working-age population
(16–64) with the level normalized to one in 1980. Over this 43-year period, openness in-
creases from 7.6 percent to 31.9 percent, and the number of establishments per working-age
person falls by 40 percent. The number of establishments falls nonlinearly with openness.
The increase in trade from 7.5 percent to 22.5 percent is associated with a 12-percent de-
crease in the number of establishments, while the increase in trade from 22.5 to 32.5 percent
coincides with the remaining 17.5 percent decrease in establishments.
       The first 43 years of the transition in the benchmark model captures a similar negative
and non-linear relationship between the number of establishments and openness over the
range in which the model and data overlap. Recall that the model’s trade share increases
from about 8.8 percent to 22.6 percent.
       We also plot the same relationship in the model targeted to match new exporters’ export
share (the starter model, which we discuss in Section 9), which generates a larger increase
in trade (26 percent versus 22.6 percent in the benchmark model). This model generates a
larger drop in the number of establishments, particularly in the late stages of the transition,
as the economy converges to a higher level of integration.
       In our model, the decrease in trade barriers drives both a decline in the number of estab-
lishments and an increase in trade volumes. It seems plausible that the United States’ greater
integration into the world economy has generated the same effects. A growing literature has
studied the declining business startup rate (e.g., Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda
2014), and several potential explanations for the phenomenon have been explored. Notably,
though, this literature has not carefully considered decreasing trade costs and, thus, this is
an area that warrants further research.
  21
    Specifically, openness refers to exports of goods and services plus imports of good and services, divided
by gross output of private goods-producing industries. Imports and exports are measured inclusive of tariffs.




                                                     31
8     Sources of the Gains from Trade
Why does the benchmark model generate a welfare gain that differs from the Krugman
model, even though the trade elasticity in the two models is the same at every point in the
transition? The short answer is that the scales of the two economies differ substantially,
owing to the different incentives to invest in establishment creation.
    In the static models considered in ACR, for example, decreasing trade barriers do not
generate changes in the number of establishments created: There is no meaningful substitu-
tion between creating new establishments and creating exporters. In our benchmark model,
however, a decrease in tariffs leads to fewer establishments but many more exporters. This
is the source of the additional gains from trade. In Section 8.1, we discuss the analytic
solution to a simple version of our benchmark model. The closed-form solutions allow us
to observe the ways that exporter dynamics influence the number of firms in the economy,
consumption, and trade.
    Motivated by our analytic results, in Sections 8.2 and 8.3, we derive a decomposition of
the gains from trade that generalizes the formula in ACR, making it easy to see how the
benchmark model (and a simpler version) differs from those in the literature.


8.1     An Analytic Solution

To quantify the dynamic aggregate effects of a change in tariffs in the presence of realistic
exporter dynamics, we have eschewed the analytical approach favored in the literature for
a purely computational approach. Nonetheless, in the appendix, for a special case of our
model that eliminates capital accumulation, the input-output structure, and persistent firm
productivity dynamics, but maintains the assumption that new exporters face a relatively
high marginal trade cost ξH > ξL with symmetric transition probability, ρξ ≥ 0.5, we can
solve for the long-run impact of a change in tariffs.
    Compared to a model without exporter dynamics (ξH = ξL ), we find that in the model
with new exporter dynamics:

    1. The stock of establishments increases more with tariffs, and more so as we increase the
      discount factor and disadvantage of new exporters (ρξ or ξH /ξL ).

                                              32
   2. The trade elasticity is larger.

   3. The steady-state change in consumption is smaller for a given level of trade growth.

    Our numerical results show that the long-run decline in the stock of establishments is
key to the overshooting observed along the transition. It primarily reflects entrants strongly
discounting future foreign market access relative to increased foreign competition at home.
We show this effect arises even when there is no discounting (β = 1). In our simple model,
the steady state number of establishments equals
                                                              
                     β              1          1           S0
(50) N =                                                                 ,
                  1 − ns β          ηθ        fE        b0 − b1 S0

where the first term is related to discounting and the expected lifespan of an establishment,
the second and third terms are related to the profit share and fixed cost, and the last term
                                                                                
                                                                             1−β
is related to the new exporter’s disadvantage. In particular, b0 = 1 − θη          > 0, and
        ns β(1−β)
b1 =   (1−ns β)ηθ
                  ,   where η is the slope parameter in a Pareto productivity distribution. Note
that b1 > 0 if β ∈ (0, 1) and b1 = 0 if β = 1. S0 is a measure of the importance of new
exporters in overall expenditures. When there are no new exporter dynamics (ξH = ξL )
we find that S0 = 1, while with new exporter dynamics (ξH > ξL ) we find that S0 < 1.
The entrant’s disadvantage, S0 , is increasing in the tariff rate, so cutting tariffs reduces the
number of establishments in the long-run, but frees resources for consumption along the
transition. This effect is stronger the smaller is β.
    The trade elasticity, ε, is complicated when there are new exporter dynamics. The
elasticity is

             \
                   ΨP
                τ 1−θ ΨX
(51) ε =                   ,
                   τb               
                                  ζ0 baH
         = ηθ − 1 + (η − 1) 1 −
                                  ζ1 τb
                                    1−θ                                       
                            \ N L           ξL    ΨL                                  !
                  1−θ
                        
                ξH    ΨH  N nL             ξH    ΨH                          bL − Ψ
                                                                              Ψ     bH 
         − 1−                       +   1−θ                                         .
                                                       
                   ΨX         τ                                                  τb
                                                        
                                         ξL     ΨL
                                                     −1
                          
                             b                                                        
                                                                                       
                                                           ξH            ΨH




                                                                33
Note that when ξH = ξL , the elasticity becomes ε = ηθ − 1. Since 0 < ζ0 < 1, ζ1 > 1,
          \                         
    τ > 0, NNnLL /b
aH /b
b                 τ < 0, and ΨbL − Ψ
                                   b H /bτ ≤ 0, we have ε > ηθ − 1. Thus, the model with
new exporter dynamics has a greater trade elasticity compared to the model without them.
    Turning to steady state consumption, note that consumption is proportional to wage
growth scaled by labor income’s share of GDP,22
                       
                    W
(52) C ∝ W/                 ,
                    C

and that each of these terms can be derived analytically. From the labor market clearing
condition, labor’s share of income is

       W   b0 − b1 S0
(53)     =            ,
       C       S

where S is a measure of the tariff distortion: S > 1 for any τ > 1, and S = 1 for τ = 1
or τ → ∞ (autarky). Therefore, trade liberalization (moving from τ > 1 to τ = 1) raises
labor’s share of GDP, W/C. It also raises the entrant’s disadvantage, S0−1 , which further
increases the labor share of GDP when β < 1.
    We are also able to show that the wage is proportional to the usual domestic expenditure
share, λ, plus additional terms related to the tariff distortions, S, and the relative size of
entrants to incumbents, S0 ,

                                                                  1
                                                               η(θ−1)
                                   1
                                − θ−1        η−1         S0
(54) W ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )                  S   η(θ−1)                           .
                                                         λ

Notice that the exponent on the domestic expenditure share is not the trade elasticity. This
is because we are considering tariffs rather than trade costs. If we considered trade costs,
the exponent would be the trade elasticity. Combining (53) and (54) yields

                                                                  1
                                                               η(θ−1)
                               θ
                            − θ−1            ηθ−1        S0
(55) C ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )                  S   η(θ−1)                       .
                                                         λ
 22
    In this simple model there is no physical capital investment and trade is balanced, so expenditure-side
GDP there is only final-goods consumption.




                                                                         34
Now, given a common change in λ across models, there will be some offsetting effects on S0
in the new exporter model so that it will generate smaller long run gains.


8.2     A Model without Capital and Materials

We begin by deriving a decomposition of the gains from trade in a variation of the benchmark
model that abstracts from capital and material inputs. In the next section, we add capital
and material inputs.
   The labor market-clearing condition implies that

       P t Ct    θ
(56)          =     Wt Lp,t ,
        St      θ−1

             1+τt ζt−1
where St =    1+ζt−1
                         is the distortion from a tariff (ζt = τtθ ξtθ−1 ≤ 1). Notice that, if there is
only iceberg trade costs (as is usually considered in the literature), S = 1. The change in
consumption from a change in tariff policy is


(57) C    ct − Pbt + Sbt + L
     bt = W                bp,t ,


where a “hat” variable is the change relative to the previous steady state. Normalizing the
wage to one, the change in the price level is

           bt − N
           λ    bt − Ψ
                     b d,t
(58) Pbt =                 ,
               θ−1
              R∞
where Ψ
      bd =
               ad
                    aφt (a) da is the average ability of domestic producers (a is the elasticity-
adjusted productivity of a producer, ln a = z(θ − 1)). The price level is increasing in the
domestic expenditure share (λ) and decreasing in the number of establishments (N ) and the
average productivity of establishments (Ψd ). These effects are stronger when the markup is
larger. Combining (57) and (58) yields the change in consumption,


     bt = Nt + Ψd,t − λt + Sbt + L
          b    b      b
(59) C                           bp,t .
              θ−1

   We begin by analyzing (59) for two of the standard trade models in the literature, deriving

                                                    35
the main result in ACR. Consider a static trade model, such as the Krugman (1980) model,
without tariffs. A change in the iceberg cost, ξ, implies that L
                                                               bp = Sb = N
                                                                         b =Ψ
                                                                            b d = 0, so that


     btK = − λt = − λt ,
             b      b
(60) C
            θ−1    εK

where (θ − 1)−1 is the markup and the inverse of the trade elasticity, εK .
   Next, consider the typical presentation of the Melitz (2003) model with a fixed operating
cost and a Pareto distribution of productivity with slope η, but without tariffs. In this
                                                                                      η−1 b
model, a change in the iceberg cost, ξ, also implies that L
                                                          bp = Sb = N
                                                                    b = 0, but Ψ
                                                                               bd =
                                                                                       η
                                                                                          λ,

                          
                     η−1       bt − λ
                      η
                               λ    bt
                                                   λ
                                                   bt        λ
                                                             bt
(61)   btM
       C     =                            =−             = − M,
                       θ−1                     η (θ − 1)    ε

where the trade elasticity is now εM = η (θ − 1). When the Krugman and Melitz models are
                                                       
disciplined to have the same trade elasticity εM = εK , a change in trade costs will yield
the same gain from trade, as shown in ACR.
   In our dynamic exporting model, however, L
                                            bp , S,
                                                 b and N
                                                       b generally do change in the new

steady state. Since accumulating varieties is costly, when N
                                                           b=6 0, the transition will matter
for steady-state consumption. Along the transition, the number of establishments affects
the productivity distribution of establishments through the producer-level growth process,
so Ψ
   b d is complicated. With risk-neutral consumers, we can express the welfare gain from a

change in tariffs as


     b̄ = N + Ψd − λ + L
          b̄ b̄    b̄
(62) C                 b̄ + S,
                         p
                            b̄
            θ−1

where the bars denote the discounted average of a variable,

                               ∞
                               X
     b̄ = (1 − β)
(63) X t                             β tX
                                        bt .
                               t=0


   In Figure 9, we plot the dynamics of consumption and the contribution of each of the com-
ponents in (59) and (62), following the elimination of a ten-percent tariff in the benchmark


                                                          36
model without capital and material inputs. Table 5 reports the discounted and steady-state
change in each variable. Consumption overshoots and declines slightly in the long run. The
overshooting of consumption is a result of several competing forces. Labor used in produc-
tion and average productivity both increase temporarily. The variety effect (N ) gradually
reduces consumption, while the growth in trade (−λ) gradually boosts consumption. The
lost tariff revenue (S) reduces welfare.
      In total, the decline in steady-state consumption of 0.17 percent is attributed to a 4.09-
percent increase from trade that is offset by the reduction in varieties (–2.89 percent), labor
used in production (–0.56 percent), and tariff revenue (–0.81 percent). The average produc-
tivity of producers is unchanged across the steady states.
      Compared to the change in steady-state consumption, the welfare gain of 0.66 percent
arises because, even though trade contributes less (3.50 percent versus 4.09 percent), along
the transition, it grows faster than the stock of establishments shrinks. In addition, the labor
used in production declines less and there is an increase in average productivity.
      In Figure 9B, we plot the dynamics of utility in the simple model and the predicted change
in utility from applying the ACR formula, adjusted for the change in the tariff, to the data
generated by the model.23 We adjust for the change in the tariff because the ACR formula is
derived for a change in iceberg costs and not tariffs. The ACR formula understates the gain
over the first 16 years and then overstates the gain, as utility in the model quickly declines
below the previous steady-state level. Over the first 20 years, the ACR formula predicts an
average utility gain of 0.33 percent, and the mean absolute deviation of the predicted utility
from the model utility is 0.54 percent.


8.3       A Model with Capital and Materials

Using the benchmark model, we can construct a similar decomposition that includes physical
capital and material inputs in production. It is straightforward to show that output can be
 23
      To focus on utility, the change in consumption is scaled by the discount factor β t .




                                                        37
decomposed as

                                  \ 
                                         θ − 1
                                               
     b    V E + α K − Lp + Lp + S − αx
(64) Y = T[        b  b    b                      ,
                                           θ

where T V E is the trade-variety-efficiency effect; K is capital; α is capital’s share of value
added; and αx is the share of material inputs in gross output.
    We report this decomposition in Table 6, in which we further decompose the trade-
variety-efficiency effect into

                     −λb               N
                                       b               Ψ
                                                       bd
(65) T[
      VE =                     +                +                 .
               (θ − 1)(1 − αx ) (θ − 1)(1 − αx ) (θ − 1)(1 − αx )

The change in steady-state output (0.52 percent) is driven by an increase in the trade-
variety-efficiency effect (4.25 percent) and a decrease in production labor (–2.11 percent)
and adjusted tariff revenue (–2.27 percent). The cut in tariffs generates capital deepening,
which adds 0.65 percent to the new steady-state output level. In discounted terms, the
increase in the trade-variety-efficiency effect dominates (8.64 percent) a smaller change in
production labor (–1.08 percent) and greater capital deepening (1.31 percent). The tariff
revenue term (–2.27) is the same as the steady-state change.
    The bottom panel of Table 6 provides further detail on the trade-variety-efficiency effect.
The general patterns are similar to those in the model without capital and material inputs.
The trade-variety-efficiency effect is driven by a decrease in establishments offset by a larger
change in trade. As in the previous decomposition, changes in the average productivity of
establishments play a small role.



9     Sensitivity
In this section, we modify several features of our benchmark model and we discuss how
these modifications change (or do not change) our findings. We show that the substitution
between trade and establishments in the aggregate responses to trade liberalization is even
stronger when we modify the model to more closely match the importance of new exporters



                                              38
in the economy.


9.1       Sensitivity to New Exporter Size

Our benchmark model does a good job of accounting for the behavior of new exporters
that we observe in the data. The model has trouble, however, accounting for the relative
importance of new exporters in aggregate trade: New exporters export too much. In our
benchmark model, the average new exporter exports 65.5 percent as much as the average
exporter, compared with 25 percent in the data. Even so, the benchmark model does much
better than the sunk-cost model (138 percent) or the sunk-cost-high model (301 percent).
      We consider three modifications to the export fixed- and variable-cost setup and study
their implications for aggregate trade growth and welfare. In doing so, we further draw out
the relationship between firm creation and trade. We find that making new exporters smaller
generally leads to larger welfare gains and long-run trade elasticities.
      Since our baseline calibration closely matches other aspects of producer growth and
dynamics, we focus on changing the process for fixed and variable trade costs rather than
on reestimating the whole model. In each model extension, we target the same aggregate
export intensity, export participation, and exit rate from exporting. The first margin ensures
that any comparison of aggregate effects is appropriate. The last two margins ensure that
each model has the same share of new exporters in the steady state. We summarize the new
parameters in Table 3 and the results in Table 4.
Exporter Reentry
Our first extension allows an exporter to exit the export market and reenter at a later date by
paying a smaller fixed entry cost. Specifically, we allow an exporter the option to take a one-
period break from the export market and return the following period by paying fR < fH .24
Consistent with the data (Table 2), recent exporters in the model are now more likely to
export than a firm that last exported three periods ago. We set fR /fL = 2/3. This increases
the option value in export entry, so, to make this model match the aggregate export data, we
must increase the cost of exporting for first-time exporters. We find that 100 × fH /fE = 5.9,
compared with 3.8 in the benchmark.
 24
      We present the modified model in the appendix.

                                                   39
   In the reentry model, the average exports of new exporters relative to incumbent ex-
porters is 63.2 percent—adding reentry does not shrink the aggregate importance of new ex-
porters. Reentry allows for smaller reentrants, but the larger initial entry cost creates more
selection and requires larger (more productive) initial entrants. In our parameterization,
these two forces roughly cancel each other out. Adding reentry makes establishments and
exporters greater substitutes, and the model’s long-run trade elasticity from a ten-percent
tariff reduction rises from 11.55 to 12.2 (Table 4). The number of establishments falls by 14.4
percent, compared with 13.1 percent in the benchmark model, and long-run consumption
increases by 0.70 percent, compared with 0.42 percent in the benchmark model. The welfare
gain rises to 6.93 percent.
Search
In our second extension, we make the variable trade cost upon export entry stochastic. In
the benchmark model, a new exporter always faced ξ = ξH . We now assume that, with
probability η, the variable trade cost is ξ = ξH , and with probability 1 − η, the variable trade
cost is ξ = ∞. We interpret this setup as a simple model of searching for, and sometimes
failing to find, an export market.
   We set η = 0.33. To keep the exit decision unaffected, we assume that fR = fH /η. To
maintain the same aggregate export intensity, we scale down the variable trade costs. We find
that the average exports per new exporter are 53.2 percent of those of the average incumbent
exporter, compared with 25 percent in the data and 65.5 percent in the benchmark model. It
is possible to further reduce the probability of a match (η), which will reduce the importance
of new exporters, but doing so makes it difficult for the model’s size distributions to match
those in the data. Establishments and exporters are also better substitutes in this model.
The trade elasticity rises to 12.8 and the number of establishments falls by 15.8 percent.
Long-run consumption, however, grows by less than it does in the benchmark, rising by only
0.21 percent, but welfare increases by more, 7.00 percent.
New Exporter Intensity
Our last extension is an alternative calibration in which we directly target the exports of
new exporters. We choose the gap between the high and low export costs so that the average
exports per new exporter are 25.0 percent of the average incumbent exporter’s, as in the


                                               40
data.25 This requires increasing the high variable trade cost to ξH = 2.2 and decreasing
the low variable trade cost ξL = 1.0. This version of the model makes establishments and
exporters the most substitutable. The trade elasticity now rises to 13.7 and the number of
establishments falls by 17.7 percent. Long-run consumption rises 0.11 percent, but welfare
rises the most, by 7.28 percent.


9.2       Sensitivity to Preference Parameters

Compared to static models, our dynamic model of the exporter life cycle generates non-trivial
transitions and different long-run effects from trade reforms. In this section, we consider two
other factors that influence post-liberalization transitions and the gains from trade: the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution and the interest rate.
       The intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1/σ, determines how agents value fluctua-
tions in consumption over time. We have set this to 1/σ = 1/2, but there is much disagree-
ment about its value. When we raise this elasticity to 1/σ = 1, we make consumption more
volatile and the interest rate less volatile (Figure 11). Changing the intertemporal elasticity
has no impact on the long-run effect of a change in tariffs but leads to a faster transition.
This has almost no impact on the trade elasticity, but leads to a faster reduction in estab-
lishments and more overshooting in consumption and capital. The faster transition arises
because fluctuations in consumption are less costly than in our benchmark case.
       Next, we vary the real interest rate (r = 1/β) by considering two alternative values for
β = 0.95, 0.98. To keep the capital-output ratio constant, we maintain the same capital
share parameter, α, and adjust the capital depreciation rate by the change in the discount
factor.26 The export response, measured by the trade elasticity, is again largely unaffected by
changing the interest rate. Raising the interest rate, however, leads firms to discount profits
faster so that the benefits of a cut in tariffs are discounted more for new firms. This leads
to a larger drop in firm entry in the new steady state. This large drop in entry makes the
long-run change in consumption negative, with consumption falling 0.6 percent. The larger
  25
     An alternate approach is to make the low variable trade cost an absorbing state, which generates similar
results.
  26                                             α
     In the neoclassical growth model K/Y = (1−β)+δ   . In our model, the profit share is affected by discount-
ing, too.


                                                      41
discount factor implies that the welfare gain is less than in our benchmark (6.1 percent versus
6.3 percent). Lowering the interest rate increases the benefits in the long-run: steady state
consumption now rises by 3.2 percent. It also yields larger consumption growth in the early
transition, with consumption growth peaking at 12 percent in year seven compared with
10.5 percent in the benchmark model. The 6.8 percent increase in welfare, however, is not
much larger than that in our benchmark model. The small difference in welfare across these
alternative calibrations with vastly different long-run effects makes clear that understanding
the early periods of reforms—rather than the long-run effects—is much more important for
judging the benefits of reform.27


9.3     Further Sensitivity

Our findings are robust to introducing a per-period operating cost as found in traditional
firm-dynamics models in Hopenhayn (1992) or Melitz (2003). With a fixed operating cost,
the extra substitution between active and inactive firms actually increases the incentive to
create a plant and, thus, the firm creation rate falls even more than in our benchmark
model. Finally, our findings are also robust to introducing an endogenous labor supply
decision. With endogenous labor supply, the long-run effects of trade liberalization will
depend on whether income or substitution effects dominate and how the lost tariff revenue
is replaced. For standard balanced-growth preferences and lump sum taxes, we continue to
find substantial overshooting.



10      Unilateral Trade Liberalization
We next consider the effect of an unanticipated unilateral cut in the home tariff. The model is
well-suited to this experiment since it allows for international borrowing and lending, capital
accumulation, and different short-run and long-run trade elasticities. As in the global tariff
reduction, the steady-state change in consumption does not yield a good approximation
  27
     It may seem odd that the low interest rate economy generates a welfare gain similar to that in our
benchmark economy even though there is more overshooting and substantially larger long-run consumption
growth. Recall, however, that periods are not valued equally when we change β, so the overshooting period
is a much smaller share of lifetime utility when β is high.


                                                   42
of the welfare gain. In particular, for the reforming country, the steady-state change in
consumption predicts a sizeable loss, even though welfare actually increases.
   In Figure 12, we plot the dynamics of some key variables, and Table 7 reports the
welfare gain and change in steady-state consumption. We solve the model under three
alternative financial market assumptions: trade in a non-contingent bond, financial autarky,
and complete markets. The latter two cases illustrate the role of financial markets and the
effects of the wealth transfer from the loss of tariff revenue. We also include the results for
the no-cost model with a non-contingent bond to clarify how the structure of trade costs
and the source of slow trade adjustment influence the welfare gain from liberalization and
the pattern of international borrowing and lending.
   When countries trade only a non-contingent bond, the home country’s welfare rises by
0.51 percent and the foreign country’s rises by 5.7 percent. Home steady-state consumption
falls by 2.43 percent and foreign steady-state consumption rises by 2.82 percent. As in the
global reform, there is substantial overshooting of consumption, so the change in steady-state
consumption does not provide a good approximation of the welfare gain. This overshooting
arises, in large part, from a strong reduction in the investment in new establishments. In
the new steady state, the number of home establishments falls by 6.5 percent and foreign
establishments falls by 5.91 percent. The strong decline in establishments in both countries
arises because, as the thresholds for exporting decline substantially in both countries, local
producers face more competition from importers.
   In Figure 12, we can see that, along the transition, the home country runs a trade surplus
in the first 11 years following the liberalization. The surplus peaks in year two at 0.72 percent
of GDP. The home country accumulates net external assets equal to 6.9 percent of GDP.
Its real exchange rate depreciates by 5.4 percent initially and then appreciates slightly for a
total depreciation of 4.5 percent. This depreciation, and the large increase in foreign income,
leads to a stronger expansion of exporting among the home producers.
   In the model without trade in financial assets, the home country’s welfare increases
a bit more than in the bond economy (0.55 versus 0.51), and the foreign country’s welfare
increases a bit less (5.66 versus 5.70). While there is a minor effect on welfare, the differences
in steady-state consumption growth are larger, as home steady-state consumption now drops


                                               43
more (–2.85 versus –2.43) and foreign consumption rises more (3.22 versus 2.82). These long-
run differences largely reflect the accumulation of assets by the home country in the bond
economy.
   When we model countries that trade a complete set of contingent claims, the wealth
effect from the loss in tariff revenue is eliminated. In contrast to the bond economy and
financial autarky, the home country is now the main beneficiary of the reform, as its welfare
increases by 4.34 percent, while the foreign country’s welfare increases by only 1.91 percent
(Table 7). The trade balance is also significantly different with complete markets. The home
country runs a trade deficit of 2.3 percent of GDP in year one, which gradually expands to
2.8 percent of GDP in the steady state.
   Lastly, we consider unilateral tariff reform in the no-cost model with slow trade adjust-
ment, from Section 6.2. As with the global reform, we find that welfare and consumption
paths in the no-cost model are quite different from those in the benchmark model. Most
striking is the implication for welfare: In the no-cost one-bond model, home country welfare
decreases by 0.62 percent, compared to the 0.51 percent increase in the benchmark one-bond
model (Table 7). In the steady state, home consumption falls only 0.06 percent, compared
to a decline of 2.43 percent in the benchmark model. The last panel of Figure 12 shows
that borrowing and lending are qualitatively similar to the benchmark model, in that the
home country initially runs trade surpluses, but the fluctuations in the trade balance are
muted. The home country accumulates assets of 6.9 percent of GDP in the benchmark
model, compared to 2.6 percent in the no-cost model. Without slow trade adjustment, net
foreign assets would remain equal to zero. Thus, the source of gradual trade adjustment
matters in determining the pattern of international borrowing.



11     Conclusions
What conclusions emerge from our analysis?
   First, the relationship between trade and the benefits of trade, measured by welfare,
depends strongly on how exporting substitutes for firm creation. Somewhat paradoxically,
this substitution and, hence, the welfare gain, is stronger when marginal exporters are less


                                             44
important. When marginal exporters are small, more investment is undertaken in increasing
the exports of incumbent exporters, unlike in the canonical sunk-cost model. For the United
States, we find evidence that this substitution is even stronger than predicted by our model.
   Second, the long-run effects of a change in trade policy depend on the dynamic incentives
to export. They cannot be recovered from a static trade model or from the formula proposed
by ACR. Moreover, because aggregate trade grows slowly, these long-run effects are strongly
discounted and, thus, are not the key determinants of the welfare gains from a change in
trade policy.
   Third, the latter stages of trade integration, as trade converges to its new steady state,
can be characterized by falling incomes. Whether this has contributed to the trade backlash
and slow growth in the post Great Recession (and Great Trade Liberalization) world remains
an open question. Indeed, it would be useful to apply our theory to understand the impact
of the massive trade liberalization that has expanded U.S. manufacturing openness from
seven percent to 35 percent over the last 40 years. There are, of course, challenges to this
approach—in particular, specifying the timing of and expectations regarding changes in trade
policy, a challenge that does not arise in static trade models (Alessandria and Mix 2017).
   Our theoretical and empirical analysis suggests several challenges to the existing empirical
approach and directions for future research.
   First, the non-linear, and non-monotonic, relationship between trade and growth suggests
revisiting empirical work on the effects of trade and growth. Second, given that the benefits of
trade are front-loaded, while trade is back-loaded, it would be useful to consider how different
generations gain or lose from reform, as well as the incentives to initiate and maintain these
trade reforms. Third, our analysis suggests that a better understanding of the substitution
between firm creation and export capacity is paramount. To highlight this mechanism, we
have assumed a simple process by which firms become better exporters. Continuing to
integrate recent work on the growth patterns of exporters into general equilibrium models
may yield further insights. Fourth, our quantitative theory can be used to formulate and
evaluate alternative formulas to approximate the gains from policy reform in a world with
different short-run and long-run trade elasticities. It can also be used to clarify how forward-
looking variables, such as asset prices, can be useful in identifying the impact of changes in


                                               45
trade policy. Preliminary work along these lines is promising (Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl
2018).


References
Alessandria, G., and H. Choi (2007): “Do sunk costs of exporting matter for net export
 dynamics?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289–336.

          (2014): “Establishment heterogeneity, exporter dynamics, and the effects of trade
  liberalization,” Journal of International Economics, 94(2), 207–223.

Alessandria, G., H. Choi, and K. J. Ruhl (2018): “New trade models: New dynamic
 gains,” Mimeo.

Alessandria, G., J. Kaboski, and V. Midrigan (2013): “Trade wedges, inventories,
 and international business cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(1), 1–20.

Alessandria, G., and C. Mix (2017): “The global trade slowdown: Trade and growth,
 cause and effect,” Mimeo.

Alessandria, G., S. Pratap, and V. Yue (2013): “Export dynamics in large devalua-
 tions,” Mimeo.

Alvarez, F., F. Buera, and R. E. Lucas (2013): “Idea flows, economic growth, and
 trade,” NBER Working Paper 19667.

Alvarez, F., and R. E. Lucas (2007): “General equilibrium analysis of the Eaton–
 Kortum model of international trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726–1768.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2012): “New trade models,
 same old gains?,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.

Atkeson, A., and A. Burstein (2010): “Innovation, firm dynamics, and international
 trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 433–484.

Baier, S. L., and J. H. Bergstrand (2007): “Do free trade agreements actually increase
 members’ international trade?,” Journal of International Economics, 71(1), 72–95.

Baier, S. L., J. H. Bergstrand, and M. Fang (2014): “Economic integration agree-
 ments and the margins of international trade,” Journal of International Economics, 93(2),
 339–350.

Bastos, P., D. A. Dias, and O. Timoshenko (2015): “Learning, prices, and firm
 dynamics,” Mimeo.

Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (1999): “Exceptional exporter performance: Cause,
 effect, or both?,” Journal of International of Economics, 47(1), 1–25.


                                            46
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (2004): “Why some firms export,” Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 86(2), 561–569.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and R. Z. Lawrence (1995): “Exporters, jobs, and
 wages in U.S. manufacturing: 1976–1987,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Mi-
 croeconomics, 1995, 67–119.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2009): “The
 margins of U.S. trade (long version),” NBER Working Paper 14662.

Burstein, A., and M. J. Melitz (2013): “Trade liberalization and firm dynamics,” in
 Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress, ed. by D. Acemoglu,
 M. Arellano, and E. Dekel, pp. 283–328. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Caliendo, L., and F. Parro (2015): “Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of
 NAFTA,” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1–44.

Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007): “Market entry costs, producer
 heterogeneity, and export dynamics,” Econometrica, 75(3), 837–873.

Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, and S. Schuh (1998): Job Creation and Destruction.
 MIT Press Books, Cambridge.

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): “The role of
 entrepreneurship in U.S. job creation and economic dynamism,” Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 28(3), 3–24.

Drozd, L. A., and J. B. Nosal (2012): “Understanding international prices: customers
 as capital,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 364–395.

Dunne, T., M. J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989): “The growth and failure of U.S.
 manufacturing plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104(4), 671–698.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, geography, and trade,” Econometrica,
 70(5), 1741–1779.

Edmonds, C., V. Midrigan, and D. Xu (2015): “Competition, markups, and the gains
 from international trade,” American Economic Review, 105(10), 3183–3221.

Engel, C., and J. Wang (2011): “International trade in durable goods: understanding
 volatility, cyclicality, and elasticities,” Journal of International Economics, 83(1), 37–52.

Fitzgerald, D., S. Haller, and Y. Yedid-Levi (2017): “How exporters grow,” Mimeo.

Gallaway, M. P., C. A. McDaniel, and S. A. Rivera (2003): “Short-run and long-
 run industry-level estimates of U.S. Armington elasticities,” North American Journal of
 Economics and Finance, 14(1), 49–68.

Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): “International trade and macroeconomic dynamics
 with heterogeneous firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865–915.

                                             47
Head, K., T. Mayer, and M. Thoenig (2014): “Welfare and trade without Pareto,”
 American Economic Review, 104(5), 310–16.

Hooper, P., K. Johnson, and J. Marquez (2000): “Trade elasticities for the G-7
 countries,” Princeton Studies in International Economics, 87.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium,”
 Econometrica, 60(5), 1127–1150.

Kohn, D., F. Leibovici, and M. Szkup (2015): “Financial frictions and new exporter
 dynamics,” International Economic Review, 57(2), 453–486.

Krugman, P. (1980): “Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade,”
 American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–959.

Levchenko, A. A., L. T. Lewis, and L. L. Tesar (2010): “The collapse of international
  trade during the 2008–2009 crisis: In search of the smoking gun,” IMF Economic Review,
  58(2), 214–53.

Melitz, M., and S. Redding (2015): “New trade models, new welfare implications,”
 American Economic Review, 105(3), 1105–1146.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

Melitz, M. J., and G. I. Ottaviano (2008): “Market size, trade, and productivity,”
 Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 295–316.

Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2007): “The unsustainable U.S. current account position
 revisited,” in G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, ed. by R. H.
 Clarida, pp. 339–375. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ossa, R. (2014): “Trade wars and trade talks with data,” American Economic Review,
 104(12), 4104–4146.

Piveteau, P. (2017): “An empirical dynamic model of trade with consumer accumulation,”
  Mimeo.

Ramanarayanan, A. (2007): “International trade dynamics with intermediate inputs,”
 Mimeo.

Ravikumar, B., A. M. Santacreu, and M. Sposi (2018): “Capital accumulation and
 dynamic gains from trade,” Mimeo.

Rho, Y., and J. Rodrigue (2016): “Firm-level investment and export dynamics,” Inter-
 national Economic Review, 57(1), 62–85.

Ruhl, K. J. (2008): “The international elasticity puzzle,” Mimeo.



                                           48
Ruhl, K. J., and J. L. Willis (2017): “New exporter dynamics,” International Economic
 Review, 58(3), 703–726.

Simonovska, I., and M. E. Waugh (2014): “Trade models, trade elasticities, and the
  gains from trade,” NBER Working Paper 20495.




                                         49
     12     Tables

                                                  Table 1: New Exporter Importance and Growth

                                           Participation        Export Share         Starter Size Discount          Intensity Dynamics
                                         8-year     1-year    8-year     1-year        Sales       Intensity      ρexs     T     ed
                                                                                                                                  xs20 /exs
                                           (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)     (8)       (9)
                       Chile (98–06) 56.7            11.8      39.2        3.5         0.53           0.45        0.88    11         1.19
                   Colombia (81–89) 57.2             17.6      38.4        4.2         0.41           0.46        0.94    11         1.33

           Balanced Panels
                     Chile (98–06)        27.4       11.8       9.2        4.4         0.49           0.59        0.88     9         1.25
                 Colombia (81–89)         34.7       13.8      14.5        3.1         0.43           0.48        0.93     9         1.46
           U.S. Compustat (84–92)         28.2        4.1      11.0        1.1         0.54           0.51        1.00    16         1.16
50




             United States (84–92)        42.0       14.0                           0.40–0.55         0.55
          Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the fraction of exporting producers that entered during either the eight-year sample period or in an
          average year. Columns 3 and 4 report the share of total exports accounted for by producers that entered during either the eight-year
          sample period or in an average year. Columns 5 and 6 report the average sales of a new exporter relative to the average sales of
          incumbent exporters. Column 7 reports the export-intensity autocorrelation from (1). T , in column 8, is the number of years an
          average exporter needs stay in the market to reach the average export intensity in the sample.
             Table 2: Export Survival Probability

                          Incumbent   Starter   Re-entrant
                              (1)       (2)        (3)
          Chile (98–06)     0.81       0.65         0.26
      Colombia (81–89)      0.90       0.66         0.30

Balanced Panels
          Chile (98–06)     0.83       0.66         0.29
      Colombia (81–89)      0.90       0.68         0.35
U.S. Compustat (84–92)      0.93       0.83         0.03
  United States (84–92)     0.66                    0.27




                               51
                               Table 3: Model Parameters

Common Parameters
                               β        σ            δ      τ
                              0.96     2.0         0.10    0.10
Model-specific Parameters
                             Bench-   Sunk     Sunk-cost    No     Reentry   Search   Starters
                              mark    Cost       High      Cost
            θ                 5.0      5.0          5.0    12.54      5.0     5.0       5.0
            α                0.132    0.132        0.132   0.276    0.132    0.132     0.132
           αx                0.810    0.810        0.810   0.704    0.810    0.810     0.810
           γ0                21.04    21.04        21.04   21.04    21.04    21.04     21.04
        100 × γ1              2.26     2.26         2.26   2.26      2.26     2.26      2.26
           ρz                0.654    0.654        0.654   0.654    0.654    0.654     0.654
           σε                 1.32     1.32         1.32   1.32      1.32     1.32      1.32
           µE                –1.34    –1.34        –1.34   –1.34    –1.34    –1.34     –1.34
          θfE                 32.7     33.2         32.7   34.7      32.6     30.7      32.5
      100 × fH /fE            3.76     5.79         18.3    0.0       5.9     1.12      2.76
         fH /fL               1.40     3.81         11.1     —       2.29     0.38     0.89
           ξH                 1.72     1.43         1.34   1.11      1.71     1.67      2.20
           ξL                 1.07     1.43         1.34   1.11      1.06     1.04      1.00
           ρξ                0.916     1.00         1.00    1.00    0.916    0.916     0.916
            η                 1.0      1.0          1.0     1.0       1.0    0.333      1.0
         fR /fL               1.40     3.81         11.1     —      0.667     1.14      0.89

Overall Fit (RMSE): Size distributions
Estab. + Empl.              0.70     0.70          0.78    1.29     0.70      0.70     0.70
Export                      14.6     15.7          3.8     49.6     11.9       4.5     14.4

Fixed Trade Costs Relative to
Plant Creation Cost          10.8     8.7          10.8     0.0     12.2      11.1     11.5
Export Profits               58.1     47.6         58.1     0.0     71.5      65.1     68.7

Selected Moments (Data)
Exit rate (17.0)              17.0    17.0          3.90    —       17.0      17.0     17.0
Starter ratio (25.1)          65.5    138.0        301.0    —       63.2      52.7     25.0
Starter export share (4.9)    12.8    19.2          23.1    —       12.4       9.7      4.9
5-yr incumbent share          49.0    30.0         43.0     —       52.7      52.9     58.7



                                              52
                           Table 4: Effect of Eliminating a ten-percent Tariff

                           Bench     Sunk-        Sunk-cost         No-          Reentry         Search      Starters
                                      cost          High            cost
 Change in
 Welfare            6.35              4.75          5.67            2.34           6.93           7.00        7.28
 SS Consumption     0.42              1.98          1.65            3.93           0.70          0.21         0.11
 SS Establishments –13.1              –4.80         –7.20            0.0          –14.4          –15.8        –17.7
 Trade elasticity
 Discounted                10.15      6.90          8.68            10.15         10.75          10.96        11.87
 Steady state              11.55      7.19          9.44            11.55         12.23          12.77         13.7
                                                       P∞                   P∞
Notes: Welfare change is a value of x that satisfies t=0 β t U (C−1 ex ) = t=0 β t U (Ct ), where C−1 is the
                                                                                              P∞
consumption level in the initial steady state. The discounted trade elasticity is ε̄ = (1 − β) t=0 β t εt , where
εt is the trade elasticity based on the difference in trade between period t and the initial steady state. The
long-run trade elasticity is limt→∞ εt .



          Table 5: Consumption Decomposition after Eliminating a 10-percent Tariff

                                    N                Ψd                 −λ
                     C
                     b              d
                                     θ−1
                                                     d
                                                     θ−1
                                                                        d
                                                                           θ−1
                                                                                             L
                                                                                             cp                   Sb
 Discounted        0.66             –2.13            0.19               3.50                –0.09               –0.81
 Steady-state      –0.17            –2.89              0                4.09                –0.56               –0.81
                                                                                            P∞
Notes: The discounted change in a variable is the difference between x̄ = (1 − β)            t=0   β t xt and the initial
steady state.



             Table 6: Output Decomposition after Eliminating a 10-percent Tariff

                                                                                                            \
                     (C)
                      b        Yb          T[
                                            VE           b − L)
                                                       α(K   b                        L
                                                                                      cp                  S − αx (θ−1)
                                                                                                                  θ

 Discounted   (6.35) 6.59                  8.64              1.31                   –1.08                    –2.27
 Steady-state (0.42) 0.52                  4.25              0.65                   –2.11                    –2.27

 Decomposing the trade variety effect
                                                             N                        Ψ                       −λ
                                           T[
                                            VE
                                                             b                         bd                       b
                                                        (θ−1)(1−αx )              (θ−1)(1−αx )            (θ−1)(1−αx )

 Discounted                                8.64             –10.40                   0.92                    18.12
 Steady-state                              4.25             –17.26                   0.00                    21.51
                                                                                            P∞
Notes: The discounted change in a variable is the difference between x̄ = (1 − β)            t=0   β t xt and the initial
steady state.



                                                       53
       Table 7: Effect of Unilaterally Eliminating a 10-percent Tariff

                                             Benchmark                            No-cost
 Change                      Bond        Fin. Autarky           Complete           Bond
 Welfare
   Home                       0.51             0.55                 4.34            –0.62
   Foreign                    5.70             5.66                 1.91             4.92
 SS Consumption
   Home                      –2.43             –2.85                1.45            –0.06
   Foreign                   2.82              3.22                –1.00            5.49
 SS Establishments
   Home                      –6.60             –6.70               –6.10             0.0
   Foreign                   –5.9              –5.9                –6.40             0.0
                                                       P∞                     P∞
Notes: Welfare gain is a value of x that satisfies t=0 β t U (C−1 ex ) = t=0 β t U (Ct ),
where C−1 is the consumption level in the initial steady state. The discounted trade
                        P∞
elasticity is ε̄ = (1−β) t=0 β t εt , where εt is the trade elasticity based on the difference
in trade between period t and the initial steady state. The long-run trade elasticity is
limt→∞ εt .




                                             54
13   Figures

                            Figure 1: New exporter dynamics in Colombia

                                             A. Trade Intensity
                   15




                   10
         Percent




                   5


                                                                          Mean by age
                                                                          Overall mean
                   0
                        0        1           2               3       4                   5
                                            Years of exporting


                                             B. Survival Rates
               100


                   90


                   80
     Percent




                   70


                   60
                                                                          Mean by age
                                                                          Overall mean
                   50
                        0        1           2               3       4                   5
                                            Years of exporting




                                                 55
                         Figure 2: New exporter dynamics in stationary steady state

                                   A. Export Intensity                                           B. Survival Rate (Annual)
               20                                                                      100



                                                                                       95
               15


                                                                                       90
     Percent




                                                                             Percent
               10

                                                                                       85


                5
                                                                                       80
                                                   Mean by age                                                        Mean by age
                                                   Overall                                                            Overall
                0                                                                      75
                           5              10         15          20                              5           10         15          20
                               Years of exporting                                                    Years of exporting




                         C. Marginal Starter Net Profits                                         D. Cumulative Net Profits
          100                                                                          500


                                                                                       400
               50

                                                                                       300
                0

                                                                                       200
Percent




                                                                           Percent




               -50
                                                                                       100

          -100
                                                                                        0

          -150
                                                    Benchmark                        -100                              Benchmark
                                                    Sunk                                                               Sunk
          -200                                                                       -200
                     0         5           10        15          20                          0   2       4        6          8      10
                               Years of exporting                                                    Years of exporting




                                                                      56
                         Figure 3: Elimination of 10-percent tariff in benchmark model

                                                        A. Trade Elasticity
               15



               10
  Elasticity




                5



                0
                     0             5                  10                  15                   20             25


                                       B. Consumption, Wage, Output, and Production Labor
               15
                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                         W
               10                                                                                        Y
  Change (%)




                                                                                                         Lp

                5


                0


                -5
                     0     5      10        15        20         25       30       35          40   45        50


                                       C. Investment (I), Entry (Ne), and Establishments (N)
               40
                                                                                                         Ne
                                                                                                         N
               20                                                                                        I
Change (%)




                0


               -20


               -40
                     0     5      10        15        20         25       30       35          40   45        50




                                                            57
                      Figure 4: Effect of entry adjustment on trade and consumption

                                              A. Trade Elasticity
             12


             10


             8
Elasticity




             6


             4


             2                                                                  Benchmark
                                                                                Fixed Entry
             0
                  0      5     10      15     20     25       30    35     40      45         50
                                                    Year



                                               B. Consumption
             12

             10

             8
Change (%)




             6

             4

             2

             0

                  0      5     10      15     20        25    30    35     40      45         50




                                                   58
                      Figure 5: Trade elasticity, several models

             12




             10




             8
Elasticity




             6




             4




             2
                                                                        Benchmark
                                                                        Sunk
                                                                        No Cost
             0
                  0   5             10             15              20               25




                                         59
                      Figure 6: Comparing consumption, wage, and output dynamics

                                                  A. Consumption
             12
                                                                                  Benchmark
             10
                                                                                  Sunk
             8                                                                    No Cost
Change (%)




             6

             4

             2

             0

                  0     5      10     15     20           25       30   35   40    45         50


                                                     B. Wage
             15
Change (%)




             10



             5



             0
                  0     5      10     15     20           25       30   35   40    45         50


                                                    C. Output
             15


             10
Change (%)




             5


             0


             -5
                  0     5      10     15     20           25       30   35   40    45         50




                                                     60
                         Figure 7: Comparing investment, entry, and labor dynamics

                                                    A. Investment
               50
Change (%)




                0




               -50
                     0    5      10     15     20          25       30   35   40     45        50


                                                      B. Entry
               10

                5

                0
Change (%)




                -5

               -10

               -15

               -20

               -25
                     0    5      10     15     20          25       30   35   40     45        50


                                               C. Labor in Production
               10
                                                                                   Benchmark
                                                                                   Sunk
                                                                                   No Cost
  Change (%)




                5



                0



                -5
                     0    5      10     15     20          25       30   35   40     45        50




                                                      61
                                                       Figure 8: Establishment creation and trade

                                        1.00

                                        0.95
Establishments per working-age person




                                        0.90


                                        0.85


                                        0.80


                                        0.75


                                        0.70



                                        0.65
                                               Data
                                               Benchmark
                                        0.60   Starter

                                                       0.10                0.15          0.20       0.25   0.30
                                                                          Trade share




                                                                          62
                          Figure 9: Decomposition in simple model

                                   A. Consumption Decomposition
                 4
                                                                           Consumption
                                                                           Variety
                 3                                                         Avg Productivity
                                                                           Trade
                 2                                                         Labor
                                                                           Tariff Revenue
    Change (%)




                 1

                 0

                 -1

                 -2

                 -3

                 -4
                      0   10           20                        30   40                      50




                                            B. Utility ( t c )
                                                            t



             1.5




             1.0
Change (%)




             0.5




             0.0



                      0   10           20                        30   40                      50




                                               63
                              Figure 10: Decomposition in the benchmark model

                                                     A. Output Decomposition
               12
                                                                                  Y
               10                                                                 Trade-Variety-Efficiency
                                                                                  Labor
                                                                                    (K/Lp)
                8                                                                 Tariff (S)


                6
  Change (%)




                4


                2


                0


                -2


                -4
                     0              10                20                 30          40                      50




                                                    B. Trade-Variety-Efficiency
               25


               20


               15


               10
Change (%)




                5


                0


                -5
                         N
                         Productivity
               -10
                         Lambda
                         Trade-Variety-Efficiency
               -15
                     0              10                20                 30          40                      50




                                                             64
                         Figure 11: Sensitivity to interest rate and intertemporal elasticity

                                                     A. Consumption (C)
               15                                                                   Benchmark
                                                                                    Log preferences
  Change (%)




               10                                                                   5 % interest rate
                                                                                    2 % interest rate

                5


                0

                     0                              20                              40

                                                         B. Capital (K)

               15
  Change (%)




               10

                5

                0


                     0                              20                              40

                                                     C. Establishments (N)
                0
Change (%)




                -5


               -10


               -15
                     0                              20                              40

                                                      D. Trade Elasticity

               10
  Change (%)




                5



                0
                     0                              20                              40




                                                           65
                                  Figure 12: Transition following unilateral liberalization

                                         C                                                       C*
                  10                                                   10


                  5                                                     5
Change (%)




                  0                                                     0


                  -5                                                   -5


             -10                                                      -10
                       0   10       20        30     40    50               0        10     20         30   40   50


                                         Ne                                                      N*e


                  0                                                     0
Change (%)




                  -5                                                   -5



             -10                                                      -10



             -15                                                      -15
                       0   10       20        30     40    50               0        10     20         30   40   50



                                Real Exchange Rate                                        Net Exports/GDP
                  6                                                     1

                  5
                                                                        0
                  4
     Change (%)




                  3
                                                                       -1
                  2

                  1
                                                                       -2
                  0

                  -1                                                   -3
                       0   10       20        30     40    50               0        10     20         30   40   50


                                             Bond     Complete        Fin. Autarky         No-cost

                                                                 66
A      The General Model of Exporting
The value of a producer that has never exported (as opposed to a firm that has exported
and is idle) is

                                           n                                   o
(66) VtN (z, ∞, fH ) = Πt (z, ∞, fH ) + max VtN,0 (z, ξ, f ) , VtN,1 (z, ξ, f ) ,


where VtN,0 is the value of continuing as a nonexporter,
                                          Z
      VtN,0   (z, ∞, fH ) = ns (z) Qt+1             N
                                                  Vt+1 (z 0 , ∞, fH ) φ(z 0 |z)dz 0 ,
                                           z0


and VtN,1 is the value of entering the export market in the next period,


(67) VtN,1 (z, ∞, fH ) = −Wt fH
                                              Z       X
                         + η ns (z) Qt+1                         X
                                                               Vt+1 (z 0 , ξ 0 , fL ) ρξ (ξ 0 |ξ)φ(z 0 |z)
                                                z 0 ξ 0 ∈{ξ ,ξ }
                                                           L H
                                                       Z
                         + (1 − η) ns (z) Qt+1                  N
                                                              Vt+1 (z 0 , ∞, fH ) φ(z 0 |z).
                                                         z0


Notice that, compared to the benchmark case, there is now a possibility that the producer is
unsuccessful after paying fH . With probability 1 − η, the producer remains a nonexporter,
with variable trade cost ∞ and export entry cost fH . The value of an exporting producer is

                                         n                                     o
(68) VtX (z, ξ, f ) = Πt (z, ξ, f ) + max VtX,1 (z, ξ, fL ) , VtX,0 (z, ξ, fR ) ,


where the value of the firm, if it pays f , and continues to export is
                                                               Z         X
      VtX,1   (z, ξ, f ) = −Wt f + ns (z, ξ, f ) Qt+1                              X
                                                                                 Vt+1 (z 0 , ξ 0 , fL ) ρξ (ξ 0 |ξ)φ(z 0 |z).
                                                                   z 0 ξ 0 ∈{ξ ,ξ }
                                                                              L H



The decision of an idle exporter is




(69) VtX,0 (z, ∞, fR ) = Πt (z, ∞, fH )+max −Wt fR + EVt+1
                                                        X
                                                           (z 0 , ξH , fL ) , EVt+1
                                                                                 N
                                                                                    (z 0 , ∞, fH ) .
                                           



                                                              67
B        Analytical Solutions to a Model with New-Exporter
         Dynamics [Not for publication]
In this appendix, we analytically examine the role of new-exporter dynamics in the long-run
distortions from tariffs. We show that with new-exporter dynamics that the following are
true:

    1. The trade elasticity is higher.

    2. The steady-state change in consumption is smaller for a given trade growth.

    3. The stock of establishments increases with tariffs, and more so as we increase the
        discount factor and disadvantage of new-exporters.

      To make these points most clearly, we keep the main elements related to new-exporter
dynamics and eliminate other elements. Specifically, as in the benchmark model, new ex-
porters have a disadvantage in that they face a relatively high marginal trade cost ξH > ξL
when they start exporting. We eliminate capital accumulation, input-output structure, and
general transition probability for iceberg costs. Notes with these extensions are available
from the authors.
      We make the following modification from the benchmark model to obtain the analytical
solutions. First, each period producers draw their elasticity-adjusted productivity a = e(θ−1)z
from a Pareto distribution with a > 1 and the slope parameter of η > 1.28 The pdf of the
distribution is given by φ (a) = ηa−(η+1) . Second, the exogenous shutdown probability is
constant with nd = 1 − ns . Third, producers face the fixed costs in exporting fX = fL = fH
measured in labor units. See Alessandria and Choi (2014) for results when there is a sunk
export cost (fH ≥ fL ). The payment should be made when they export. Fourth, there are
fixed costs in production fP measured in labor units. If a producer does not pay the fixed
cost in production, it becomes dormant in the current period. For notational simplicity, we
replace 1+ξ with ξ, and 1+τ with τ. As in the benchmark model, we assume ρ = ρξ (ξH |ξH ) =
 28
      With the elasticity adjusted productivity a, the relative size of a producer is proportional to a.




                                                       68
ρξ (ξL |ξL ) > 1/2.29 For notational convenience, we focus on the symmetric steady-state. We
will skip the agent’s problems as they are identical to the benchmark model.


B.1         Consumers

The first order conditions from the consumer’s problem in the steady-state give the budget
constraint,


(70) C = W L + Π + T


B.2         Final Good Producers

The final good producers’ problem yields the demand for goods,

      d
(71) yH (a, ξ) = [PH,t (a, ξ)]−θ C,

(72) yFd (a, ξ) = [τ PF (a, ξ)]−θ C,


and the normalized final good’s price index, P = 1,

                  X           Z h                                                              i
(73) 1 =                            PH,t (a, ξ)1−θ ϕH,t (a, ξ) + [τ PF,t (a, ξ)]1−θ ϕF,t (a, ξ) da,
              ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}


Note that we replace the productivity z with its level a.


B.3         Intermediate Good Producers

The first order conditions give the pricing rule
                          
                    θW      1
(74) PH (a, ξ) =         a 1−θ
                   θ−1
                        
      ∗              θW       1
(75) PH (a, ξ) = ξ         a 1−θ ,
                     θ−1
  29
       We assume that ρξ (ξL |ξL ) > ρξ (ξL |ξH ) by setting ρ > 1/2.




                                                           69
and the demands for inputs

                     1
(76) l (z, ξ) = a 1−θ y (a, ξ) .


The total output of a producer with (a, ξ) is given by

                                                                  −θ
                                      ∗d                    θW                          θ
(77) y (a, ξ) =    d
                  yH     (a, ξ) +   ξyH      (a, ξ) =                    1 + τ −θ ξ 1−θ a θ−1 C
                                                            θ−1

Using (77), we can rewrite the demands for inputs as

                                                  −θ
                           −θ 1−θ
                                            θW
(78) l (a, ξ) = 1 + τ         ξ                             aC.
                                             θ−1

    The operating profit of a producer with (a, ξ) is given by


(79) Π (a, ξ) = PH (a, ξ) yH (a, ξ) + PH∗ (a, ξ) yH
                                                  ∗d
                                                     (a, ξ) − W l (a, ξ)
                                                               θW 1−θ
                                                                      
                                       θ−1             −θ 1−θ
              = PH (a, ξ) y (a, ξ) −             1+τ ξ                     aC
                                         θ                        θ−1
                                      θW 1−θ
                                           
                 1           −θ 1−θ
              =        1+τ ξ                         aC.
                 θ                      θ−1

                                                        1       θW 1−θ
                                                                   
Marginal Productivity: Let Π0 =                         θ       θ−1
                                                                         C, the operating profit of a non-exporter
with a = 1. The marginal active producer’s productivity aP satisfies


(80) W fP = Π (aP , ∞) = Π0 aP .


Here, we assume that fP is sufficiently high so that aP > 1, and fX is relatively high so that
the marginal active producer with aP does not export. The value of a active producer with
(a, ξ) is given by


(81) v (a, ξ) = Π0 1 + τ −θ ξ 1−θ a − W fP − W f + ns βEV (ξ) ,
                                 




                                                                  70
where EV (ξ) is the expected value of the producer with ξ last period, and f is the optimal
choice of the producer with ξ. Specifically,
                        Z    aH                          Z     ∞
(82) EV (∞) =                     v (a, ∞) φ (a) da +              v (a, ξH ) φ (a) da,
                         1                                    aH
                            Z    aH                           Z   ∞                      
(83) EV (ξH ) = ρ       v (a, ∞) φ (a) da +       v (a, ξH ) φ (a) da
                              1                aH
                          Z aL                       Z ∞                      
                + (1 − ρ)        v (a, ∞) φ (a) da +       v (a, ξL ) φ (a) da ,
                             1                         aL
                        Z aH                      Z ∞                       
(84) EV (ξL ) = (1 − ρ)        v (a, ∞) φ (a) da +       v (a, ξH ) φ (a) da
                          1                          aH
                   Z aL                       Z ∞                     
                +ρ        v (a, ∞) φ (a) da +       v (a, ξL ) φ (a) da ,
                                  1                                 aL


where the marginal exporters’ productivity aH and aL satisfy


(85) v (aH , ξH ) = v (aH , ∞) ,

(86)   v (aL , ξL ) = v (aL , ∞) .


Using (81) we can rewrite the conditions as


(87) W fX = Π0 τ −θ ξH
                     1−θ
                         aH + ns β [EV (ξH ) − EV (∞)] ,

(88) W fX = Π0 τ −θ ξL1−θ aL + ns β [EV (ξL ) − EV (∞)] .


Let
               Z   ∞                            
                                            η
(89) Ψj =              aφ (a) da =                   a1−η
                                                      j   ,
                aj                         η−1
               Z ∞
(90) nj =              φ (a) da = a−η
                                   j ,
                aj




                                                          71
where j ∈ {P, H, L} . Then, we can rewrite the expected value of a non-exporter as


(91) EV (∞) = Π0 ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                            1−θ
                                  
                                ΨH − nP W fP − nH W fX

                 +ns β [nH EV (ξH ) + (1 − nH ) EV (∞)]
                  
                   Π0
                         ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                    1−θ
                                          
               =                        ΨH + ns βEV (∞)
                    η
                            
                      1       Π0
                                      ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                                 1−θ
                                                       
               =                                     ΨH .
                   1 − ns β    η

The entry condition is given by


(92) W fE = βEV (∞)
                       
                 β       Π0
                            ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                       1−θ
                                             
          =                                ΨH .
              1 − ns β   η

The expected values of an exporter with ξ = ξH can be rewritten as


(93) EV (ξH ) = Π0 ΨP + ρτ −θ ξH
                               1−θ
                                   ΨH + (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL
                                                             

                      −nP W fP − [ρnH + (1 − ρ) nL ] W fX

                      +ns βρ [nH EV (ξH ) + (1 − nH ) EV (∞)]

                  +ns β (1 − ρ) [nL EV (ξL ) + (1 − nL ) EV (∞)]
                   
                   Π0 
                          ΨP + ρτ −θ ξH
                                      1−θ
                                          ΨH + (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL + ns βEV (∞) .
                                                                    
                =
                    η

Similarly, the expected values of an exporter with ξ = ξL can be rewritten as
                          
                      Π0
                                ΨP + (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξH
                                                   1−θ
                                                       ΨH + ρτ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL + ns βEV (∞) .
                                                                         
(94) EV (ξL ) =
                      η

From (91), (93) and (94), we have
                                     
                          Π0
                               (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH
                                                        1−θ
                                                              
(95) EV (ξH ) − EV (∞) =                                    ΨH ,
                          η
                          
                          Π0
                               ρτ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH1−θ
                                                        
(96) EV (ξL ) − EV (∞) =                              ΨH .
                          η




                                                    72
From (87), (88), (95) and (96), we have the marginal exporters’ productivity conditions as
                                          
                                 ns β
                      Π0 τ −θ ξH
                               1−θ
                                        Π0 (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH
                                                                    1−θ
                                                                          
(97) W fX       =            +     aH                                   ΨH ,
                                  η
                                     
                      −θ 1−θ     ns β
                                        Π0 ρτ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH1−θ
                                                                    
(98) W fX       = Π0 τ ξL aL +                                    ΨH .
                                  η

   The masses of non-exporters, N0 , exporters with ξH , NH , and exporters with ξL , NL , are
given by


(99) N0 = [(ns N0 + NE ) + ρns NH + (1 − ρ) ns NL ] (1 − nH )

                  + [(1 − ρ) ns NH + ρns NL ] (1 − nL ) ,

(100) NH = [(ns N0 + NE ) + ρns NH + (1 − ρ) ns NL ] nH ,

(101) NL = [(1 − ρ) ns NH + ρns NL ] nL ,

(102) N = N0 + NH + NL .


where N is the mass of all producers, and NE is the mass of entrants, NE = (1 − ns ) N .
Using the masses of producers, we can rewrite (73) with (74) and (75) as,
                         1−θ
                     θW
                                N ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX
                                                  
(103)    1 =
                    θ−1
                                                                    
                   1−θ     ns N0 + NE            NH                    NL
(104) ΨX =        ξH                     + ρns          + (1 − ρ) ns         ΨH
                                N                 N                    N
                                                     
                     1−θ               NH             NL
                  +ξL     (1 − ρ) ns         + ρns           ΨL
                                       N              N
                                                   
                   1−θ        NH        1−θ       NL
            =     ξH ΨH              + ξL ΨL
                             N nH                N nL
                                                         
                   1−θ          1−θ       1−θ
                                                  NL
            =     ξH ΨH + ξL ΨL − ξH ΨH
                                                     N nL

Labor Market Clearing Condition: The total labor in production is given by
                               Z                                                   
                   X                                                           Π0
                                                                                        N ΨP + τ −θ ΨX .
                                                                                                      
        LP =                       l (z, ξ, f ) ϕH,t (a, ξ) da = (θ − 1)
                                                                               W
               ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞}




                                                          73
The total labor used for fixed costs in production is given by
                              
                Π0       η−1
(105) N nP fT =                    N ΨP .
                W         η

The total fixed cost in exporting is given by


(106) LX = [ns N0 + NE + ρns NH + (1 − ρ) ns NL ] nH fX + [(1 − ρ) ns NH + ρns NL ] nL fX
                            
           Π0 N H       η−1
         =                       τ −θ ξH
                                       1−θ
                                            ΨH
           W nH           η
                            
             Π0 N H       ns β
                                 (1 − ρ) τ −θ nH ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH1−θ
                                                                     
           +                                                      ΨH
             W nH          η
                             
             Π0 N L      η−1
           +                       τ −θ ξ 1−θ ΨL
             W nL           η
                            
             Π0 N L      ns β
                                 ρτ −θ nL ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH1−θ
                                                              
           +                                               ΨH
             W nL          η
                                                          
           Π0 −θ       η−1                 β           1−θ
                                                             
         =     τ N              ΨX +             ΨX − ξH ΨH
           W             η                 η

The total labor used for entry is given by
                              
              β (1 − ns )    1  Π0
                                   N ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                                1−θ
                                                       
(107) NE fE =                                       ΨH
               1 − ns β      η  W

   The labor market clearing condition is given by
                                                 
                  Π0           −θ
                                    Π0 η − 1
(108) L = (θ − 1) N ΨP + τ ΨX +                     N ΨP
                  W                    W      η
                                                     
            Π0 −θ        η−1         β            1−θ
                                                        
          + τ N                ΨX +      ΨX − ξH ΨH
            W              η         η
                         
            β (1 − ns ) 1    Π0
                                  N ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                               1−θ
                                                      
          +                                        ΨH .
             1 − ns β    η   W

Rearranging it, we have

        W LS     1−β    ns β (1 − β)
(109)        =1−     −               S0 ,
         C        θη   (1 − ns β) θη




                                                74
where

               ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX
(110) S =                     ,
               ΨP + τ −θ ΨX
                          1−θ
               ΨP + τ −θ ξH   ΨH
(111) S0     =          −θ
                                 .
                ΨP + τ ΨX

Note that S can be interpreted as a measure of the tariff distortion. For any τ > 1, S > 1,
and for τ = 1, S = 1. Also note that S0−1 can be interpreted as a measure of entrant’s
disadvantage. Clearly, S0 = 1 if ξH = ξL , and S0 < 1, if ξH > ξL .


Aggregates: The expenditure on imported goods relative to that on home goods
              P            R
             τ ξ∈{ξL ,ξH } a PF (a, ξ) yF (a, ξ) ϕF (a, ξ) da    τ 1−θ ΨX
(112) IM D = P             R                                   =          .
              ξ∈{ξL ,ξH ,∞} a PH (a, ξ) yH (a, ξ) ϕH (a, ξ) da      ΨP

The share of expenditures on domestic goods is given by

                 1          ΨP
(113) λ =             =               .
             1 + IM D   ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX


B.4         Long-Run Growths

Productivity Thresholds, aP , aH , and aL : The productivity thresholds are determined
by 4 equations (80), (92), (97) and (98). With these 4 equations, we have 3 equations that
determine the productivity thresholds
                          
       fE             β        1
                                     ΨP + τ −θ ξH1−θ
                                                        
(114)       aP =                                     ΨH ,
       f           1 − ns β    η
       P                           
       fX         −θ 1−θ         ns β
                                        (1 − ρ) τ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH
                                                                 1−θ
                                                                       
(115)       aP = τ ξH aH +                                           ΨH ,
       f                          η
       P                           
       fX         −θ 1−θ        ns β
                                        ρτ −θ ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH1−θ
                                                                 
(116)       aP = τ ξL aL +                                     ΨH .
       fP                         η

From (115) and (116), we have
                                               
         1−θ                             ns β
                      ξL1−θ aL                      (2ρ − 1) ξL1−θ ΨL − ξH
                                                                         1−θ
                                                                               
(117)   ξH   aH   −              =                                           ΨH .
                                          η



                                                              75
Note that we should have ξL1−θ ΨL > ξH
                                     1−θ
                                         ΨH by construction. Thus, we have

       1−θ
(118) ξH   aH > ξL1−θ aL ,


and aH > aL with ξH > ξL . It follows that ΨH < ΨL and nH < nL . Taking the log-
linearization of (117), we have

                     1−θ                                 
                 ξH            aH        1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nH
(119) b
      aL =                                                      aH .
                                         1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL
                                                                b
                 ξL            aL

       1−θ
Since ξH   aH > ξL1−θ aL and nH < nL , we have b
                                               aL /b
                                                   aH > 1. Taking the log-linearization of
(114) and (115), we have
                        1−θ
                  τ −θ ξH   ΨH
      aP = −
(120) b                 −θ  1−θ
                                     [θbτ + (η − 1) b
                                                    aH ] ,
               ηΨP + τ ξH       ΨH
                     
                       fP             h
      aP
(121) b    = −θbτ+          τ −θ a−1
                                  P    ξH1−θ
                                             aH b
                                                aH
                      fX
                                                                 
                 ns β                         1−θ          1−θ
                                                                 
             −          (1 − ρ) (η − 1) ξL ΨLb     aL − ξH ΨH baH .
                  η

Rearranging them with (119), we have

                                       θηΨP
(122) b
      aH =                                                   τb,
                               1−θ                  1−θ
                                                        ΨH ζζ01
                                        
                 (η − 1) τ −θ ξH   ΨH + ηΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                                     1−θ
                          θ [ζ0 + (η − 1) ζ1 ] τ −θ ξH   ΨH
      aP = −
(123) b                                                  1−θ
                                                                τb,
                      ηζ0 ΨP + [ζ0 + (η − 1) ζ1 ] τ −θ ξH    ΨH

where

                ns β (1 − ρ) (nL − nH )
(124) ζ0 = 1 −                          ,
                 1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL
                          
             fX      θ θ−1   aP
(125) ζ1 =         τ ξH
             fP              aH
                                        " 1−θ        #
                                    1       ξL      ΨL
         = 1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH                           −1 .
                                  η−1       ξH      ΨH




                                                        76
Note that ζ1 > 1 and 0 < ζ0 < 1 since

                1 − ns βρnL + ns β (1 − ρ) nH
(126) ζ0 =                                    > 0.
                     1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL

Clearly, b
         aH /b
             τ > 0, and b
                        aP /b
                            τ < 0. From (119) we also have b
                                                           aL /b
                                                               τ > 0. That is, with a tariff
cut τb < 0, the exporting thresholds aH and aL both fall, but the production threshold aP
rises.
    From (123), we can find that following a cut in the tariff rate, aP falls less in the model
with exporter dynamics relative to the model without it at the margin for the same initial
trade share and the tariff rate. To see that, we can rewrite (123) as

                                                          ηΨX
                                                                            −1
                                              
         aP                           ΨP                  1−θ
                                                         ξH   ΨH
             = −θ 1 +
         b
(127)                                                                          .
          τb                        τ −θ ΨX        1 + (η − 1)     ζ1
                                                                   ζ0


From (113), we have
                                     
       ΨP                        λ
(128) −θ   =τ                              .
      τ ΨX                      1−λ

From (104), we have

                                           "         1−θ                    #
        ΨX                          NL             ξL            ΨL
(129) 1−θ   =1+                                                             −1 .
      ξH ΨH                         N nL           ξH            ΨH

From (99), (100) and (101), we have the fraction of exporters with ξH and ξL as
                      
             NL     NH
(130)         +            = 1,
             N nL   N nH
                                          
                      NL                  NH
(131) (1 − ρns nL )        = (1 − ρ) ns        nL ,
                      N                   N

Rearranging them, we have the fraction of producers with ξL as

         NL            (1 − ρ) ns nH
(132)         =                            .
         N nL   1 + (1 − ρ) ns nH − ρns nL




                                                                   77
So, we have
                                                               "        1−θ                 #
       ηΨX            η (1 − ρ) ns nH                               ξL            ΨL
(133) 1−θ   =η+                                                                            −1 .
      ξH ΨH     1 + (1 − ρ) ns nH − ρns nL                          ξH            ΨH

From (124) and (125), we have

                      ζ1            1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL
(134) 1 + (η − 1)        = 1+
                      ζ0       1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH − ns βρnL
                           (                         "                    #)
                                                              1−θ      
                                                         ξL        ΨL
                             η − 1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH                     −1
                                                         ξH        ΨH
                                                               "                 #
                                                                       1−θ      
                                       ns β (1 − ρ) nH            ξL         ΨL
                         = η+                                                     −1
                               1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH − ns βρnL      ξH         ΨH
                                                                        
                            (η − 1) nnL − 1
                                                                          
                                                                           
                                         H
                              1−θ             + [1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL ] .
                            ξL
                                        ΨL
                                              − 1
                                                                           
                                                                           
                               ξH        ΨH


From (117), we have

                    1−θ                                                       "        1−θ               #
                ξL            ΨL        nH                              1                  ξL            ΨL
(135) 1 −                                        = ns β (2ρ − 1)                 nH                                −1 .
                ξH            ΨH        nL                             η−1                 ξH            ΨH

Rearranging it, we have
                                            
                                                 nL
                          (η − 1)    −1          nH
(136) ns β (2ρ − 1) nL =  1−θ         − (η − 1) .
                           ξL     ΨL
                           ξH     ΨH
                                      − 1

Applying this to (134), we have
                                                                          "        1−θ                 #
                   ζ1            ηns β (1 − ρ) nH                              ξL               ΨL
        1 + (η − 1) = η +                                                                                −1 .
                   ζ0     1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH − ns βρnL                        ξH               ΨH

We have


1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH − ns βρnL = 1 + ns (1 − ρ) nH − ns ρnL + (1 − β) ns [ρnL − (1 − ρ) nH ]

(137)                                   ≥ 1 + ns (1 − ρ) nH − ns ρnL ,


                                                          78
since ρ > 1/2 and nL > nH . This gives

                ns β (1 − ρ) nH                ns (1 − ρ) nH
(138)                                 <                            .
        1 + ns β (1 − ρ) nH − ns βρnL   1 + ns (1 − ρ) nH − ns ρnL

Thus, we have

          aP            aP
(139) −      |ξH >ξL < − |ξH =ξL .
          b             b
          θb
           τ            θb
                         τ

Exporters with ξL : From (132) we have the fraction of producers with ξL as

                             −1
      NL         1 − ρns nL
(140)      = 1+                   .
      N nL      (1 − ρ) ns nH

Since b
      aH /b
          τ > 0, and b
                     aL /b
                         τ > 0, we have n
                                        bH /b
                                            τ < 0, and n
                                                       bL /b
                                                           τ < 0. Thus, from (140), the
fraction of producers with ξL falls with a rise in the tariff rate,

        \
         NL                  NL
                             [  
          N nL                N
(141)             < 0, and          < 0.
           τb                 τb

The Trade Elasticity: Log-linearizing (104) gives
                                         1−θ                  
                                              ξ L   ΨL
                     1−θ
                                                                   
                         ΨH  \
                                 
                    ξH           NL           ξH    ΨH
                                                                    
(142) ΨX = ΨH + 1 −                   +   1−θ         ΨL − ΨH    .
      b    b                                              b    b
                      ΨX      N nL        ξL     ΨL
                                                       −1
                                                                    
                                                                     
                                           ξH     ΨH


We have

            Ψ
            bH               aH
                 = − (η − 1)
                             b
(143)                            < 0,
              τb              τb
          \
           NL
           N nL
(144)               < 0,
            τb
        bL − Ψ
        Ψ     bH                 aL − b
                                (b     aH )
(145)               = − (η − 1)
           τb                   ( τb                                )
                                         1−θ                         
                                    ξH       aH 1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nH       aH
                    = − (η − 1)                                        −1
                                                                           b
                                                                               < 0.
                                    ξL       aL 1 − ns β (2ρ − 1) nL        τb




                                               79
                 Ψ          Ψ
Thus, we have           <            < 0. From (121), we have
                 bX         bH
                  τb         τb

                                
                            ζ0
      aP = −θb
(146) b      τ+                      aH .
                                     b
                            ζ1

Using (142) and (146), the trade elasticity ε is given by
              \
                   ΨP
                τ 1−θ ΨX
(147) ε =
                   τb             
                                ζ0 b  aH
         = ηθ − 1 + (η − 1) 1 −
                                ζ1 τb
                                      1−θ                                                      
                               \NL             ξL    ΨL                                                !
                   1−θ                                                                      bL − Ψ
                   ξH ΨH       N nL           ξH    ΨH                                        Ψ     bH 
           − 1−                        +   1−θ                                                       .
                                                          
                     ΨX      τb                                                                  τb
                                                           
                                            ξL     ΨL
                                                        −1
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        
                                                              ξH            ΨH

                                                   \
                                                   NL                               
                                     aH            N nL                  b L −Ψ
                                                                         Ψ
Since 0 < ζ0 < 1, ζ1 > 1,                   > 0,          < 0, and                       ≤ 0, we have ε > ηθ − 1. Note
                                     b                                          bH
                                      τb            τb                       τb

that when ξH = ξL , the elasticity becomes ε|ξH =ξL = ηθ − 1. Thus, the model with exporter
dynamics has a greater trade elasticity compared to the model without it, ξH = ξL .


Entrant’s disadvantage (S0−1 ): The entrant’s disadvantage is measured with S0−1 in
(111). Log-linearizing the equation gives
                                                                                        
                        −θ 1−θ                                                −θ
               ΨP ΨP + τ ξH ΨH −θb
                  b              τ + ΨH
                                     b                               ΨP ΨP + τ ΨX −θb
                                                                        b           τ + ΨX
                                                                                        b
(148) Sb0 =                      1−θ
                                                  −
                    ΨP + τ −θ ξH     ΨH                        ΨP + τ −θ ΨX
                                 −1                  −1
          = ΨP + τ −θ ξH1−θ
                                     ΨP + τ −θ ΨX
                                                  
                            ΨH
            n
              τ −θ ΨX − ξH1−θ           b P + τ −θ ΨX − ξ 1−θ ΨH ΨP θb
                                                                 
                              ΨH ΨP Ψ                       H            τ
                         "                         !                           !#)
                                        1−θ
                                      ξ     ΨH Ψ
                                               b H                         Ψ
                                                                           b H
            −τ −θ ΨX Ψ
                     b X ΨP 1 − H                     + τ −θ ξH
                                                              1−θ
                                                                  ΨH 1 −           .
                                         ΨX Ψ  bX                          ΨX
                                                                           b

Since Ψ
      b P /b
           τ > 0, Ψ
                  b X /b
                       τ < 0, and 0 < Ψ
                                      b H /Ψ
                                           b X < 1, we have Sb0 /b
                                                                 τ > 0. That is, the entrant’s
disadvantage, S0−1 , rises with a tariff cut.




                                                             80
Labor Share of GDP (W L/C) : From the labor market clearing condition (109), we
have

        WL   b0 − b1 S0
(149)      =            ,
        C        S
                            
                       1−β                          ns β(1−β)
where b0 = 1 −          θη
                                 > 0, and b1 =     (1−ns β)ηθ
                                                              .     Note that b1 > 0 if β ∈ (0, 1) and b1 = 0 if
β = 1. Also note that S > 1 for any τ > 1, and S = 1 when τ = 1 or τ → ∞ (autarky).
Thus the trade liberalization, τ = 1 from τ > 1, raises the labor share of GDP, W L/C,
and the rise in the entrant’s disadvantage, S0−1 , further increases the labor income to output
ratio when β < 1.


Investment on Establishment Capital (N ): From the entry condition (92) and the
price index (103), we have



                                              1−θ
                            1 C ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                                
                    β                             ΨH
(150) W fE   =
                 1 − ns β   ηθ N     ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX
                          
                    β       1 CS0
             =                     .
                 1 − ns β   ηθ N S

Using (149), we have
                                                             
                    β              1         L             S0
(151) N =                                                               .
                 1 − ns β          ηθ        fE        b0 − b1 S0

Since S0 falls with the trade liberalization, the mass of producers, N , falls, N
                                                                                b /b
                                                                                   τ > 0.


Wage Rate (W ): From the price index (103), we have


(152) W θ−1 ∝ N ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX ,
                             




                                                             81
where ∝ denotes ‘proportional to’. From the entry condition (92) and the marginal producer
condition (80), we have


(153) aP ∝ ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                      1−θ
                          ΨH .


We can rewrite it as

                                         −(η−1)
(154) ΨP ∝ ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                      1−θ
                          ΨH                            .


So, we have

              ΨP                        λS
(155)              1−θ
                              =
        ΨP + τ −θ ξH   ΨH               S0
                                                                       −η
                              ∝         ΨP + τ −θ ξH
                                                   1−θ
                                                       ΨH                    .


This gives


(156) ΨP + τ 1−θ ΨX = λ−1 ΨP
                        η−1
                        S    η    1
                    ∝          λ− η .
                       S0

With (151) and (156), (152) can be rewritten as

                                                        η1
          θ−1                  −1        η−1       S0
(157) W         ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )     S     η                    ,
                                                   λ

or
                                                                1
                                                             η(θ−1)
                               1
                            − θ−1        η−1         S0
(158) W ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )             S   η(θ−1)                         .
                                                     λ

So, the fall in the tariff distortion from S > 1 to S = 1 following the trade liberalization
reduces the wage growth rate. The increase in the entrant’s disadvantage, S0−1 also lowers
the wage growth. Having positive discount rate, β < 1 and b1 > 0, further reduces the
growth of the wage rate.



                                                                   82
Consumption (C): Using (149) and (158), consumption can be rewritten as
                    
                 C
(159) C ∝                W
                 W
                                                             1
                                                          η(θ−1)
                 S                          1
                                         − θ−1    η−1    S0
         ∝                 (b0 − b1 S0 )       S η(θ−1)
             b0 − b1 S 0                                 λ
                                         η(θ−1)  1
                            θ    ηθ−1      S0
         ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )− θ−1 S η(θ−1)
                                            λ

Following the trade liberalization, a fall in the share of expenditures on domestic goods λ
raises the welfare. However, the reduction of the tariff distortion S reduces the long-run
welfare gains. The increase in the entrant’s disadvantage, S0−1 also reduces the welfare gains.
If the discount rate is positive, β < 1 and b1 > 0, the welfare gains are further reduced
because a fall in S0 lowers the gains additionally through a fall in the mass of producers.


Long-run Welfare Gains with Same Trade Growth: Equation (159) shows the rela-
tionship between the trade growth, λ−1 , and the long run welfare gains, and how the tariff
distortion S and the entrant’s disadvantage S0−1 affect the long run consumption growth.
However, it is not clear how the model predicts the long run growth once the model is cal-
ibrated to match the trade growth with same tariffs τ and initial trade. To find it out we
can rewrite the consumption equation as follows. From (149), (152) and (153) we have
                         1
                 C  N SaP θ−1
(160) C ∝
                 W    S0
                      
                S                             1
                          (b0 − b1 S0 )−1 SaP θ−1
                         
        ∝
            b0 − b1 S0
                             θ    θ    1
         ∝ (b0 − b1 S0 )− θ−1 S θ−1 aPθ−1 .


This gives

                           b                   
      Cb     θ      b1 S0    S0     θ Sb     θ   aP
                                                 b
(161)    =                      +         +         .
      τb   θ − 1 b0 − b1 S0 τb    θ − 1 τb θ − 1 θb
                                                  τ

The first term is positive. The increase in the entrant’s disadvantage, S0−1 , with a fall in τ
reduces the long run gains. The second term is also positive. The a reduction of the tariff


                                                 83
distortion with a cut in τ reduces the long run gains. The last term is negative. An increase
in the production threshold with a cut in τ raises the welfare.
   For the growth rate of the tariff distortion, from (110), we have

               τ −θ ΨX
(162) Sb =                [1 − λ (τ − 1) ε] τb.
             ΨP + τ −θ ΨX

Now, consider a special case with β = 1. In this case, we have

        Sb bap    λ (τ − 1) ετ −θ ΨX
(163)     +    =−                    .
        τb θbτ      ΨP + τ −θ ΨX

If we set θ to match the trade growth across models (ξH > ξL and ξH = ξL ), we need to
assign higher θ for the model without exporter dynamics. Since θ/ (θ − 1) is decreasing in
θ, and the first term is zero with β = 1, the model predicts that the welfare gains under
ξH = ξL is lower than that under ξH > ξL .
   In a general case with β < 1, the first term is positive, and − baθbPτ |ξH >ξL < − baθbPτ |ξH =ξL .
Thus, the discount factor plays a crucial role for the long run welfare gains.




                                                  84
