                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DOES MANAGEMENT MATTER IN SCHOOLS

                                           Nicholas Bloom
                                            Renata Lemos
                                           Raffaella Sadun
                                          John Van Reenen

                                        Working Paper 20667
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20667


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




We would like to thank the ESRC, the IGC, and the Itaú Social Foundation for financial support through
the Centre for Economic Performance. Roland Fryer, Gary Chamberlain, Caroline Hoxby, Will Dobbie,
Steve Machin, Sandra McNally, Martina Viarengo and participants at seminars in the AEA, Harvard,
the Royal Economic Society Conference and Stanford have given helpful comments on earlier drafts.
Frederic Vermeulen and two anonymous referees have given excellent advice on the paper. Our partnership
with Daniela Scur has been particularly important during this project. Matilde Gawronski and Kalpesh
Patil have provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20667.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nicholas Bloom, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Management Matter in Schools
Nicholas Bloom, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 20667
November 2014
JEL No. L2

                                          ABSTRACT

We collect data on operations, targets and human resources management practices in over 1,800
schools educating 15-year-olds in eight countries. Overall, we show that higher management quality
is strongly associated with better educational outcomes. The UK, Sweden, Canada and the US obtain
the highest management scores closely followed by Germany, with a gap to Italy, Brazil and then
finally India. We also show that autonomous government schools (i.e. government funded but with
substantial independence like UK academies and US charters) have significantly higher management
scores than regular government schools and private schools. Almost half of the difference between
the management scores of autonomous government schools and regular government schools is
accounted for by differences in leadership of the principal and better governance.


Nicholas Bloom                                  Raffaella Sadun
Stanford University                             Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                         Morgan Hall 233
579 Serra Mall                                  Soldiers Field
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                        and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu                             rsadun@hbs.edu

Renata Lemos                                    John Van Reenen
Center for Economic Performance                 Department of Economics
London School of Economics                      London School of Economics
Houghton Street                                 Centre for Economic Performance
London WC2A 2AE                                 Houghton Street
UK                                              London WC2A 2AE
and University of Cambridge                     UNITED KINGDOM
r.lemos@lse.ac.uk                               and NBER
                                                j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
                                    I. INTRODUCTION

There are major disparities in the quality of education within and between countries (e.g.
OECD 2012). School managerial practices may be an important reason for such differences.
Unfortunately, understanding the role of management in schools within and across countries
has been held back by a lack of robust and comparable instruments to systematically measure
management practices and, thus, a lack of good data.


The key purpose of this paper is to develop an international management index for schools
and present descriptive evidence on management quality and education outcomes across
schools of different types within and across countries. We used double-blind telephone
interviews with school principals to collect information on management practices for over
1,800 schools across eight countries. To construct our management index, we average across
20 basic management practice measures in four areas of management: operations,
monitoring, target setting and people. Each question is evaluated against a scoring grid that
ranges from one (“worst practice”) to five (“best practice”). Our management index for each
school represents the average of these scores.


We also constructed measures of school-level pupil outcomes for these schools (when data
was available) from examination results across regions and countries, creating a matched
management-pupil outcome international dataset at the school level.


This data allows us to document some stylized facts. First, we show that the adoption of basic
managerial practices varies significantly across and within countries. The UK, Sweden,
Canada and the US obtain the highest average scores, followed by Germany, Italy and Brazil,
while India has the lowest scores. About half of the variance in school management is at the
country-level. This share is larger in education than we have found from our similar surveys
in other sectors such as manufacturing, where most of the variation is within countries. This
finding suggests that differences in the institutional environment have particularly important
effects on the way schools are managed.


Second, higher management scores are positively correlated with better pupil outcomes.
More specifically, we find that one standard deviation increase in our managerial index is
associated with a 0.232 to 0.425 standard deviation increase in pupil outcomes. Although the

                                                 2
cross-sectional nature of the data does not allow us to determine whether this correlation is
causal (e.g. unobservable differences across schools might drive both pupil outcomes and
management quality), the result does suggest that our management data has some useful
informational content.


Third, large disparities in management also exist within countries and regions, especially
across types of schools. In particular, autonomous government schools - organisations that
are publicly funded but are more decentralised from government control, like charter schools
in the US and academies in the UK 1 - have significantly higher management scores than
regular government schools and private schools. The difference in management of
autonomous government schools does not reflect observable differences in pupil
composition, school and regional characteristics, nor basic demographics or principal
characteristics such as tenure and gender. It does, however, seem more closely linked to two
features: (i) the strength of governance, i.e. having strong accountability for pupil
performance to an outside body and (ii) the degree of school leadership, i.e. developing a
long-term strategy for the school. Including these governance and leadership variables more
than halves the managerial gap between autonomous government schools and other schools
(although the gap remains significant).


Previous efforts to survey school practices support our main findings. For example, Dobbie
and Fryer (2013) and Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013) have collected extensive measures
of school practices, focusing on a smaller sample of US schools. Dobbie and Fryer (2013)
report in a sample of 39 New York charter schools that management practices similar to those
we measure – in particular teacher feedback, data guided instruction and high expectations -
are associated with substantially higher grades. Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013) survey a
sample of 36 Massachusetts charter schools and link the impact of urban charter schools2 to
practices such as instructional time, classroom technique and school philosophy - labelled the
“No Excuses” approach. Intriguingly both papers also find little or no impact of schools



1
  We define autonomous government schools as schools receiving at least partial funding from the government
and with at least limited autonomy to follow school-specific charters in one of three areas: establishing the
curriculum content, selecting teachers, and admitting pupils. In our data, these are escolas de referência in
Brazil, separate schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, private-aided schools in India, friskolor in
Sweden, academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK (equivalent to autonomous state
schools), and charter and magnet schools in the US. See Table 1 for more details.
2
  The authors find more mixed results for the non-urban charter schools.

                                                        3
inputs – class size, per-pupil expenditure or teacher training – on pupil performance, a result
shared with Hannushek and Woessmann (2010) on a cross country basis.


In our data collection efforts, we focus on a set of basic management practices, which we
have shown to matter across other sectors (see the survey of this work in Bloom, Lemos,
Sadun, Scur, Van Reenen 2014). The school data is less rich and does not have the
compelling experimental design of the New York and Massachusetts data, however we have
a much larger sample of schools and an international dimension. Our results extend the
current literature by highlighting the variance of management quality in schools within and
across countries, the relatively low management quality on an absolute level compared to
other sectors, and its widespread link to pupil outcomes and autonomy levels across
countries,


This paper also contributes to several literatures. Firstly, we link to work on the role of
institutions for school performance, focusing in particular on their implications for
management practices. Many recent contributions (e.g. from the OECD’s PISA studies) have
also looked at this through the lens of autonomy, centralized monitoring, school choice,
teacher incentives and instructional time.3 Secondly, there is a burgeoning number of studies
on alternative types of school governance and management on pupil outcomes. These studies
have focused on autonomous government schools, such as US urban charter schools. 4
Thirdly, through the analysis of principal-specific characteristics we relate to the agenda
investigating the effect of school leadership.5 Finally and more generally, we contribute to the
emerging literature investigating management practices in public sector institutions.6


The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the data and
methodology we used to measure management practices across schools. Section III provides

3
  For examples see Hanushek and Woessmann (2010), Fuchs and Woessmann (2007), Woessmann et al. (2007),
Woessmann (2005), Woessmann (2010), Hanushek, Link, and Woessmann (2013), and Lavy (2010).
4
  For examples of studies looking at US urban charter schools see Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2011), Angrist, Pathak,
and Walters (2013), Angrist et al. (2011), Fryer (2014), Dobbie and Fryer (2011, 2013), Curto and Fryer (2014),
and Hoxby and Murarka (2009). Other studies looking at US rural charter schools include Angrist et al. (2011),
UK academies include Eyles and Machin (2014), Machin and Vernoit (2011), and Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff
(2009), Swedish friskolor include Sahlgren (2011) and Böhlmark and Lindahl (2012) and Canadian separate
schools include Card, Dooley, Payne (2010).
5
  For examples see Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin (2012), Dhuey and Smith (2011), Coelli and Green (2012),
Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff (2009), Béteille, Kalogrides, and Loeb (2012), Grissom and Loeb (2011), and
Horng, Klasik, and Loeb (2010).
6
   For examples see Bloom, Propper, Seiler and Van Reenen (2015), McCormack, Propper, and Smith (2013),
Rasul and Rogger (2013).

                                                       4
a basic description of the differences in school management across and within countries.
Section IV investigates the relationship between school management practices and pupil
outcomes. Section V explores the factors linked to the variation of management practices
across countries, examining the role of school ownership and governance within countries.
Section VI concludes.


                                                II. DATA

Measuring management practices in education
To measure management practices in schools, we adapted a survey methodology described in
Bloom and Van Reenen (2007), previously employed in the manufacturing, retail and
healthcare sectors. The survey investigates the adoption of 20 basic management practices,
where the level of adoption is evaluated against a grid from one to five. 7 A high score
indicates that a school adopts structured practices. Our main measure of management
practices represents the average of the scores across all 20 questions. To ensure comparability
across sectors, we retained most of the questions included in our previous studies of
organizations in other sectors, with modifications to reflect the school context (the full list of
questions can be found in Table A1).8 We interviewed the principal/head teacher in each
school.


We measure four broad areas of management:


1. Operations
      Standardization of Instructional Planning Processes: school uses meaningful processes
      that allow pupils to learn over time
      Personalization of Instruction and Learning: school incorporates teaching methods that
      ensure all pupils can master the learning objectives
      Data-Driven Planning and Pupil Transitions: school uses assessment and easily
      available data to verify learning outcomes at critical stages

7
  In the earlier manufacturing-focused survey wave we carried out an extensive evaluation of this approach,
including comparing telephone interviews with face-to-face visits, running management experiments on firms,
and resurveying 5% of the sample with different interviewers and managers at the same firm. In all cases we
found strong evidence that our telephone surveys were providing a good proxy of firm management practices –
see Bloom, Genakos, Sadun and Van Reenen (2012) for details.
8
  Sixteen of these twenty basic practices are considered to be relevant and applicable across all industries
previously surveyed (for example, performance based promotion) while the remaining four are specific to the
management of schools (for example, lesson planning).

                                                     5
      Adopting Educational Best Practices: school incorporates and shares teaching best
      practices and pupil strategies across classrooms accordingly.


2. Monitoring
      Continuous      Improvement:      school    implements      processes     towards    continuous
      improvement and encourages lessons to be captured and documented
      Performance Tracking: school performance is regularly tracked with useful metrics
      Performance Review: school performance is reviewed with appropriate metrics
      Performance Dialogue: school performance is discussed with appropriate content,
      depth and communicated to teachers.
      Consequence Management: mechanisms exit to follow-up on performance issues


3. Target Setting
      Target Balance: school covers a sufficiently broad set of targets at the school,
      department, and individual levels
      Target Interconnection: school establishes well-aligned targets across all levels
      Time Horizon of Targets: there is a rational approach to planning and setting targets
      Target Stretch: school sets targets with the appropriate level of difficulty
      Clarity and Comparability of Targets: school sets understandable targets and openly
      communicates and compares school, department and individual performance


4. People Management9
      Rewarding High Performers: school implements a systematic approach to identifying
      good and bad performance, rewarding teachers proportionately.
      Fixing Poor Performers: school deals with underperformers promptly
      Promoting High Performers: school promotes employees based on job performance
      Managing Talent: school nurtures and develops teaching and leadership talent
      Retaining Talent: school attempts to retain employees with high performance
      Creating a Distinctive Employee Value Proposition: school has a thought-through
      approach to attract employees




9
 These practices are similar to those emphasized in earlier work on management practices, by for example
Black and Lynch (2001), and Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997).

                                                   6
Obtaining school surveys across countries
We randomly sampled schools that offered education to 15-year-olds and had at least 50
pupils. These schools are large enough that the type of systematic management practices we
study here are likely to matter.10 We used a variety of procedures to remove potential sources
of bias from our estimates. First, we monitored interviewers’ performance in contacting
schools and scheduling interviews. The interviewers ran on average two interviews a day
lasting approximately an hour each and spent the remainder of their time repeatedly
contacting principals to schedule interviews. Second, we presented the study as a confidential
conversation about management experiences, starting with non-controversial questions such
as “What is your school’s plan for the next five years?” and “What tools and resources are
provided to teachers?” Third, we never asked principals about the school’s overall pupil
performance during the interview. Instead, we obtained such data from other sources, which
were usually from administrative information (described in Appendix A). Fourth, we sent
informational letters and copies of endorsements letters from respected institutions, such as
the UK Department for Education, Harvard University’s Program on Education Policy and
Governance, and Brazil’s Itaú Social Foundation.11


In terms of interviews completed, we obtained an overall high response rate (41% on
average12), ranging from 58%, 57% and 42% of eligible schools in Brazil, Italy and India,
respectively, to 36%, 26%, 20% and 19% of eligible school in Sweden, Germany, the US and
Canada. We obtained a substantially lower response rate in the UK – 8% of eligible schools –
most likely due to the proliferation of cold-calling and the increasing number of telephone
surveys in schools in the UK, and principals’ slow turnaround time for a response after the
initial contact by interviewers (which was common throughout the North American and
European countries surveyed).


The response rate of 41% is similar to our previous manufacturing and healthcare surveys. It
is also roughly comparable to other management surveys in education such as 64% response
rate of middle and high schools in Massachusetts, US (Angrist, Pathak, and Walters, 2013),


10
   In Brazil, Canada, Italy, Germany, US, and UK, these schools are part of the upper secondary or high school
education system. In India these schools are part of the lower secondary education system while in Sweden they
are still considered primary schools.
11
   Despite the common practice of paying organizations to participate in research, we did not provide managers
with financial incentives to participate.
12
   Average weighted by the number of interviews in each country.

                                                      7
57% response rate of UK University departments (McCormack, Propper and Smith, 2014),
and 39% response rate of New York Charter schools (Dobbie and Fryer, 2013).13


However, when interviewers were able to connect with school principals, they typically
agreed to the survey proposition when interviewers were able to connect with them. As such,
the explicit refusal rate among eligible schools was generally low across all countries
surveyed, ranging from 2% in Sweden, 6% in both the US and Canada, 9% in India, 13% in
both Brazil and the UK, 15% in Italy and to 16% of all eligible schools in Germany. In terms
of selection bias, we compare our sample of schools for which we secured an interview with
the sample of eligible schools in each country against size, ownership, and location. We
obtain few significant coefficients with marginal effects small in magnitude. We further
construct sampling weights and observe that our main unweighted results stand even when
using alternative sample weighting schemes. We describe our selection analysis as well as the
sampling frame sources and response rates in more detail in Appendix C.


Maximizing response rates and interview quality
We also followed several steps to obtain a high quality response. First, we use a “double-
blind” interview technique. That is, at one end, we conducted the telephone survey without
informing the principals that their answers would be evaluated against a scoring grid. Thus,
we gathered information about actual management practices as opposed to the principal’s
aspirations of what should (rather than does) happen. At the other end, our interviewers did
not know in advance anything about the school’s performance. Interviewers were only
provided with the school’s name and telephone number and had generally not heard of the
schools on their lists before, thus, having no preconceptions about them.


Second, we used open-ended questions – that is, questions which avoid leading responders
towards a particular answer. For example, on the first performance monitoring dimension we
start by asking the open question “What kind of main indicators do you use to track school
performance?”, rather than a closed-ended question like “Do you use class-room level test
scores indicators [yes/no]?”. The first open-ended question is followed by further questions

13
  Other establishment survey response rate benchmarks include at the high-end the US Census response rates to
the mandatory Management and Organizational Practices Survey at 80% (Bloom, Brynjolfsson, Foster, Jarmin,
Saporta and Van Reenen, 2013), in the mid-range the 30% response rate of small firms by Aurora, Cohen and
Walsh (2014), down to the 7% response rate for Chief Financial Officers at medium and large firms (Ben-
David, Graham and Harvey, 2013).

                                                     8
like “How frequently are these indicators measured?”, “Who gets to see this data?” and then
“If I were to walk through your school what could I tell about how you are doing against your
indicators?” The combined responses to this dimension are scored against a grid which goes
from 1 - defined as “Measures tracked do not indicate directly if overall objectives are being
met. Tracking is an ad-hoc process (certain processes aren’t tracked at all).” up to 5 -
defined as “Performance is continuously tracked and communicated, both formally and
informally, to all staff using a range of visual management tools.” During their training
session, the interviewers are also encouraged to ask follow-up questions whenever necessary.


Third, we had rigorous interviewer training. We required all interviewers to undergo one
week of initial training, including multiple group scoring sessions to ensure consistency
across countries.14 We also required them to conduct and listen to at least 25 interviews to
correct any inconsistent interpretation of responses. Fourth, we “double-scored” the majority
of interviews (69%). That is, we asked the team managers, whose main role was monitoring,
to silently listen and score the responses provided during each interview. After the end of the
interview, the team manager discussed these scores with the primary interviewer, providing
on-going training and calibration.


Finally, we also collected “noise-controls”, that is, data on the interview process itself (such
as the time of day and the day of the week), characteristics of the interviewee and the identity
of the interviewer. We include these noise controls in the regression analysis to improve the
precision of our estimates by reducing some of the measurement error.


Choosing countries to survey
The choice of countries was driven by funding availability, the availability of school
sampling frames, and research and policy interest. We are continuing to roll these school
management surveys out across countries, for example hoping to extend this shortly to China,
Denmark and Mexico through collaborations with other research institutions.




14
  During these calibration exercises, the whole team listened to both created role-play interviews and actual live
interviews (in English) then subsequently compared scores. Any differences in scoring were discussed to ensure
a common interpretation of the scoring grid. These calibration sessions were run intensively at the beginning
and then periodically through-out the project (to avoid any interviewers scoring drifting over time).

                                                        9
Classifying differences across school types
In order to look at management practices across different types of schools, we classify regular
government schools, autonomous government schools and private schools based on two main
characteristics: their source of funding and their degree of autonomy in establishing the
curriculum content, selecting teachers, and admitting pupils. Regular government schools
receive full funding from the government (national or local level) and follow government-
wide rules and regulations with little or no autonomy in these three areas. Private schools
receive solely private funding (they may be for-profit or not-for-profit) and follow school-
specific charters, having full autonomy over all three areas mentioned above. Autonomous
government schools receive most of their funding from the government but have more
autonomy to follow school-specific charters on curriculum, teacher selection and (sometimes)
limited pupil selection.15


Table 1 classifies school types across these areas. By this criteria we defined the following
types of schools as autonomous government schools: Escolas de Referência (Brazil);
Separate Schools (Canada); Private Ersatzschulen (Germany), Private-Aided Schools (India);
Friskolor (Sweden); Academy, Foundation and Voluntary-Aided Schools (UK); and Charter
and Magnet Schools (US). There are no autonomous government schools in Italy.

Appendix Table B1 presents means and standard deviations of our variables for the overall
sample and Table B2 breaks them down by country and shows differences across private,
autonomous government and regular government schools in deviations from country means.
In the OECD countries and Brazil autonomous government schools have higher management
scores than both regular government schools and private schools. India looks different with
private schools scoring most highly. However, Table B2 also shows that autonomous
government schools are systematically different on many dimensions. For example, they are
smaller than regular government schools and more likely to be in urban areas. Our analysis
will consider whether the apparently higher management scores (and pupil performance) of
such schools is due to such confounding influences.




15
  Pupil selection in autonomous government schools is usually not based on academic ability (although we will
analyse this) but rather on other dimensions. For example, UK academies can select up to 10% of pupils on
“aptitude” (such as sporting or musical ability).

                                                     10
Collecting measures of pupil performance
Given the absence of publicly comparable metrics of school-level performance across
countries, 16 we collected several country-specific measures of educational achievement
ranging from standardized (and sometimes compulsory) examination results to non-
standardized examination results.


We use the following main measures in each country: (1) In the US we construct measures of
school performance using the math, science and reading exam pass rate from High School
Exit Exams (HSEEs) and End-of-Course (EOCs) exams in states where performance
measures were available. (2) In the UK we employ the average uncapped GCSE score, the
contextual value added measure, and the proportion of pupils achieving five GCSEs (level 2)
including English and Maths. (3) In Canada we employ the school-level rating produced by
the Fraser Institute, which is based on several measures of pupil achievement, including
average province exam mark, percentage of exams failed, courses taken per pupil, diploma
completion rate, and delayed advancement rate. (4) In Sweden we use the GPA in the 9th
grade and the percentage of pupils qualifying for upper secondary school. (5) In Brazil we
use the average scores for math, natural sciences, and language and codes of the non-
mandatory High School National Exam (Exame Nacional do Ensino Medio, ENEM). We also
use 9th grade average score of Prova Brasil for government schools. (6) In India we use the
average scores for math, science and first language in the X Standards examinations. The
details of these measures and their sources for each country and are provided in Appendix A.


          III. SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ACROSS AND WITHIN COUNTRIES
Figure 1 shows the average management scores across countries. The adoption of modern
managerial processes in schools is fairly limited: on an index of 1 to 5, the average
management score across all countries is 2.27, which corresponds to a low level of adoption
of many of the managerial practices included in the questionnaire. There are, however,
significant differences across countries. The UK has the highest management score (2.9),
closely followed by Sweden, Canada and the US (all on 2.8). Germany is slightly lower (2.5)
and Italy is substantially lower (2.1). The emerging economies of Brazil (2.0) and India (1.7)
have the lowest scores. The rankings do not change substantially when we include school and

16
  The main exception to this, which is relevant to our study of schools offering education to 15-year olds, is the
pupil level data on achievement collected in the framework of the PISA project. Unfortunately due to
confidentiality constraints the PISA data cannot be released with school identifiers. We were therefore unable to
match the two datasets.

                                                       11
principal controls suggesting that these differences in management are not driven by school,
principal or interviewee characteristics.17


Differences in management across countries are larger in education than in other sectors.
Country fixed effects account for 46% of the variance in the school management scores
compared to 13% in manufacturing and 40% in hospitals across the same subset of countries
and questions. This finding suggests that institutions play an important role in management
practices in the education sector (Fuchs and Woessmann 2007).


Figure 2 shows the differences across countries, splitting the management index into people
management practices (hiring, firing, pay and promotions) and other non-people management
practices (operations, monitoring and target setting). Interestingly, there are some clear
variations in relative strengths and weaknesses. Across all countries, schools are notably
weaker in people management practices.


Figure 3 shows the distribution of the management scores within each country with the
smoothed (kernel) fit of the US for comparison. Across OECD countries, lower average
country-level management scores are associated with an increasing dispersion towards the
left tail of the distribution: every country except the UK has some schools scoring below two.
A score of below two indicates very poor management practices - almost no monitoring, very
weak targets (e.g. only an annual school-level target) and extremely weak incentives (e.g.
tenure based promotion, no financial or non-financial incentives and no action taken about
underperforming teachers). However, while the fraction of schools scoring between one and
two is minimal in countries such as Sweden and Canada (2.2% and 2.7%, respectively), it
rises to 82% in India.


At the other end of the distribution, we also observe that all OECD countries have some
schools scoring on average above three, which in contrast would correspond to medium to
widespread adoption of the management practices (some reasonable performance monitoring,
a mix of targets and performance based promotion, rewards and steps taken to address
persistent underperformance). The fraction of schools scoring above three ranges from 46%
in the UK to 5% in Italy. While the distribution of management scores for Brazil is very


17
     We look in more detail at sample selection in Appendix C, Table C4.

                                                        12
similar to the Italian distribution (a wide dispersion of scores and a “fat” left tail of weakly
managed schools), India is clearly different from the OECD countries. In India the
distribution of the management scores shifts completely to the left: the vast majority of
schools scores below two, and no school scores above three, indicating that Indian schools
seem to have very weak management practices, with very little monitoring, target setting and
use of monetary and non-monetary incentives. Looking at a comparable set of practices
across other sectors, we find that the fraction of Indian firms scoring above three is 22% for
manufacturing and 10% for hospitals, compared to only 1.6% for schools. This finding
matches up to the long literature on poor management practices in Indian schools.18


Figure 4 plots the distribution of management scores for three sectors for the US and the UK.
It is striking that for the US the mean of the distribution is lowest for schools, in the middle
for hospitals and highest for manufacturing firms in the US.19 For the UK schools are in the
middle of the three industries – above hospitals and below manufacturing. We can also
compare our scores to those for University departments collected by McCormack, Propper
and Smith (2014) in the UK. This reports a similarly wide dispersion of management
practices in UK universities, with a moderately higher mean. There is also a significant
positive relationship between university management practices on the one hand and
academics’ performance in research and teaching on the other. In the next sub-section we will
show that the positive association between management and student performance also exists
for our sample of schools.


          IV. MANAGEMENT QUALITY AND EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES
Are our management scores related to meaningful educational outcomes? While we are by no
means able to establish whether management is causally related to improvements in
educational achievements, we see this analysis as a useful external validation exercise of our
management data.20 If the management data were just noise, there should be no systematic
relationship between management and objective information on pupil performance.


18
   See, for example, Duflo, Hanna and Ryan (2012) and the literature discussion therein.
19
   In contrast to the average school score of 2.27 across all eight countries, the average manufacturing firm
scores 3.01 for the same eight countries (firms employing 50 to 5000 workers). The average school also scores
lower but more similarly to the average hospital (general hospitals offering acute care plus cardiology or
orthopedics procedures), where the average score is 2.43 across these eight countries.
20
   The association between management and firm performance has already been empirically tested in other
sectors outside education, including manufacturing, hospitals and retail (e.g. Bloom et al., 2012). Better
management practices have also been associated with better outcomes for workers, with for example, Bloom et

                                                     13
Empirical model of pupil performance
We consider a base simple “educational production function”,21 where school-level average
pupil exam outcomes (         ) are related to pupil composition, management and other school-
level characteristics, where i denotes individual schools and c denotes country. We are
particularly interested in the coefficient on the management index (M is the average of the z-
scores of each of the 20 individual z-scores of the management questions).


                                                                                 γ                       (1)


We focus on the three types of school discussed above: autonomous government schools
(AUTGOV), private schools (PRIVATE), and regular government schools as the omitted base.
X are the other controls detailed below and               is an error term. To control for some of the
other dimensions that may differ across type of school we include the type of curriculum (the
regular academic school programs vs. vocational/technical education) and whether the school
can select pupils based on academic merit.


Our empirical proxies for educational outcomes are school-level measures of pupil
achievement as described the subsection II above and Appendix A. In summary, we use
country-specific measures of educational achievement as follows: the percentage of pupils
who passed their secondary school core subject exit exams (US), the percentage of pupils
who qualified for upper secondary school (Sweden), the average overall score and subject-
specific scores for secondary school exit examinations (India, Sweden, and UK), rankings
and contextual value added based on several indicators including pupil grades and
characteristics (Canada and UK), and mandatory and non-mandatory university entrance
qualification national exams (Brazil). Given the differences in school-level indicators of
pupils’ achievement across countries, we standardize outcome measures within each country
and include country dummies in all specifications when we pool across countries.


We control for school resources and inputs by including measures of the number of pupils in
the school, the pupil/teacher ratio, and a dummy to capture schools that select pupils partially


al. (2011) reporting well-managed firms have better facilities for workers such as child-care facilities, job
flexibility and self-assessed employee satisfaction.
21
   See Hanushek (1979) for a conceptual and empirical discussion of education production functions.

                                                     14
based on academic merits. More detailed controls for pupil characteristics depend on the data
available for each country. These include the proportion of pupils who are female, non-white,
who do not speak the national language as their primary language, and who are eligible for
free school meals (a standard poverty measure). We consider specifications that estimate
equation (1) by pooling across all countries and using only basic controls for pupil
composition, but we also show specifications where we estimate the equation separately for
each country where we can control for pupil composition in finer detail (at the cost of smaller
sample sizes). Finally, some specifications control for survey measurement error by including
interviewer dummies, a subjective interview reliability indicator coded by the interviewer, the
day of the week, time in which the interview took place and interview duration.


We have a sample of just over 1,000 schools when we estimate equation (1). This smaller
sample size is mainly because we do not have access to school level performance data in Italy
and Germany.22 However, we do find a positive relationship between the average PISA pupil
performance score and the average management score in German regions (correlation of 0.65,
significant at the 10% level) and Italian regions (correlation of 0.63, significant at the 5%
level).23


Main results on pupil performance
Table 2 presents the results of regressing school-level measures of pupil achievement on the
management score. Looking at the table as a whole, management quality is positively
correlated with pupil achievement across all countries. Column (1) reports the cross-country
pooled regression with controls only for country dummies. The coefficient implies that a one
standard deviation increase in the management score index (0.65 points in the raw
management score) is associated with an increase of 0.425 of a standard deviation in pupil
achievement. Column (2) includes the dummy variables for school type. Private schools and


22
   There are also a portion of schools in the other six countries where we could not obtain performance data. For
example, in the US we did not find public information on pupil performance in private schools, we did not
collect performance data in states where we interviewed only one school or states which do not have a High
School Exit Exam or End-of-Course Assessments. In India we collected performance measures over the
telephone by calling back the school and speaking to the exams coordinators (response of 50%) and were also
not able to collect information with a number of private schools no longer requiring their students to take the X
Standard Examinations. In Canada, the Fraser Institute 2009 school ratings were only collected in Alberta,
British Columbia, and Ontario. Thus, in the US, India and Canada, we were not able to collect performance data
for approximately 47-53% of the sample. In Brazil, Sweden and the UK, we did not find public information for
a very small portion of the schools surveyed (approximately 7-8% in each).
23
   We use 2006 PISA regional average scores for 8 German regions and 2009 PISA regional average scores for
14 Italian regions, restricting to regions with 5 or more observations.

                                                      15
autonomous government schools obtain significantly higher pupil outcomes than regular
government schools. If we drop the management variable, the coefficient on these school
types rises substantially.24 We will return to the difference between school types in the next
table.


Column (3) includes the set of more general controls which slightly decreases the coefficient
on management to 0.232, and it remains significant at the 1% level.25 The magnitude remains
sizeable. For example, a one standard deviation improvement in management is equivalent to
49% of the improvement associated with the selection of pupils based on academic merit. In
terms of the other characteristics larger schools have higher performance as do those with a
higher teacher-pupil ratio (although not significantly so).


In columns (4) to (9) we disaggregate by country and add a richer set of country-specific
controls. Across all countries, management quality continues to be positively associated with
better pupil outcomes and in most countries this relationship is significant at the 10% level or
greater.26 The correlation is largest in Canada (0.609) and smallest in Brazil (0.104).27 It is
difficult to interpret the reasons for the cross-country differences given the different measures
of test scores. Some of the differences in significance are related to sample size: the only two
countries with a statistically insignificant coefficient on management are the two with the
smallest number of schools (Canada has a sample size of 77 and Sweden has 82). We do not
find a systematically larger coefficient in the “Anglo-Saxon” countries (e.g. the US
coefficient on management is smaller than the one in India), which is consistent with the view
that the management measure are not inherently culturally biased.




24
   For example the coefficient on autonomous government schools rises from 0.23 to 0.30.
25
   To put this result into perspective in view of the larger literature using educational production functions,
Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2001) find that a one standard deviation reduction in class size (roughly 3 pupils
per class) is associated with a 0.02 of a standard deviation increase in achievement. Hanushek and Rivkin (2003)
find that a one standard deviation increase in the degree of competition (0.02 point decline in the Herfindahl
Index) is associated with a reduction of 0.09 standard-deviations in the within school variance of teacher quality.
In other words, performance associations for management quality are between 2 to 3 times as large as for
competition and teacher quality and over ten times as large as for a measured input such as class size.
26 In a companion paper, Di Liberto, Schivardi and Sulis (2013) find a positive and weakly significant

association between nationally-tested student level math exams outcomes in Italy and our management
measures.
27
   In Table B3 we report the results of the association between pupil outcomes and management using
alternative measures of pupil outcomes. The majority of the results are consistent with Table 2, i.e. management
is positively and significantly associated with most available school-level measures of pupil outcomes.

                                                       16
A criticism of the results in Table 2 is that we are not fully controlling for the fact that pupil
intake is very different across schools, so it may be that the better managed schools are
simply lucky enough to have better quality students sorting into these schools. For one
country (the UK) there are published school-level measures of value added, which tracks the
average improvement in pupils’ grades between entering and exiting the school. Such value
added measures are superior to just using test score measures as their control for initial intake
quality. Column (10) uses value added as an outcome and shows that our management score
actually displays a statistically and economically stronger correlation with this value added
measure than the raw test score measure in the previous column (0.881 vs. 0.512). Hence,
although we do not have value added measures for all countries, it seems unlikely that
differential student intake is driving the results in Table 2.


Robustness of pupil performance results
Appendix Table B4 presents some robustness tests of the results of regressing school-level
measures of pupil achievement on the management using column (3) of Table 2 as a baseline.
The management survey includes several questions related to people management (e.g. use of
incentives, practices related to promotion and dismissals of teachers) that are heavily
regulated across most of the countries in our sample. One possible concern is that regulatory
constraints might reduce the observed variation along these areas of management, thus
inhibiting our ability to estimate their association with school-level pupil outcomes. We look
at this issue in two ways. First, the distribution of people management by country shows
substantial within country variation (Appendix Figure B1). This finding suggests that national
regulations are not homogenous or completely binding on schools. Second, people
management alone is positively and significantly correlated with school-level outcomes, with
a coefficient (standard error) of 0.257(0.046) in an equivalent specification to column (5) of
Table B4. The other non-people related areas of management are also significantly correlated
with outcomes – coefficients (standard error) of 0.093(0.036) for operations, 0.133(0.036) for
performance monitoring, and 0.158(0.038) for target setting. The sub-set of 16 questions
asked in an almost identical fashion to other sectors like manufacturing and healthcare (e.g.
performance tracking, goal setting etc.) has a coefficient (standard error) of 0.248(0.045). We
also looked at a subset of questions that are related to five practices examined in Dobbie and
Fryer (2013) in New York charter schools - frequent teacher feedback, the use of data to
guide instruction, high dosage tutoring, increased instructional time, and a culture of high


                                                17
expectations.28 We constructed a similar “Dobbie and Fryer” management index from our
questions (data-driven planning and pupil transitions, adopting education best practices,
personalization of instruction and learning, and clearly defined accountability for principals).
This coefficient (standard error) on this index is 0.134(0.038).


       V. HOW MANAGEMENT VARIES ACROSS SCHOOLS: THE ROLE OF
                         AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS


Empirical model of management
Having established the presence of a positive correlation between our management practices
score and school-level educational outcomes, we now turn to study how management varies
within countries. We distinguish between three main types of schools: private schools,
autonomous government schools and regular government schools. Recall that we define
autonomous government schools as schools receiving at least partial funding from the
government and with at least limited autonomy in one of three areas: establishing the
curriculum content, selecting teachers, and admitting pupils.29 We use a simple regression
model of the form:


                                                                                                           (2)


Given the differences between OECD and non-OECD countries we estimate separate
equations for Brazil and India. Although we pool across OECD countries in the main
specifications, we also consider disaggregating the OECD regressions by country (Appendix
Table B5). Figure 5 shows management index differences across autonomous government,
regular government and private schools in deviations from country means. On average across
countries, private schools have the highest scores, followed by autonomous government
schools and regular government schools at the bottom. There is much heterogeneity in the
ranking across countries, however.




28 Dobbie and Fryer (2013) show that this set of five practices are also strongly correlated with pupil
achievement and explain approximately 45% of the variation in school effectiveness. In an experimental setting,
Fryer (2014) shows that the average impact of implementing these policies significantly increases pupil math
achievement in treated elementary and secondary schools by 0.15 to 0.18 standard deviations.
29
   Table 1 provides more details about schools under this classification across countries.

                                                      18
Main results on management
Across OECD countries column (1) of Table 3 shows that autonomous government schools
obtain significantly higher management scores than regular government schools (the omitted
base category). The difference is large and significant: the management score of autonomous
schools is 0.233 of a standard deviation higher relative to regular government schools, which
amounts to about 13% of the gap in management between (say) the UK and India.
Interestingly, the coefficient on private schools is negative suggesting that their higher pupil
outcomes in earlier tables may be due to the type of pupils attending them. The base of the
table has a test of the difference between autonomous government schools and private
schools and finds this is significant across all specifications.


Clearly, differences in management may simply capture differences in observable
characteristics across school types (Table B2 showed that school types differ across other
dimensions beyond management). So in column (2) we augment the specification with the
other covariates used in Table 2 together with “survey noise” controls, such as interviewer
dummies. The coefficient on autonomous government schools slightly increases, suggesting
that the managerial advantage of these schools is not mainly due to these factors. Similar to
other sectors, size is significantly positively correlated with management scores. This might
reflect the existence of economies of scale in management. It might also reflect the ability of
better managed schools to attract more pupils, although this is less likely given that schools
tend to have difficulty growing in most systems. 30 Management is also significantly
negatively correlated with the pupil/teacher ratio which may capture the fact that schools with
higher resources may be able to establish and enforce better management processes (for
example, when teachers are not as overstretched it might be easier to use merit based
promotions, deal with underperformance etc.31).


Another possible explanation for the higher management score of autonomous government
schools could be differences in location. For example, Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013)
point out that while charter schools in urban areas have positive effects on pupil achievement,
non-urban charter schools are on average ineffective and in some instances even detrimental
30
   Since private (and to a lesser extent autonomous government) schools have more ability to grow, we
examined the reallocation story by looking at whether the association between management and size was
stronger for these schools. We did not find systematic evidence of this, suggesting that the correlation may be
more due to scale economies.
31
   Indeed, the negative correlation between management and the pupil/teacher ratio is much larger for the people
management portion of the survey relative to the other non-people management questions.

                                                      19
to pupils. To account for locational differences, we measure of population density in the area
where the school is located in column (3).32 We do find that schools in urban areas tend to
have significantly higher managerial scores, but this only reduces the coefficient on
autonomous government schools slightly (from 0.273 to 0.244).33


Appendix Table B5 explores the heterogeneity of the results across countries by estimating
the same regression in column (3) of Table 3 separately for each of the OECD country in our
sample. The coefficient on autonomous government schools is positive across all the
countries in our sample, although it is especially large for Sweden which had the most radical
institutional change towards autonomous government schools among our sampled
countries.34


In columns (4) to (6) of Table 3 we repeat the specifications for Brazil. We also find a
positive managerial differential between autonomous government schools and regular
government schools, although this result is based on only three autonomous government
schools, thus difficult to generalize. 35 In contrast with OECD countries, however, private
schools in Brazil appear to have much higher scores relative to regular government schools.
The private-regular government schools gap is substantial (about half a standard deviation),
and is robust to the inclusion of measures of school size, curriculum offered and the ability to
select pupils based on merit. Also in contrast with the OECD countries, the ability to select
pupils on the basis of academic merit is positively correlated with management, while the
proxy for regional density is not.

32
   Our measure of population density is at the NUTS 3 level for the OECD, at the municipality level for Brazil
and at the sub-district level (Tehsils or Mandals) for India.
33
   The density variable is insignificant when included in the pupil performance regressions of column (3) of
Table 2.
34
   The coefficient on the autonomous government schools dummy is very strong and significant in Sweden, and
positive but not significant in Canada, Germany, UK, US. The coefficient on the dummy is still positive and
significant at the 10% level when we pool all countries except Sweden. The Swedish case presents unique
features as its education system benefited from a series of aggressive and rapid reforms in the early 1990s,
starting with a decentralization of education to the municipal level, holding municipalities financially
accountable for its schools and implementing a voucher program which led to a sharp increase in the number of
friskolor and the number of pupils attending those schools (Sahlgren 2011). The US charter schools and the UK
academies, on the other hand, were being progressively introduced at a much slower pace, starting in the mid- to
the end of the 1990s. Studying the impact of the introduction of academies on pupil achievement, Machin and
Vernoit (2011) find stronger positive results for schools that have been academies for longer and who have
experienced the largest changes in governance practices, suggesting that the benefits of introducing autonomous
government schools in an education system may take a while to materialize.
35
   In 2007, the state of Pernambuco partnered with a group of companies committed to improving education to
convert 10 existing secondary schools into a new model of reference schools. By 2010, the program had
expanded to 60 full-day and 100 half-day secondary schools (Bruns, Evans and Luque, 2012). By 2013, it
reached a total of 260 schools.

                                                      20
The final three columns of Table 3 repeat the specifications for India. The results
substantially differ from the rest of the Table. Column (7) shows that private schools score
on average higher in terms of management relative to regular government schools, while no
significant difference can be found for autonomous government schools. However, the
private-regular government differential is insignificant when we introduce basic controls for
school size, pupil/teacher ratios and the ability to select pupils (many of the elite Indian
government schools use such selection devices – e.g. Rao, 2014). This result suggests the
better performance of private schools is likely due to greater resources which are particularly
large in India and casts doubt on the idea that they are a possible solution to the chronic
inefficiencies experienced in the public sector (e.g. OECD 2012).


In summary, autonomous government schools seem to have significantly better managerial
scores than regular government schools in all countries except India. Private schools, by
contrast, are no better than government schools in any country except Brazil, implying that
their advantages in pupil performance in Table 2 are likely to be due to selection of pupils
from wealthier families.36


What explains the advantage of autonomous government schools?
Our results indicate that autonomous government schools are fundamentally different in
terms of the processes that they employ in the day-by-day management of these
organizations. In Table 4 we explore what could account for the advantage of autonomous
government schools focusing on OECD schools because of the differences we observed
between the OECD countries and emerging economies. Column (1) reports the baseline
specification of column (3) of Table 3. Column (2) includes a measure of competition to see
if some schools are in areas where there is more pupil choice.37 The measure has a positive


36
   To account for potential differences between faith-based and non-faith-based schools, we introduce a dummy
for faith-based schools in our sample to the full specifications in columns 3, 6, and 9. In each region the
autonomous government school and the private school coefficients remain significant and nearly unchanged. In
the OECD the autonomous government coefficient (standard error) changes to 0.235(0.075) and the private
coefficient (standard error) changes to -0.019(0.094), in Brazil the autonomous government coefficient (standard
error) changes to 0.894(0.182) and the private coefficient (standard error) changes to 0.465 (0.096), and in India,
the autonomous government and the private coefficient remain unchanged. In our sample, 14.2% of interviews
in the OECD, 7.8% of interviews in Brazil and 15.7% of interviews in India were run with principals of faith-
based schools.
37
   Our measure of competition is collected during the survey itself by asking the principal “How many other
schools offering education to 15 year-olds are within a 30-minute drive from your school?”

                                                       21
but insignificant coefficient. 38 Column (3) adds in some characteristics of the principal 39
collected in the survey (tenure, gender and whether the principal has a background in STEM -
Science, Technology, Engineering, Maths, or Business). Of these only gender is significant:
female principals are associated with higher management scores. But these covariates only
reduce the autonomous government coefficient slightly. Column (4) includes three measures
of the autonomy of the principal in terms of hiring and firing, budgetary expense and
curriculum choices. Column (5) includes both the principal characteristics and autonomy
measures. The autonomy measures are generally insignificant with the exception of personnel
autonomy (which is significant at the 10% level). Adding all six measures reduces the
coefficient on the autonomous government dummies to 0.211 from 0.244 in column (1). So
these measures of principal characteristics and autonomy do not really account for much of
the difference.


So what does matter? We focus on two measures (see Appendix Table A2 for details): first;
governance - the degree to which the principal is accountable to institutional stakeholders
such as school external boards (“Principal Accountability”); and second, leadership – the
degree to which the principal communicates a well-articulated strategy for the school over the
next five years (“Principal Strategy”). Column (6) includes the Principal Accountability and
the Principal Strategy variables, showing that these variables are highly significant and these
two factors account for almost half of the gap between autonomous government and regular
government schools (the coefficient falls from 0.211 to 0.129). 40 Table B2 shows that,
accountability and strategy are very different between school types. When we break the
management questions into its two different subcomponents – people and non-people
management –, we find that the dummy capturing principals with a STEM or Business
background is correlated with non-people practices, that is, operations, monitoring and target
setting, but not with people management, while the opposite holds for personnel autonomy.



38
   The evidence on the impact of competition and school choice is mixed. Some studies find a positive effect
(Hoxby 2000; Card, Dooley, and Payne 2010; Gibbons, Machin, and Silva 2008; Ahlin 2003; Hanushek and
Rivkin 2003) while other studies find a negative effect or no effect on pupil achievement (Hsieh and Urquiola
2006; Rothstein 2005).
39
   For instance, Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff (2009) find some evidence that experience as an assistant
principal at the principal’s current school is associated with higher performance among inexperienced
principals. They also find a positive relationship between principal experience and school performance,
particularly for math test scores and pupil absences.
40
   Both are about equally important. For example, just including accountability reduces the coefficient on
autonomous government schools from 0.211 to 0.177.

                                                     22
Appendix Table B6 shows the results for India and Brazil. Overall, these are broadly
consistent with those shown for OECD countries. In both Brazil and India, competition,
principal characteristics and autonomy are not significantly correlated with the management
score, while the accountability and strategy variables appear to be large in magnitude, and
positively and significantly correlated with higher management scores. These findings
suggest that governance and leadership may play an important role for the performance of
schools even in developing economies.


                                    VI. CONCLUSION
Understanding the factors associated with variations in school performance within and across
countries is important. While many researchers have looked at differences in school inputs –
such as teacher quality, class size and family/pupil characteristics – or variations in the
institutional environment – such as pupil choice – few studies explore differences in school
management. In this paper we show robust evidence that management practices vary
significantly across and within countries and are strongly linked to pupil outcomes.
Management quality seems to matter for schools.


A new finding is that autonomous government schools appear to have significantly higher
management scores than both regular government schools and private schools. Their better
performance is not linked with autonomy per se but with how autonomy is used. Having
strong accountability of principals to an external governing body and exercising strong
leadership through a coherent long-term strategy for the school appear to be two key features
that account for a large fraction of the superior management performance of such schools.


From a policy point of view our findings suggest that improving management could be an
important way of raising school standards and give broad support for the fostering of greater
autonomy of government schools. Autonomy by itself is unlikely to deliver better results,
however, finding ways to improve governance and motivate principals are likely to be key to
make sure decentralized power leads to better standards.


Our work suggests many lines of future inquiry. First, we have only presented conditional
correlations. Thinking of ways to evaluate the causal effects of management interventions
such as randomized control trials (e.g. Fryer and Holden, 2014) is a high priority. Second, we
only account for at most half of the better management of autonomous government schools
                                             23
with accountability and leadership: what else is important? Are there key characteristics of
principals and teachers, for example, which we have missed out? Third, what drives
improved school management? We have suggestive evidence that governance matters (as it
does more widely in other sectors) but what about school networks, teacher skills, incentives,
pupil choice and information? There is an exciting research agenda ahead.




                                      REFERENCES
        Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and
Parag A. Pathak. 2011. ‘Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from
Boston’s Charters And Pilots’. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2): 699–748
        Ahlin, Åsa. 2003. ‘Does School Competition Matter? Effects of a Large-Scale School
Choice Reform on Student Performance’. Working Paper Series 2003:2. Uppsala University,
Department of Economics.
        Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and
Christopher R. Walters. 2011. ‘Who Benefits from KIPP?’ IZA Discussion Paper 5690.
        Angrist, Joshua D, Parag A Pathak, and Christopher R Walters. 2013. ‘Explaining
Charter School Effectiveness’. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4): 1–27.
        Béteille, Tara, Demetra Kalogrides, and Susanna Loeb. 2012. ‘Stepping Stones:
Principal Career Paths and School Outcomes’. Social Science Research 41 (4): 904–19.
        Black, Sandra E., and Lisa M. Lynch. 2001. ‘How to Compete: The Impact of
Workplace Practices and Information Technology on Productivity’. The Review of Economics
and Statistics 83 (3): 434–45.
        Bloom, Nicholas, Christos Genakos, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2012.
‘Management Practices across Firms and Countries’. The Academy of Management
Perspectives (AMP) 26 (1): 12–33.
        Bloom, Nicholas, Tobias Kretschmer, and John Van Reenen. 2011. ‘Are Family
Friendly Workplace Practices a valuable firm resource?’ Strategic Management Journal
32(4): 343-367.
        Bloom, Nicholas, Carol Propper, Stephan Seiler, and John Van Reenen. (2015). ‘The
Impact of Competition on Management Quality: Evidence from Public Hospitals’.
forthcoming Review of Economic Studies.
        Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. ‘Measuring and Explaining
Management Practices across Firms and Countries’. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122
(4): 1351–1408.
        ———. 2010. ‘Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries?’
Journal of Economic Perspectives 24 (1): 203–24.
        Böhlmark, Anders, and Mikael Lindahl. 2012. ‘Independent Schools and Long-Run
Educational Outcomes: Evidence from Sweden’s Large Scale Voucher Reform’. 6683. IZA
Discussion Paper. Institute for the Study of Labor.
        Branch, Gregory F., Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2012. ‘Estimating the
Effect of Leaders on Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals’. Working
Paper 17803. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        Bruns, Barbara, Deon Filmer, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2011. Making Schools
Work: New Evidence on Accountability Reforms. World Bank Publications.


                                             24
        Bruns, Barbara, David Evans and Javier Luque. 2012. Achieving World-Class
Education in Brazil: The Next Agenda. World Bank Publications.
        Card, David, Martin D. Dooley, and A. Abigail Payne. 2010. ‘School Competition
and Efficiency with Publicly Funded Catholic Schools’. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 2 (4): 150–76.
        Clark, Damon. 2009. ‘The Performance and Competitive Effects of School
Autonomy’. Journal of Political Economy 117 (4): 745–83.
        Clark, Damon, Paco Martorell, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2009. ‘School Principals and
School Performance’. 38. CALDER Working Papers. Center for Analysis of Longitudinal
Data in Education Research.
        Coelli, Michael, and David A. Green. 2012. ‘Leadership Effects: School Principals
and Student Outcomes’. Economics of Education Review 31 (1): 92–109.
        Curto, Vilsa E., and Roland G. Fryer. 2014. ‘The Potential of Urban Boarding
Schools for the Poor: Evidence from SEED’. Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.
        Dhuey, Elizabeth, and Justin Smith. 2011. ‘How Important Are School Principals in
the Production of Student Achievement?’ CLSSRN working paper clsrn_admin-2011-33.
Vancouver School of Economics.
        Di Liberto, Adriana, Fabiano Schivardi, and Giovanni Sulis. 2013. ‘Managerial
Practices and Students’ Performance’. Universita Degli Studi Di Milano Mimeo, November.
        Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer 2013. ‘Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective
Schools: Evidence from New York City’. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
5(4): 28-60.
        Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer 2011. ‘Are High Quality Schools Enough to Close
the Achievement Gap? Evidence from a Social Experiment in Harlem’. American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 3(3).
        Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen P. Ryan. 2012. ‘Incentives Work: Getting
Teachers to Come to School’. American Economic Review 102(4): 1241-78
        Eyles, Andrew and Stephen Machin (2014) “The Introduction of Academy Schools
to England's Education”, mimeo Centre for Economic Performance
        Fryer, Roland G. and Richard Holden. 2012. "Multitasking, Learning, and Incentives:
A Cautionary Tale". Working Paper 17752. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        Fryer, Roland G. 2014. ‘Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional
Public Schools: Evidence from Field Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
forthcoming.
        Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. ‘What Accounts for International
Differences in Student Performance? A Re-Examination Using PISA Data’. Empirical
Economics 32 (2-3): 433–64.
        Gibbons, Stephen, Stephen Machin, and Olmo Silva. 2008. ‘Choice, Competition, and
Pupil Achievement’. Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (4): 912–47.
        Grissom, Jason A., and Susanna Loeb. 2011. ‘Triangulating Principal Effectiveness
How Perspectives of Parents, Teachers, and Assistant Principals Identify the Central
Importance of Managerial Skills’. American Educational Research Journal 48(5):1091–1123.
        Hanushek, Eric. A, and Ludger Woessmann. 2010. ‘The Economics of International
Differences in Educational Achievement’. Working Paper 15949. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
        Hanushek, Eric A. 1979. ‘Conceptual and Empirical Issues in the Estimation of
Educational Production Functions’. The Journal of Human Resources 14 (3): 351–88.
        Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2003. ‘Does Public School Competition
Affect Teacher Quality?’ in The Economics of School Choice: 23–48. National Bureau of
Economic Research.

                                            25
        Hanushek, Eric A., Susanne Link, and Ludger Woessmann. 2013. ‘Does School
Autonomy Make Sense Everywhere? Panel Estimates from PISA’. Journal of Development
Economics 104 (September): 212–32.
        Horng, Eileen Lai, Daniel Klasik, and Susanna Loeb. 2010. ‘Principal’s Time Use and
School Effectiveness’. American Journal of Education 116 (4): 491–523.
        Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. ‘Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students
and Taxpayers?’ The American Economic Review 90 (5): 1209–38.
        Hoxby, Caroline M., and Sonali Murarka. 2009. ‘Charter Schools in New York City:
Who Enrolls and How They Affect Their Students’ Achievement’. Working Paper 14852.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
        Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Miguel Urquiola. 2006. ‘The Effects of Generalized School
Choice on Achievement and Stratification: Evidence from Chile’s Voucher Program’.
Journal of Public Economics 90 (8-9): 1477–1503.
        Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. ‘The Effects of
Human Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines’.
American Economic Review 87 (3): 291–313.
        Lavy, Victor. 2010. ‘Do Differences in School’s Instruction Time Explain
International Achievement Gaps in Math, Science, and Reading? Evidence from Developed
and Developing Countries’. Working Paper 16227. National Bureau of Economic Research.
        Machin, Stephen, and James Vernoit. 2011. ‘Changing School Autonomy: Academy
Schools and Their Introduction to England’s Education’. Working Paper 123. Centre for the
Economics of Education .
        McCormack, John, Carol Propper, and Sarah Smith. 2014. ‘Herding Cats?
Management and University Performance’. The Economic Journal 124 (578): 534–564.
        OECD. 2012. Public and Private Schools: How Management and Funding Relate to
Their Socio-Economic Profile. Paris: OECD Publishing.
        Rao, Gautam. 2014. ‘Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity,
Discrimination and Diversity in Delhi Schools’. UC Berkeley Mimeo.
        Rasul, Imran, and Daniel Rogger. 2013. ‘Management of Bureaucrats and Public
Service Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service’. UCL Mimeo.
        Rothstein, Jesse. 2005. ‘Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students
and Taxpayers? A Comment on Hoxby (2000)’. Working Paper 11215. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
        Sahlgren, Gabriel H. 2011. ‘Schooling for Money: Swedish Education Reform and the
Role of the Profit Motive’. Economic Affairs 31 (3): 28–35.
        Warren, John Robert, Krista N. Jenkins, and Rachael B. Kulick. 2006. ‘High School
Exit Examinations and State-Level Completion and GED Rates, 1975 through 2002.’
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 28 (2): 131–152.
        Woessmann, Ludger. 2003. ‘Central Exams as the “Currency” of School Systems:
International Evidence on the Complementarity of School Autonomy and Central Exams’.
CESifo DICE Report 1 (4): 46–56.
        ——. 2005. ‘The Effect Heterogeneity of Central Examinations: Evidence from
TIMSS, TIMSS‐Repeat and PISA’. Education Economics 13 (2): 143–69.
        ———. 2010. ‘Cross-Country Evidence on Teacher Performance Pay’. CESifo
Working Paper Series 3151. CESifo Group Munich.
        Woessmann, Ludger, Elke Lüdemann, Gabriela Schütz, and Martin R. West. 2007.
‘School Accountability, Autonomy, Choice, and the Level of Student Achievement’. OECD
Education Working Papers 13. Paris: OECD Publishing.



                                            26
FIGURE 1: AVERAGE MANAGEMENT SCORE BY COUNTRY


                   UK                                                                             2.9


             Sweden                                                                    2.8


              Canada                                                                  2.8


                   US                                                                2.8


            Germany                                                      2.5


                 Italy                           2.1


                Brazil                          2.0


                 India              1.7



                        1.5   1.7         1.9    2.1        2.3    2.5         2.7          2.9         3.1

Notes: Data from 1,851 schools. 513 in Brazil; 146 in Canada; 140 in Germany, 318 in India, 284 in Italy, 88
in Sweden, 92 in the UK and 270 in the US. A school level score is the simple average across all 20 questions
and the country average (shown above) is the unweighted average of these school level scores within a country.

FIGURE 2: PEOPLE AND NON-PEOPLE MANAGEMENT BY COUNTRY


                 UK

            Sweden

            Canada

                 US

          Germany

                Italy

              Brazil

                                                                                              People
               India
                                                                                              Non-People


                    1.5       1.7         1.9   2.1         2.3    2.5         2.7           2.9         3.1

Notes: Country-level averages for people management vs. non-people management practices. Broadly speaking
people management involves pay, promotions, hiring and firing, while non-people involves school operations,
monitoring and targets (see Table A1 for the precise definitions).


                                                       27
FIGURE 3: MANAGEMENT WITHIN COUNTRIES

                                     1 UK                            2 Sweden                                  3 Canada



          0 .5 1 1.5 2




                                     4 US                           5 Germany                                      6 Italy
          0 .5 1 1.5 2




                                                                                                     1         2         3   4

                                 7 Brazil                                8 India
          0 .5 1 1.5 2




                         1   2              3        4        1      2             3         4
         Graphs by Country


Notes: Data from 1,851 schools showing the distribution of the firm level school scores. A smoothed kernel
density plot of the US data is shown on each panel for easy comparison to the US management distribution.

FIGURE 4: COMPARING THE DISTRIBUTION OF MANAGEMENT IN
SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND MANUFACTURING FIRMS IN THE US AND UK

                                                UK                                                         UK
             1




                                                                              1
             .8




                                                                              .8
             .6




                                                                              .6
             .4




                                                                              .4
             .2




                                                                              .2
             0




                                                                              0




                         1       2              3         4         5                  1         2         3             4       5


                                                Schools           Hospitals                Manufacturing


Notes: The management index is constructed from the 16 questions that overlap in all three sectors. Smoothed
kernel density shown for each sector.

                                                                         28
FIGURE 5: MANAGEMENT INDEX DIFFERENCES ACROSS SCHOOL TYPES -
DEVIATIONS FROM COUNTRY MEANS

                         All Countries                       1 UK                    2 Sweden

            Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.

            Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.

              Private                       Private                       Private


                          3 Canada                           4 US                    5 Germany

            Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.

            Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.

              Private                       Private                       Private


                             6 Brazil                        6 Italy                  7 India

            Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.                     Aut. Gov.

            Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.                     Reg. Gov.

              Private                       Private                       Private


                    .9       1.1   1.3            .9        1.1   1.3           .9    1.1   1.3
         Graphs by Country


Notes: Data from 1,567 schools. 513 in Brazil; 146 in Canada; 140 in Germany, 318 in India, 88 in Sweden, 92
in the UK and 270 in the US. “Aut. Gov.” are autonomous government schools, “Reg. Gov.” are regular
government schools and “Private” are private schools. There are no autonomous government schools in Italy.




                                                       29
 TABLE 1: CLASSIFICATION OF AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
                                              Teacher   Pupil
                        Government Curriculum
School Type                                   Selection Admissions
                        Funding    Autonomy
                                              Autonomy Autonomy
Escolas de Referência, Brazil           Most (1)            Limited            Limited           None
Separate Schools, Canada                All                 Limited (4)        Full              Full
Private Ersatzschulen, Germany          Most (2)            Limited (5)        Limited (11) Limited (14)
Private Aided Schools, India            All                 None               None              Limited (15)
Friskolor, Sweden                       Most (3)            None               Full              None
Academy Schools, UK                     Most (3)            Limited (6)        Full              Limited (16)
Foundation Schools, UK                  All                 Limited (7)        Limited (12) Limited (17)
Voluntary Aided Schools, UK             All                 Limited (8)        Limited (13) Limited (18)
Charter Schools, US                     Most (3)            Limited (9)        Full              None
Magnet Schools, US                      All                 Limited (10)       None              Limited (19)
 Notes: The Brazilian Escolas de Referência are found in Pernambuco State only. The Canadian Separate
 Schools are found in Alberta, Ontario, and Saskatchewan only. The following explanations refer to when
 Limited Autonomy is granted to autonomous government schools in these three areas plus funding. (1) The state
 government is responsible for staff salaries, school feeding, books, and uniforms, and private funding finances
 infrastructure investments and scholarships for low-income pupils. (2) Government funding can be anywhere
 from 90% to 100%, the remaining can be from private sources. (3) May receive private donations. (4) Catholic
 concepts and values determine the orientation of the standard curriculum’s content. (5) Curriculum must have at
 least the same academic standards as government schools. (6) Follow the National Curriculum but with a
 particular focus on one or more areas. (7) May partner up with organisations to bring specific skills and
 expertise to the school. (8) Religious education may be taught according to a specific faith. (9) Must meet
 federal and state standards but innovation in the curriculum design and structure is permitted. (10) Must cover a
 set of core academic subjects, but may concentrate on a particular discipline or area of study. (11) Teachers
 must have at least the same education and earn at least the same wages as teachers in regular government
 schools. (12) Local Education Authority will appoint Head Teacher from candidates shortlisted by school. (13)
 Local Education Authority must be involved in the selection process. (14) No segregation of pupils according to
 the means of their parents. (15) Conditional on the amount of funding received by the government. (16) May
 choose up to 10% of pupils based on aptitude. (17) Cannot operate admissions outside the LEA’s coordinated
 admissions scheme. (18) Must consult other admissions authorities as well as their Diocesan Directors of
 Education when there are substantial changes. The school can use faith criteria in prioritising pupils for
 admission. (19) Most have no entrance criteria but some are highly selective.




                                                       30
TABLE 2: PUPIL OUTCOMES AND MANAGEMENT
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)
 Sample of countries:                  All           All           All         Brazil       Canada         India        Sweden          US            UK            UK
                                                                                                                                      HSEE                       Context.
                                        Cross-country pooled pupil             Math          Fraser       Average      9th grade                   Average
 Dependent variable:                                                                                                                   Math                       Value
                                               achievement                    Average        Rating        Math          GPA                        GCSE
                                                                                                                                       Pass                       Added
 Management (z-score)              0.425***      0.242***      0.232***       0.104**       0.609         0.499**      0.242        0.170**       0.512*        0.881**
                                   (0.046)       (0.041)       (0.044)        (0.050)       (0.368)       (0.243)      (0.206)      (0.080)       (0.272)       (0.369)
 Autonomous government                           0.225*        0.396***       0.235         -0.263        0.211        0.612**      0.123         0.245         -0.309
 school                                          (0.129)       (0.114)        (0.289)       (0.467)       (0.216)      (0.291)      (0.229)       (0.319)       (0.428)
 Private school                                  1.246***      1.139***       1.496***      0.937         0.383*                                  -0.633
                                                 (0.081)       (0.094)        (0.101)       (0.585)       (0.208)                                 (1.014)
 Log(pupils)                                                   0.075*         0.126**       0.396*        0.001        0.352         0.206**      -0.620        -0.566
                                                               (0.042)        (0.060)       (0.213)       (0.136)      (0.262)       (0.103)      (0.441)       (0.610)
 Log(pupils/teachers)                                          -0.014         -0.118        -0.473        0.087        -0.103        -0.486       0.456         0.424
                                                               (0.086)        (0.109)       (0.615)       (0.188)      (0.261)       (0.471)      (0.864)       (2.426)
 Pupils selected on academic                                   0.477***       0.526***      0.588         0.048        2.368***      0.743**      1.145***      -0.260
 merit                                                         (0.109)        (0.151)       (0.488)       (0.188)      (0.496)       (0.340)      (0.400)       (0.582)
 General controls                    No          No            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Pupil controls (cty-specific)       No          No            No             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Observations                        1,002       1,002         1,002          472           77            152          82            133          86            78
 Dependent variables (mean)                                                   514.20        5.92          69.23        211.53        69.96        442.78        1002.81
Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. For the
cross-country pooled measure, we use the math exam pass rate from HSEEs in US (government schools only), uncapped GCSE score in UK, Fraser Institute school rating in
Canada, 9th grade GPA in Sweden, average math score in High School National Exam (ENEM) in Brazil, average math score in X Standards in India. In the UK we also use
a contextual value added measure (see Appendix A for details). Pupil achievement data z-scored within country. Autonomous government schools are escolas de
referência in Brazil, separate schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, private-aided schools in India, friskolor in Sweden, academies, foundation, and
voluntary-aided schools in the UK, and charter and magnet schools in the US. Management is z-score of the averaged of the z-scored 20 individual questions. All
regressions have country dummies. General controls: regional dummies, school curriculum (academic vs. vocational) and noise (job post and tenure of interviewee;
interviewer dummies, day of week; time of day and interview duration and reliability measure). Pupil controls: Brazil (% of female pupils, % of foreign and naturalized
pupils, and % of indigenous pupils), Canada (% of pupils whose 1st language is known/believed to be other than English), India (% of female pupils and % of pupils who
are native speakers of the local language),Sweden (% of female pupils and % of pupils whose 1st language is Swedish in Sweden), UK (% of female pupils, % of pupils
whose 1st language is not English, % of non-white pupils, and % of pupils eligible for a school meal); and US (% of female pupils, % of non-white pupils, and % of pupils
eligible for a school meal).

                                                                                   31
TABLE 3: MANAGEMENT REGRESSIONS - ACCOUNTING FOR DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SCHOOL TYPES
                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)
Dependent variable:                                                                                   Management
Country sample:                                OECD           OECD          OECD           Brazil        Brazil          Brazil         India          India         India
Autonomous government school                  0.233***       0.273***      0.244***       1.790***     0.926***         0.893***       -0.013          0.006         0.002
                                               (0.086)        (0.076)       (0.075)        (0.088)      (0.179)          (0.181)       (0.150)        (0.107)       (0.110)
Private school                                 -0.149*         0.033         -0.004       0.504***     0.457***         0.471***      0.273***         0.015         0.008
                                               (0.078)        (0.071)       (0.076)        (0.089)      (0.083)          (0.082)       (0.074)        (0.067)       (0.069)
Log(pupils)                                                  0.141***      0.113***                     0.103*          0.125**                      0.226***      0.221***
                                                              (0.032)       (0.033)                     (0.055)          (0.058)                      (0.040)       (0.041)
Log(pupils/teachers)                                         -0.163**      -0.150**                      -0.066           -0.079                     -0.291***     -0.288***
                                                              (0.070)       (0.070)                     (0.102)          (0.103)                      (0.063)       (0.063)
Pupils selected on academic                                    0.038          0.034                     0.345**         0.366**                      0.232***      0.230***
merits                                                        (0.088)       (0.087)                     (0.141)          (0.144)                      (0.055)       (0.056)
Regular (non-vocational)                                     0.170**       0.165**                       0.114            0.133
curriculum                                                    (0.073)       (0.074)                     (0.152)          (0.152)
Log(population density)                                                    0.057***                                      -0.059                                       0.012
                                                                            (0.018)                                      (0.041)                                     (0.024)
Noise controls                                   No             Yes            Yes           No             Yes            Yes           No             Yes            Yes
Test Private=Aut. gov. (p-value)                0.000          0.014          0.012         0.000          0.020          0.040         0.070          0.937          0.959
Observations                                    1,020          1,020          1,020          513            513            318           318            318            318
Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. All
columns have country and regional controls. The Management variable takes the average of all 20 management questions. Autonomous government schools are separate
schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, friskolor in Sweden, academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK; charter and magnet schools in the
US; escolas de referência in Brazil; private-aided schools in India. Population density is at the NUTS3 level. Noise controls include 23 interviewer dummies, day of week;
time of day interview conducted, interview duration, reliability measure, and job post of interviewee.




                                                                                             32
TABLE 4: ACCOUNTING FOR THE ADVANTAGE OF AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS IN THE OECD
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)             (7)              (8)
 Dependent Variable                                                           Management                                        Non-People          People
 Autonomous government school                  0.244***      0.244***    0.233***   0.223***        0.211***      0.129**          0.050          0.296***
                                                (0.075)       (0.075)     (0.074)    (0.076)         (0.075)       (0.060)        (0.061)          (0.083)
 Private school                                  -0.004        -0.006      0.013      -0.061          -0.058        -0.049       -0.193***        0.337***
                                                (0.076)       (0.077)     (0.076)    (0.082)         (0.083)       (0.070)        (0.074)          (0.092)
 Log(pupils)                                   0.113***      0.112***    0.115***   0.118***        0.120***      0.070**          0.043          0.123***
                                                (0.033)       (0.033)     (0.033)    (0.033)         (0.034)       (0.029)        (0.030)          (0.037)
 Log(pupils/teachers)                          -0.150**      -0.151**    -0.151**   -0.158**        -0.163**       -0.108*         -0.035         -0.252***
                                                (0.070)       (0.070)     (0.071)    (0.070)         (0.072)       (0.063)        (0.063)          (0.080)
 Competition                                                   0.007                                  0.021         -0.006         -0.013            0.015
                                                              (0.039)                                (0.038)       (0.034)        (0.036)          (0.040)
 Principal tenure (years)                                                  -0.004                     -0.004        -0.004         -0.003           -0.004
                                                                           (0.003)                   (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.004)
 Principal gender (male)                                                 -0.134***                 -0.142*** -0.097***           -0.108***          -0.066
                                                                           (0.041)                   (0.041)       (0.036)        (0.038)          (0.044)
 Principal has STEM background                                              0.070                     0.072          0.059         0.077*            0.012
                                                                           (0.046)                   (0.046)       (0.041)        (0.042)          (0.049)
 Principal personnel autonomy                                                            0.059       0.065*        0.060*           0.026         0.131***
                                                                                        (0.037)      (0.037)       (0.032)        (0.032)          (0.038)
 Principal budgetary autonomy                                                            0.003        0.005          0.007          0.003            0.015
                                                                                        (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.025)        (0.026)          (0.030)
 Principal academic content autonomy                                                     -0.004       -0.004        -0.015         -0.019           0.002
                                                                                        (0.031)      (0.031)       (0.028)        (0.028)          (0.032)
 Principal accountability                                                                                        0.235***        0.234***         0.184***
                                                                                                                   (0.022)        (0.023)          (0.029)
 Principal strategy                                                                                              0.236***        0.251***         0.161***
                                                                                                                   (0.023)        (0.024)          (0.026)
 Test Private= Aut. gov. (p-value)               0.012         0.012        0.023        0.005        0.008         0.046          0.006             0.679
Notes: All columns have 1,020 observations. Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust standard errors in
parentheses under coefficients. All columns contain country dummies, regional dummies, population density, whether regular academic curriculum, whether pupils selected
on academic merit and noise controls. The Management variable takes the average of all 20 management questions. Autonomous government schools are separate schools in


                                                                                  33
     ONLINE APPENDICES: NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION UNLESS REQUESTED BY
                                                    REFEREES



                                              APPENDIX A: DATA

A1. Management Survey Data
Table A1 lists the 20 management practices questions asked during the survey. The questions on accountability
and strategy are in Table A2 and on autonomy in Table A3.

A2. School-Level Pupil Outcome Data
We use school performance data for all countries surveyed, except Germany for which data is not available at the
time and for Italy for which a companion paper has been written (Di Liberto, Schivardi, and Sulis 2013). Across
all other countries we have found two types of school performance data: 1) standardized (and sometimes
compulsory) examination results and 2) non-standardized examination results. Below is a description of our
school performance dataset for each country.

Performance data for countries with a standardized examination system across regions

Brazil
For Brazilian schools, our main performance indicator is the 2011 overall school math average in the Exame
Nacional do Ensino Médio (ENEM), a non-mandatory national exam often used as a secondary school pupil
evaluation (and award certification for secondary school degree) and/or as a standard university entrance
qualification test. The exam is administered by the Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais
(INEP). The ENEM consists of 180 multiple-choice questions equally divided into four subject areas – math
(math and geometry), natural sciences (biology, physics and chemistry), human sciences (history, geography,
philosophy and sociology), languages and codes (Portuguese language, literature, foreign language, physical
education, information technology and communication) – plus a written essay.

As a robustness check, we also look at the association of management with the school average in natural sciences
and languages and codes as well as on the 9th grade average score of Prova Brasil – a national exam established
in 2005 assessing all pupils in public education with at least 20 pupils enrolled in the grade assessed. For pupil
characteristics used as controls in the performance regressions, such as gender composition, percentage of pupils
with a foreign background among others which were not collected during the survey, we use INEP’s 2011 Census
Escolar (School Census) publicly available database (www.inep.gov.br).

Sweden
We use the 9th grade GPA and the percentage of pupils qualifying for upper secondary school as the two main
performance measures in Sweden. Both of these measures (as well as school and pupil characteristics) are
available online at the Skolverket website (www.skolverket.se, siris.skolverket.se) for the large majority of the
schools in our dataset. The 9th grade GPA measure consists of the sum of points for the 16 best subjects in the
pupil's final grade. For each subject, pupils can pass, pass with merit, or pass with distinction. For a pass they
receive 10 points, for merit pass 15 points, and for distinction 20 points. The 9 th grade GPA is calculated for those
pupils who received grades in at least one subject. The percentage of pupils qualifying for upper secondary school
measure consists of the percentage of pupils who are eligible to apply to upper secondary school national
programs. To be eligible, a pupil needs to receive a minimum pass in three core subjects in Swedish compulsory
education: Swedish or Swedish as a second language, English, and math.

United Kingdom
As our main performance indicator in the UK, we use the average uncapped GCSE score which is publicly
available in the Key Stage 4 performance tables at the National Archives at the Department of Education website
(www.gov.uk/dfe).

The proportion of pupils achieving 5 GCSEs A-C* (Level 2 threshold), and more recently, the contextual value
added measure have been the main indicators used to assess secondary school performance in the UK. However,
we choose to use the average uncapped GSCE score because the average uncapped GSCE score provides a fuller
picture of the achievements of pupils of all abilities. Nonetheless, we show the effect of management on the
contextual value added measure in our main table and on proportion of pupils achieving 5 GCSEs A-C* (Level 2
threshold) in Table B3.


                                                         34
For pupil characteristics not collected during the survey and used as controls in the performance regressions such
as pupil gender composition, pupil ethnicity, pupil receiving free school meals among others, we use UK LEA
and School Information Service (LEASIS) 2009 database.

Countries with a non-standardized examination system

Canada
Due to the lack of a comparable pupil examination scores across provinces in Canada, we use a rating indicator
produced by the Fraser Institute (www.fraserinstitute.org), a Canadian think-tank that publishes school reports for
all schools (independent, separate and public) in the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and Ontario.

This measure consists of an overall relative rating out of 10, based on standardized scores, which ranks all
secondary schools within provinces. That is, in order for a school to show improvement in its overall rating out
of 10, it must improve more rapidly than the average. If it improves at a rate less than the average, it will show a
decline in its rating. The rating for each province takes a combination of several indicators of pupil achievement
into account, including exam marks, percentage of exams failed or below standard, courses taken per pupil, gender
gaps, graduation rates and delayed advancement rates. The rating for each province is built as follows:

        Schools in Alberta: the overall rating out of 10 takes into account the average exam mark, the percentage
         of exams failed, school vs. exam mark difference, gender gaps, no of courses taken per pupil, diploma
         completion rate and delayed advancement rate.
        Schools in British Columbia: the overall rating out of 10 takes into account the average exam mark,
         percentage of failed exams, school versus exam mark difference, gender gaps, graduation rate and
         delayed advancement rate.
        Schools in Ontario: the overall rating out of 10 takes into account the average level Grade 9 math,
         percentage of pupil passing the OSSLT, percentage of tests below standard, and gender gap.

The school reports provided by the Fraser Institute also contain the pupil characteristics data used in the
performance regressions.

India
For Indian schools, we use the average math scores in the X Standard examinations as our main indicator and the
average science, and average first language scores in the same examination for robustness checks. After the
completion of the tenth grade, pupil in India are required to sit for national board exams or state board exams,
depending on which central institution the school is affiliated to. These examinations consist of multiple choice
and short and long essay questions in the fields of math, physical sciences, social sciences, and languages among
others and are based on each board’s syllabus for Class X. The percentage scored in this examination determines
not only the pupil’s eligibility for graduation but also which field of study such as Science, Business or Arts the
pupil can enrol in class XI. Although the X Standards examinations are mandatory for all schools under
government school boards, the Central Board of Secondary Education (a Pan-Indian Private School Board) has
made this examination optional to its pupil and allowed schools to accept their internal exam scores for graduation
since 2010. We verify whether the quality of this examination is comparable across regions by searching for the
examination format and subjects in math across a selected number of boards, as shown in Table A4.

The results of the X Standard examinations are not publicly available. Instead, we collected these results one
month after the end of the survey by calling the person in charge of administering the X Standard examinations
in each school and asking for the average score, the overall number of points possible, the number of pupil sitting
in the examination, and the number of pupil passing the examinations for each compulsory subject in the
examination (usually math, sciences, first language, second language). We used the same procedure to collect the
pupil characteristics used in the performance regressions, cross-checking this information with the information
available in the DISE database (www.dise.in).

United States
We construct measures of school performance using the math exam pass rate from High School Exit Exams
(HSEEs) and End-of-Course Exams (EOCs). For robustness checks we use the science and reading exam pass
rates. The states where performance measures were available are the following: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas
(math and science only), California (math only), Colorado, Florida (math and reading only), Georgia (math and
science only), Illinois, Louisiana (math and science only), Massachusetts (math and science only), Minnesota
(math and reading only), New Jersey (math only), New York (math and science only), North Carolina (math and

                                                        35
science only), Ohio, Oklahoma (math and reading only), Oregon, Pennsylvania, Texas (math and science only),
Virginia (math and science only), Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. These measures were compiled using
publicly available data found in the department of education websites of each state.

This constructed measure of school performance gives rise to the question of whether it is a comparable measure
to use in our analysis. Indeed, some states use HSSEs (examinations on 9th or 10th grade subjects taken by 11th
or 12th grade pupil) where the subjects are usually grouped together as math, read, science, and social studies.
Other states use mandatory EOC examinations to withhold pupil diplomas where pupil are tested on several topics
within these main subjects such as Algebra, Geometry, Physics, Biology, and Chemistry (for example, Arkansas,
New York, North Carolina, and Virginia have passing scores for separate math-related subjects so there is no
overall passing percentage for just math). Furthermore, some of the states administering EOC examinations have
not started withholding diplomas yet, thus, these examinations are not mandatory. 1 In Table A5, we check for the
comparability of HSSEs and EOCs across states by examining the format and tested subjects in math for all state
containing performance measures in our dataset.2

For pupil characteristics used as controls in the performance regressions, such as gender composition, pupil
ethnicity among others which were not collected during the survey, we use the publicly available NCES CCD
Public School Survey Data 2008-2009 (https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/).




                                   APPENDIX B: ADDITIONAL RESULTS

Tables B1 and B2 contain descriptive statistics from our sample. Table B3 has the robustness tests of the pupil
performance regressions using alternative measures of school-level pupil outcomes. Table B4 has the robustness
tests of the pupil performance regressions decomposing the management index. Table B5 disaggregates the
management regressions in Table 3 by OECD country. Table B6 presents the specifications of Table 4 in Brazil
and India.



                                     APPENDIX C: SAMPLING FRAME

C1. The Sampling Frame and Eligibility to Participate in the Survey
In every country the sampling frame for the management survey included all schools offering education to 15
year-olds (excluding special needs schools) with 50 or more pupils in total.3 In order to ensure comparability
across countries, we refrained from saying only “secondary or high schools” because some schools educate
children from kindergarten to the end of high school (and we did not want to exclude them from the sample). The
source of this sampling frame by country is shown in Table C1.

Interviewers were each given a randomly selected list of schools from the sampling frame. This should therefore
be representative of the population of schools in the country. At schools, we either interviewed the principal, head-
teacher or school director, that is, the school leader at the top of the organization who is still involved in its
management on a daily basis. The school leaders also had to be in the post for at least one year at the time of the
interview.

1
  The main controversy surrounding HSEEs is twofold: 1) pupils who think they might fail the test might not take
it in the first place and instead drop out of high school and, 2) local school authorities, principals and teachers
have an extra incentive if pupils do well so the passing/proficient percentage might be higher but so are the dropout
rates. For more information on this topic, see Warren, Jenkins, and Kulick (2006).
2
    This table is an updated version of the table available on the following website:
http://sites.google.com/site/highschoolexits/home/examsbystate
3
  The exception to this is India. Due to the lack of readily available sampling frames for secondary education in
India, we constructed a sampling frame which only included schools that offered education at both the primary
and secondary level, that is, the grades/level offered by the school included primary as well as secondary education
(list of schools available at the District Information System for Education website). We were able to complement
this sampling frame with the database of the two pan-Indian school networks, the Central Board for Secondary
Education and the Indian Council of Secondary Education, which comprised of all secondary member schools,
including schools only offering secondary education.

                                                        36
Table C2 shows the number of schools in the sampling frame. The median schools in the UK, Italy (information
available for public schools only), and Germany are larger as measured by the number of pupil in the schools
while the median schools in Brazil and India are the smallest. In terms of the percentage of schools which are
funded and managed exclusively by government authorities (this excludes escolas de referência in Brazil, separate
schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, private aided schools in India, friskolor in Sweden,
academies, foundation schools and voluntary aided schools in the UK, and charter and magnet schools in the US),
the UK has the smallest share (46%) while Sweden has the largest share (88%).


C2. The Survey Response Rates
Table C3 shows the survey response rates by country. The first column of each country represents all schools in
the randomly selected list of schools given to the interviewers as described above. The second column represents
all schools eligible for the interview. The eligibility criteria were confirmed by the interviewer during the process
of contacting and scheduling the interview. In terms of interviews completed, we managed to obtain a response
rate ranging from 58% and 42% of eligible schools in Brazil and India, respectively, to 8% of eligible schools in
the UK. In contrast, the explicit refusal rate was generally low across all countries surveyed, ranging from 2% of
all eligible schools in Sweden to 16% of all eligible schools in Germany.

The high response rate in Brazil and India was due to greater persistence in following up non-respondents in order
to meet the target numbers we were aiming for and to the fact that most principals interviewed in these countries
responded with a scheduled time and date soon after the first or second contact with the interviewer. As for the
UK, there are a number of possible reasons for why the response rate was lower, including the proliferation of
cold-calling and the increasing number of telephone surveys in schools in the UK (which makes running telephone
surveys harder as switchboards more aggressively screen out calls), the domestic bias (phoning UK schools from
the UK representing a study from a UK University is less impressive than, for example, phoning Brazilian schools
from the UK), and principals’ slow turnaround time for a response after the initial contact by interviewers (which
was common throughout the North American and European countries surveyed).

“Scheduling in progress” indicates schools which have been contacted by an interviewer and which have not
refused to be interviewed (for example they may schedule an interview but cancel or postpone it or simply take
more time to respond). The high share of “scheduling in progress” schools was due to the need for interviewers
to keep a stock of between 100 to 300 schools to cycle though when trying to arrange interviews. Since
interviewers only ran an average of 1.4 interviews a day the majority of their time was spent trying to contact
principals to schedule future interviews. The optimal level of this stock varied by the country: many US and
Canadian managers operated voicemail, so that large stocks of firms were needed, while UK managers typically
had personnel assistants rather than voicemail, who wanted to see Government endorsement materials before
connecting with the managers. In addition, in the North American and European countries, a portion of the survey
wave took place when principals were on holiday during the summer months. Unfortunately, the survey ended
before these principals could be interviewed, which left large stocks of initially contacted schools without
possibility of following up but were still considered under the “scheduling in progress” category.

The ratio of successful interviews to rejections (ignoring “scheduling in progress”) is above 1 in every country,
except in the UK. Hence, managers typically agreed to the survey proposition when interviewers were able to
connect with them. This agreement ratio is lowest in the UK for the same reasons the response rate was lower:
proliferation of phone surveys, domestic bias, personal assistants acting as tough gatekeepers, and slow turnaround
time for a response after initial contact.

Finally, after initial contact, many schools were deemed not eligible for an interview, that is, the information in
the sampling frame wrongly reported these schools as offering general education to 15-year-olds or enrolling more
than 50 pupils in the sampling frames, or interviewer verified that the principal had been in the post for less than
one year. One of the reasons for a lower average of school interviews conducted per day in comparison to the
average for our manufacturing interviews (2.8 per day) is the fact that analysts spent a significant time on the
phone screening out non-eligible schools.




                                                        37
C3. Selection Analysis
Panel A of Table C4 analyses the probability of being interviewed. 4 Within each country, we compare the
responding schools with those eligible schools in the sampling frame - including “interviews refused” and
“scheduling in progress” but removing “schools not eligible” for the survey - against three types of selection bias:
size (number of pupils), ownership (share of regular government schools) and population density (number of
habitants per square kilometer) by state, province, or NUTS 2 region as a measure of location.

Looking at the overall pattern of results, there are very few significant coefficients and the marginal effects are
small in magnitude. First, there is a tendency for larger schools to be more likely to respond, although this is only
significant in Canada. The US is unusual in that smaller schools are significantly more likely to be interviewed. 5
Second, government schools were no more likely to respond, except in India. Third, schools in densely populated
areas tended to be less likely to respond, although this only significant at the 5% level in India 6 and only at the
10% level in the US and Brazil.

To address selection concerns, we used the regressions in Table C4 to construct sampling weights. We then plot
our cross-country ranking using the estimated weights. We found that the rankings across countries for the
unweighted scores in Figure 1 were very robust when using these alternative sample weighting schemes. For
example, Figure C1 below gives the equivalent of Figure 1 using the weights from Panel A of Table C4.

Panel B of Table C4 analyses the probability of being interviewed and of having pupil outcome measures publicly
available. Within each country, we compare these schools with eligible school in the rest of the sampling frame,
including schools for which we have a management interview against the same three types of selection bias as
specified in Panel A. First, the results indicate that larger schools are more likely to have pupil outcomes data
available in Canada (where performance data is only available in three major provinces) and the UK and (albeit
we have performance data for 86 of the 92 schools interviewed) while smaller schools in India are more likely to
have pupil outcome data (where data was collected through a short school performance telephone survey).
Nonetheless, the coefficient magnitudes are small. Second, regular government schools in Brazil and the US are
more likely to have pupil outcomes data available, however the magnitude of the coefficient in Brazil is small (we
have performance data for 472 of the 513 schools interviewed) while the larger coefficient in the US reflects the
unavailability of data for non-regular government schools for the majority of states. Third, schools in densely
populated areas are more likely to have pupil outcomes data available in Canada and the UK, while schools in
less populated areas are more likely to have pupil outcomes data in India (although this is marginally significant
in the UK and India).




4
  Note this sample is smaller than the total survey sample because we do not have enrolment or ownership data
for all schools in our survey sample.
5
  The reason for this is that many US principals from smaller schools did not have assistants who could potentially
block our calls. Instead, many principals display their direct lines on the schools websites, which made it easier
for our interviewers to reach them.
6
  For our Indian random survey sample, private school phone numbers (from CBSE and ICSE databases) were
available while no phone numbers were available for government schools (from the DISE database). For many
schools, we were not able to find either phone numbers or any information online and, thus, we were not able to
verify whether these schools were still functioning. The interviewers were instructed to categorize these schools
as out-of-business/no phone number found (that is, not eligible for the survey), thus decreasing the share of
government schools in the eligible school sample. As interviewers were instructed to persistently call government
schools in order to balance the sample, we now see a higher marginal effect of being interviewed which is inflated
due to the fact that we had a much lower share of government schools in the eligible sample.


                                                        38
FIGURE B1: PEOPLE AND NON-PEOPLE MANAGEMENT WITHIN COUNTRIES

                               1 UK                                 2 Sweden                               3 US
          1
        .5
          0




                          4 Canada                                  5 Germany                              6 Italy
          1
        .5
          0




                                                                                                1      2        3       4

                              7 Brazil                                  8 India
          1
        .5
          0




              1           2        3        4          1            2        3        4
                                                                        x
                                                           People            Non-People


         Graphs by Country


Notes: Data from 1,851 obs. (513 BR, 146 CA, 140 GE, 318 IN, 284 IT, 88 SW, 92 UK, 270 US schools).


FIGURE C1: CROSS COUNTRY AVERAGE MANAGEMENT SCORES CORRECTED FOR
SAMPLING RESPONSE RATES



                   UK                                                                                                2.94

             Sweden                                                                                          2.81

             Canada                                                                                         2.79

                   US                                                                                      2.77

          Germany                                                                               2.57

                  Italy                                         2.06

              Brazil                                           2.04

                  India                   1.72


                      1.5           1.7          1.9           2.1           2.3          2.5       2.7        2.9          3.1

Notes: Average management score using sample weights constructed from the sample selection model in Table
C4. Data from 1,851 obs. (513 BR, 146 CA, 140 GE, 318 IN, 284 IT, 88 SW, 92 UK, 270 US schools).


                                                                        39
TABLE A1: LIST OF MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

Operations:
 Q1. Standardization of       Measures how well materials and practices are standardized and aligned in order to
 Instructional Planning       be capable of moving pupils through learning pathways over time
 Processes
 Q2. Personalization of       Measures for flexibility in teaching methods and pupil involvement ensuring all
 Instruction and Learning     individuals can master the learning objectives
 Q3. Data-Driven Planning     Measures if the school uses assessment to verify learning outcomes at critical stages,
 and Pupil Transitions        make data easily available and adapt pupil strategies accordingly
 Q4. Adopting Educational     Measures how well the school incorporates teaching best practices and the sharing
 Best Practices               of these resources into the classroom

Monitoring:
 Q5. Continuous               Measures attitudes towards process documentation and continuous improvement
 Improvement
 Q6. Performance              Measures whether school performance is measured with the right methods and
 Tracking                     frequency
 Q7. Performance Review       Measures whether performance is reviewed with appropriate frequency and follow-
                              up
 Q8. Performance Dialogue     Measures the quality of review conversations
 Q9. Consequence              Measures whether differing levels of school performance (not only individual teacher
 Management                   performance) lead to different consequences

Target Setting:
 Q10. Target Balance          Measures whether the system tracks meaningful targets tied to pupil outcomes
 Q11. Target                  Measures whether the school and individual targets are aligned with each other and
 Interconnection              the overall system goals
 Q12. Time Horizon of         Measures whether the school has a rational approach to planning and setting the
 Targets                      targets
 Q13. Target Stretch          Measures whether targets are appropriately difficult to achieve
 Q14. Clarity and             Measures how easily understandable performance measures are and whether
 Comparability of Targets     performance is openly communicated

People/Talent Management:
 Q15. Rewarding High          Measures whether good teacher performance is rewarded proportionately
 Performers
 Q16. Fixing Poor             Measures whether the school is able to deal with underperformers
 Performers
 Q17. Promoting High          Measures whether promotions and career progression are based on performance
 Performers
 Q18. Managing Talent         Measures how well the school identifies and targets needed teaching, leadership and
                              other capacity in the school
 Q19. Retaining Talent        Measures whether the school will go out of its way to keep its top talent
 Q20. Creating a              Measures how strong the teacher value proposition is to work in the individual school
 Distinctive Employee
 Value Proposition
Notes: Detailed survey instrument available at www.worldmanagementsurvey.org




                                                    40
TABLE A2: PRINCIPAL LEADERSHIP & ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES

 Leadership Vision &             Measures whether schools leaders have an understanding of the broader set of
 Strategy                        challenges that the school, system and key actors face and the right mind-set to
                                 address them by checking whether the vision is clearly defined, set with the
                                 collaboration of a wide range of stakeholders, broadly communicated, linked to pupil
                                 outcomes and built upon a keen understanding of community needs.
  Clearly Defined                Measures whether school leaders are accountable for delivery of targets (including
  Accountability for School      quality, equity, and cost-effectiveness of pupil outcomes), are held responsible with
  Leaders                        both school and individual-level consequences for good and bad performance, and
                                 are autonomous in order to make decision that will directly affect the outcomes of
                                 these targets.
Notes: All questions are scored on a 1 to 5 scale with 1=lowest scores and 5=highest score. Detailed survey
instrument available at www.worldmanagementsurvey.org.



TABLE A3: PRINCIPAL AUTONOMY MEASURES

 Personnel Autonomy              To hire a full-time teacher what agreement would you need?
 Budgetary Autonomy              What is the largest capital investment you can make without prior authorization from
                                 outside?
 Academic Content                To add a new class - for example, introducing a new language such as Mandarin -
 Autonomy                        what agreement would you need?
Notes: To measure the degree of autonomy we use a 1-5 scale where 1 refers to no authority to make any
decision and 5 refers to complete authority to make any decision. Detailed survey instrument available at
www.worldmanagementsurvey.org




                                                       41
TABLE A4: INDIA X STANDARD EXAMS (CLASS 10)
State             Test Name            Cove   Man           Test Format for                               Test Subjects for Mathematics
                                       rage   dator          Mathematics
                                               y?
AP      Andhra Pradesh Board of        10     Yes     Short Answer and Constructed   Algebra, Vector Algebra, Trigonometry, Calculus, Coordinate Geometry
        Intermediate Education                        Response
GJ      Gujarat Board of Secondary     10     Yes     Multiple Choice, Short         Number system, Algebra (Polynomials, Rational Expressions, Linear
        Education                                     Answer, Very Short Answer      Equation, Quadratic Equations), Arithmetic Progression, Accounting
                                                      and Constructed Response       (Instalments, Income Tax), Mensuration, Trigonometry, Coordinate
                                                                                     Geometry.
HR      Haryana Board of Education     10     Yes     Multiple Choice, Short         Number system (Real Numbers), Algebra (Polynomials, Linear Equation,
                                                      Answer, Very Short Answer      Quadratic Equations), Arithmetic Progression, Trigonometry (Triangles),
                                                      and Constructed Response       Coordinate Geometry
J&K     J & K State Board of School    10     Yes     Multiple Choice and            Algebra, Probability, Mensuration, Trigonometry, Coordinate Geometry,
        Education                                     Constructed Response           Accounting (Instalments, Interest Rates)
KA      Secondary School Leaving       10     Yes     Multiple Choice, Very Short    Algebra, Mensuration, Coordinate Geometry
        Certificate                                   Answer, Constructed
                                                      Response
MH      The Maharashtra State          10     Yes                                    Number system, Algebra, Geometry, Trigonometry, Mensuration, Statistics,
        Secondary School Certificate                                                 Graphs and Coordinate Geometry
CBSE    All India Secondary School     10     No      Multiple Choice, Short         Algebra, Geometry, Mensuration, Trigonometry, Coordinate Geometry,
        Examination                                   Answer, Very Short Answer      Probability
                                                      and Constructed Response
ISCE    Indian School Certificate      10     Yes     Short Answer, Very Short       Number system, Algebra, Mensuration, Coordinate Geometry, Accounting
        Examination                                   Answer, Constructed            (Interest Rates), Trigonometry, Probability.
                                                      Response.




                                                                         42
TABLE A5: UNITED STATES HIGH SCHOOL EXIT EXAMS (HSEEs) AND END OF COURSE EXAMS (EOCs)
State             Test Name               Coverage      Man         Test Format for                            Test Subjects for Mathematics
                                                        dator        Mathematics
                                                         y?
AL      Alabama High School               11, 12        Yes     Multiple choice          Algebra and Pre-Geometry
        Graduation Exam (AHSGE)
AZ      Arizona's Instrument to Measure   9, 10, 11,    Yes     Multiple choice          Algebra I & II and Geometry
        Standards (AIMS)                  12
AR      End Of Course Exams (EOC)         HS            Yes     Multiple Choice and      Statistics, Data Analysis, Probability, Measurement and Geometry, Number
                                                                Constructed Response     Sense, Mathematical Reasoning, Algebra
CA      California High School Exit       10, 11, 12    Yes     Multiple Choice          Number Sense, Algebra, Probability, Geometry and Measurement, Problem
        Examination (CAHSEE)                                                             - Solving,
FL      Florida's Comprehensive           10            Yes     Multiple Choice,         Number and Operations, Measurement, Geometry and Spatial Sense,
        Assessment Test (FCAT)                                  Performance Tasks,       Patterns, Functions, and Algebra, Data Analysis, Probability and Statistics
                                                                Gridded Response
GA      Georgia High School               11            Yes     Multiple Choice          Number and Computation, Geometry and Measurement, Algebra, Data
        Graduation Tests (GHSGT)                                                         Analysis
IL      Prairie State Achievement         11            No      Multiple Choice          Number Sense, Estimation and Measurement, Algebra and Analytical
        Examination (PSAE)                                                               Methods, Geometry, Data Analysis and Probability
LA      Graduation Exit Exam (GEE)        10 (Eng &     Yes     Multiple Choice and      Number Sense, Concepts, and Applications; Spatial Sense and Geometry;
                                          math), 11             Constructed Response     Data Analysis, Probability, Statistics, and Discrete Math; Patterns,
                                          (sci & soc)                                    Functions, and Algebra

MA      Massachusetts Comprehensive       9/10 (sci),   Yes     Multiple Choice, Short   Algebra, Functions, and Graphs; Geometry and Trigonometry; Data
        Assessment System (MCAS)          10 (ela &             Answer, Open Response    Analysis and Probability;
                                          math)
MN      Graduation Required               11 math),     Yes     Multiple Choice          Numbers and Operations; Geometry and Measurement; Data Analysis and
        Assessment for Diploma            10 (read),                                     Probability; Algebra
        (GRAD)                            9 (write)
NJ      High School Proficiency Exam      11            Yes     Multiple Choice and      Algebra I
        (HSPA)                                                  Open Ended
NM      New Mexico High School            11            No      Multiple Choice and      Algebra I, Geometry and Measurement, Probability and Statistics, Math
        Standards Assessment                                    Constructed Response     Processes and Tools
        (NMHSSA)



                                                                              43
 NY        New York State Education         HS            Yes     Multiple Choice and       Numbers and Operations; Algebraic Reasoning; Geometric Reasoning and
           Department Regents                                     Short Answer              Measurement; Data, Statistics, and Probability
           Examinations (NYSEDRE)

 NC        North Carolina End of Course     HS            Yes     Multiple Choice           Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II
           Exams (NC EOC)
 OH        Ohio Graduations Tests (OGT)     10            Yes     Multiple Choice and       Mathematical Processes, Numerical Operations and Relationships,
                                                                  Constructed Response      Geometry, Measurement, Statistics and Probability, Algebraic Relationships


 OK        Oklahoma Core Curriculum         9, 10, 11,    Yes     Multiple Choice           Number operations and concepts, Geometry, Measurement, Algebra, Data
           Tests (OCCT-EOI)                 12                                              Analysis and Probability
 OR        Oregon Assessment of             10            No      Multiple Choice           Numeration, Measurement, Estimation, Functions, Geometry, Probability
           Knowledge and Skills (OAKS)
 PA        Pennsylvania System of School    11            Yes     Multiple Choice and       Numbers and Operations, Algebraic Concepts, Geometry, Measurement and
           Assessment (PSSA)                                      Open Ended                Data, Data Analysis and Probability
 TX        Texas Assessment of              11            Yes     Multiple Choice and       Algebra 1
           Knowledge and Skills (TAKS)                            Short Answer
 VA        Standards of Learning Tests      EOC           Yes     Multiple Choice           Number and Operations; Geometry and Measurement; Functions and
           (SOL)                                                                            Algebra; Data, Statistics, and Probability
 WA        Washington Assessment of         10            Yes     Multiple Choice, Short    Number and Operations, Geometry, Data Analysis, Statistics and
           Student Learning (WASL)                                Answer, and Constructed   Probability; Measurement; Algebra, Functions, and Patterns
                                                                  Response
 WI        Wisconsin Knowledge Concepts     10            No      Multiple Choice           Number and Operations; Geometry and Measurement; Functions and
           Exams (WKCE)                                                                     Algebra; Statistics and Probability
 WY        Proficiency Assessments for      11            No      Multiple Choice and       Number and Operations, Algebra, Geometry and Measurement, Statistics
           Wyoming Students (PAWS)                                Constructed Response      and Probability
Notes: Information on HSEEs and EOCs for the year of the survey (2009).




                                                                                44
TABLE B1: MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF VARIABLES

                                                                 Standard
 Variable                                              Mean        Dev.      Min.       Max.      Obs
 Average Management Score                              2.27        0.612     1.00       4.15      1851
 Average People Score                                   2.00       0.624      1.00      4.00      1851
 Average Non-People Score                               2.39       0.658      1.00      4.37      1851
 Performance Measures (for 1,002 schools)
 Average Management Score                               2.27       0.649      1.00      4.15      1002
 HSNE (ENEM) Average Math Score                        514.20     74.326     328.10    774.69     472
 Rating                                                 5.92       2.013      0.00      10.00      77
 X Standards Average Math Score                         69.23      8.289     50.00      90.00     152
 9th Grade GPA                                         211.53     20.992     122.00    274.20      83
 HSEE Math Pass Rate                                    69.96     23.119      0.00     100.00     133
 Average Uncapped GCSE Score                           442.78     75.543     299.80    645.80      86
 Contextual Value Added                                1002.81    17.258     957.60    1044.50     78
 Ownership and Governance
 Share of Private Schools                               0.27       0.443      0.00      1.00      1851
 Share of Autonomous Government Schools                 0.06       0.244      0.00      1.00      1851
 Share of Regular Government Schools                    0.67       0.471      0.00      1.00      1851
 Leadership
 Principal Strategy                                     2.62       0.850      1.00      5.00      1851
 Principal Accountability                               2.22       0.843      1.00      5.00      1851
 Autonomy
 Personnel Autonomy                                     2.76       1.665      1.00      5.00      1851
 Academic Content Autonomy                              2.89       1.473      1.00      5.00      1847
 Capital (Budgetary) Autonomy                          5966.75   16551.250    0.00    178019.10   1732
 School Characteristics
 Number of Pupils                                       6.35       0.874      2.30      8.58      1851
 Pupil/Teacher Ratio                                    2.64       0.550      0.01      5.24      1851
 Share of Schools with a Regular Curriculum (as
 opposed to Vocational)                                 0.92       0.264      0.00      1.00      1851
 Share of Schools with Pupil Selection based on
 Academics                                              0.24       0.426      0.00      1.00      1408
 Principal Characteristics
 Number of Years in Post (Tenure)                       6.56       6.224      1.00      52.00     1850
 Share of Male Principals                               0.56       0.496      0.00      1.00      1851
 Share of Principals with a
 Science/Tech./Eng./Maths/Business Degree               0.32       0.468      0.00      1.00      1690
 Geographical Control
 Population Density (number of people/Km2)             704.75    2911.378     0.00    56348.08    1764




                                                  45
TABLE B2: DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PRIVATE, AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT AND REGULAR GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS (IN DEVIATIONS
FROM COUNTRY MEANS)
                                                 Panel A: OECD                       Panel B: Brazil                       Panel C: India

                                                  Autonomous     Regular              Autonomous       Regular              Autonomous      Regular
                                       Private       Gov.         Gov.     Private       Gov.           Gov.     Private       Gov.          Gov.


 Management                             0.98          1.05        1.00      1.12          1.42          0.95      1.04          0.95         0.94


 Pupils                                 0.87          1.00        1.03      0.95          1.01          1.02      1.02          1.03         0.96
 Pupils/teachers                        0.86          1.03        1.02      0.88          1.17          1.04      0.98          1.05         1.02
 Regular curriculum                     1.02          1.02        0.99      1.04          1.05          0.99      1.00          1.00         1.00
 Academic selection                     2.31          0.66        0.75      2.39          0.00          0.49      1.13          0.76         0.83
 Population density in region           1.17          1.07        0.96      1.33          0.13          0.89      1.01          1.04         0.98


 Number of competitors                  1.14          1.00        0.97      1.22          0.77          0.92      1.02          1.02         0.96


 Principal tenure (years)               1.44          0.95        0.91      1.65          0.95          0.76      1.14          1.12         0.73
 Principal gender (male)                1.00          0.88        1.02      0.95          1.04          1.02      0.86          1.08         1.22
 Principal has STEM background          1.03          1.12        0.98      0.76          1.20          1.09      0.99          1.14         0.99


 Principal personnel autonomy           1.71          1.09        0.84      2.23          1.22          0.54      1.25          1.06         0.57
 Principal budgetary autonomy           1.05          0.99        0.99      1.89          2.72          0.71      1.08          0.88         0.90
 Principal academic content autonomy    1.17          1.05        0.96      1.97          1.52          0.64      1.19          1.06         0.67


 Principal strategy                     0.92          1.06        1.01      1.05          1.21          0.98      1.04          0.81         0.96
 Principal accountability               1.02          1.03        0.99      1.29          1.48          0.89      1.08          0.84         0.90


 Observations                          1,020         1,020        1,020     513            513          513       318           318          318




                                                                   46
TABLE B3: PUPIL OUTCOMES AND MANAGEMENT – ALTERNATIVE MEASURES
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
        Sample of countries:                        Brazil         Brazil         India         India         Sweden          UK             US             US
                                                                Portuguese
                                                    Natural                                                      %            %
                                                                 & Math                        Average                                     HSEE           HSEE
                                                   Sciences                     Average                     qualifying    achieving 5
        Dependent variable:                                      Average                        First                                      Science       Reading
                                                   Average                      Science                     for upper     GCSEs A-
                                                                  (Prova                      Language                                      Pass          Pass
                                                   (ENEM)                                                   sec. school       C*
                                                                  Brasil)
        Management (z-score)                         0.120**          0.190*      0.495**          0.402        0.286          0.399         0.079         0.333**
                                                     (0.055)         (0.113)       (0.247)        (0.333)      (0.224)        (0.249)       (0.069)        (0.140)
        Autonomous government school                  0.064           0.007        0.412*          0.192        0.055          0.040         0.155          -0.182
                                                     (0.361)         (0.390)       (0.223)        (0.237)      (0.345)        (0.246)       (0.146)        (0.349)
        Private school                              1.535***                        0.197          -0.299                      0.004
                                                     (0.105)                       (0.205)        (0.313)                     (0.892)
        Log(pupils)                                 0.186***          0.053         0.095          0.332       0.550*          -0.532        0.054          0.195
                                                     (0.059)         (0.127)       (0.119)        (0.201)      (0.286)        (0.340)       (0.074)        (0.167)
        Log(pupils/teachers)                          -0.132          -0.038        -0.003         0.100        -0.057         0.741         -0.345         -0.652
                                                     (0.104)         (0.222)       (0.212)        (0.274)      (0.287)        (0.765)       (0.224)        (0.658)
        Pupils selected on academic merit           0.477***          -0.448        -0.042         -0.225       0.018        1.254***        0.096          -0.794
                                                     (0.155)         (0.334)       (0.172)        (0.218)      (0.611)        (0.322)       (0.242)        (0.485)
        General controls                               Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
        Pupil controls (country-specific)              Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
        Observations                                   472             263           152            152           82             86            105            72
Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. We use the
science and reading exam pass rates from HSEEs in US (government schools only), contextual value added and % of pupils achieving 5 GCSEs A-C* (Level 2 threshold) in
UK, % of pupils qualifying for upper secondary school in Sweden, natural sciences in High School National Exam (ENEM) and Portuguese and math average in Prova Brasil
in Brazil, X Standards Average science and first language score in India (Appendix A). Pupil achievement data z-scored within country. Autonomous government schools are
escolas de referência in Brazil, private-aided schools in India, friskolor in Sweden, academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK, and charter and magnet
schools in the US. Management is z-score of the averaged of the z-scored 20 individual questions. General controls: regional dummies, school curriculum (academic vs.
vocational) and noise (job post and tenure of interviewee; interviewer dummies, day of week; time of day and interview duration and reliability measure). Pupil controls:
Brazil (% of female pupils, % of foreign and naturalized pupils, and % of indigenous pupils), Canada (% of pupils whose 1st language is known/believed to be other than
English), India (% of female pupils and % of pupils who are native speakers of the local language), Sweden (% of female pupils and % of pupils whose 1st language is Swedish
in Sweden), UK (% of female pupils, % of pupils whose 1st language is not English, % of non-white pupils, and % of pupils eligible for a school meal); and US (% of female
pupils, % of non-white pupils, and % of pupils eligible for a school meal).


                                                                                    47
  TABLE B4: PUPIL OUTCOMES AND MANAGEMENT – DECOMPOSITIONS OF MANAGEMENT
  PRACTICES
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
Dependent variable:                     Cross-country pooled measure of pupil achievement (z-scored)
Management (z-score)         0.232***
                              (0.044)
Operations (z-scored)                      0.093**
                                           (0.036)
Monitoring (z-scored)                                  0.133***
                                                         (0.036)
Targets (z-scored)                                                   0.158***
                                                                      (0.038)
People (z-scored)                                                                 0.257***
                                                                                   (0.046)
Comparable                                                                                     0.248***
Management (z-scored)                                                                           (0.045)
Dobbie-Fryer Index                                                                                          0.134***
                                                                                                             (0.038)
Autonomous government        0.396***     0.433***     0.428***      0.427***     0.365***     0.391***     0.426***
school                        (0.114)      (0.117)       (0.117)      (0.115)      (0.113)      (0.114)      (0.117)
Private school               1.139***     1.201***     1.205***      1.224***     1.015***     1.131***     1.175***
                              (0.094)      (0.095)       (0.094)      (0.095)      (0.100)      (0.094)      (0.096)
Log(pupils)                    0.075*      0.088**      0.093**      0.087**       0.072*       0.077*       0.084**
                              (0.042)      (0.043)       (0.043)      (0.043)      (0.042)      (0.042)      (0.043)
Log(pupils/teachers)           -0.014       -0.023       -0.037       -0.022       -0.018       -0.019       -0.016
                              (0.086)      (0.087)       (0.086)      (0.087)      (0.087)      (0.086)      (0.086)
Pupils selected on           0.477***     0.504***     0.512***      0.489***     0.453***     0.473***     0.503***
academic merit                (0.109)      (0.111)       (0.109)      (0.110)      (0.109)      (0.109)      (0.110)
Observations                    1,002          1,002         1,002         1,002       1,002       1,002       1,002
  Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust
  standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. General controls and country dummies in all columns. We use
  the math exam pass rate from HSEEs in US (government schools only), uncapped GCSE score in UK, Fraser
  Institute school rating in Canada, 9th grade GPA in Sweden, average math score in High School National Exam
  (ENEM) in Brazil, average math score in X Standards in India (see Appendix A for details). Pupil achievement
  data z-scored within country. Autonomous government schools are escolas de referência in Brazil, separate
  schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, private-aided schools in India, friskolor in Sweden,
  academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK, and charter and magnet schools in the US. The
  Management variable takes the average of all 20 management questions. The Non-People variable takes the
  average of all non-people practices, that is, all operations management, performance management, and target
  setting questions listed in Table A1 (Qs 1 to 14) in the Appendix. The People variable takes the average of all
  people related management questions in Table A1 (Qs 15 to 20) in the Appendix. The Comparable Management
  variable takes the average of 16 questions common to the school survey and surveys in other sectors in Table A1
  in the Appendix (Qs 5 to 20, that is, all monitoring, target setting and people management questions). The Dobbie-
  Fryer Index takes the average of 3 management questions: “Q3 - Data-driven Planning and Pupil Transitions”,
  “Q4 - Adopting Education Best Practices”, “Q2 - Personalization of Instruction and Learning”, and 1 leadership
  question: “Clearly Defined Accountability for Principals”. General controls are regional dummies, school
  curriculum (academic vs. vocational) and noise controls (job post and tenure of interviewee; up to 40 interviewer
  dummies, day of week; time of day interview conducted, interview duration and reliability measure).


                                                         48
TABLE B5: MANAGEMENT REGRESSIONS BY OECD COUNTRY
                                                                         (1)              (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
                                                                                                                                                              All OECD
  Sample of countries:                                    All          Canada       Germany           Italy        Sweden           UK             US           except
                                                                                                                                                               Sweden
  Dependent variable:                                                                               Management (z-score)


  Autonomous government school                         0.244***         0.030           0.237                      0.430**         0.213          0.111         0.141*
                                                        (0.075)        (0.100)          (0.204)                    (0.185)        (0.154)        (0.228)        (0.077)
  Private school                                         -0.004         0.176           0.790        0.007                         -0.055        -0.194         -0.009
                                                        (0.076)        (0.189)          (0.498)      (0.144)                      (0.448)        (0.143)        (0.079)
  Log(pupils)                                          0.113***         0.028           0.168        0.054          -0.057       0.678***        0.133**       0.128***
                                                        (0.033)        (0.056)          (0.116)      (0.076)       (0.139)        (0.173)        (0.067)        (0.035)
  Log(pupils/teachers)                                 -0.150**         0.123           -0.167       -0.134         -0.237         -0.545        -0.179        -0.152**
                                                        (0.070)        (0.142)          (0.363)      (0.123)       (0.151)        (0.615)        (0.161)        (0.075)
  Pupils selected on academic merits                     0.034          0.153           0.083        -0.032         0.338          0.037          0.084          0.060
                                                        (0.087)        (0.134)          (0.285)      (0.184)       (0.309)        (0.240)        (0.272)        (0.088)
  Regular (non-vocational) curriculum                   0.165**                         0.134       0.170**                                                    0.164**
                                                        (0.074)                         (0.179)      (0.084)                                                    (0.074)
  Log(population density)                              0.057***         0.030           0.080*       -0.014         0.226*         -0.038        0.086**       0.054***
                                                        (0.018)        (0.029)          (0.048)      (0.057)       (0.132)        (0.051)        (0.035)        (0.018)


  Regional dummies                                        No             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
  Noise controls                                          No             Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
  Test Private=Autonomous gov.: p-value                  0.028          0.438           0.303                                      0.503          0.192          0.128
  Observations                                            1,020           146            140             284             88           92            270             932
Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. Autonomous
government schools are separate schools in Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, friskolor in Sweden, academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK,
and charter and magnet schools in the US. Column (1) includes country dummies. Population density is at the NUTS3 level. Noise controls include up to 23 interviewer
dummies, day of week; time of day interview conducted, interview duration, reliability measure, and job post of interviewee.



                                                                                   49
TABLE B6: EXPLAINING THE ADVANTAGE OF AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS:
PRINCIPAL LEADERSHIP IN BRAZIL AND INDIA
                                                  (1)                   (2)              (3)                (4)
  Sample of countries:                                       Brazil                               India

                                             Management          Management         Management        Management
  Dependent variable:                         (z-scored)          (z-scored)         (z-scored)        (z-scored)

  Autonomous government school                 0.893***               0.436**           0.002              0.055
                                                (0.181)               (0.198)          (0.110)            (0.095)
  Private school                               0.471***                -0.030           0.008              -0.076
                                                (0.082)               (0.137)          (0.069)            (0.061)
  Log(pupils)                                   0.125**                0.078          0.221***            0.171***
                                                (0.058)               (0.048)          (0.041)            (0.036)
  Log(pupils/teachers)                          -0.079                 -0.061         -0.288***           -0.134**
                                                (0.103)               (0.086)          (0.063)            (0.053)
  Competition                                                          -0.017                              0.054
                                                                      (0.042)                             (0.046)
  Principal tenure (years)                                            -0.006**                             -0.004
                                                                      (0.003)                             (0.004)
  Principal gender (male)                                              -0.036                              -0.058
                                                                      (0.053)                             (0.048)
  Principal has STEM background                                        0.054                               -0.011
                                                                      (0.056)                             (0.045)
  Principal personnel autonomy                                         0.023                               -0.010
                                                                      (0.063)                             (0.036)
  Principal budgetary autonomy                                         0.043                               0.015
                                                                      (0.031)                             (0.034)
  Principal academic content                                           0.038                               0.018
  autonomy                                                            (0.047)                             (0.029)
  Principal accountability                                            0.361***                            0.283***
                                                                      (0.033)                             (0.040)
  Principal strategy                                                  0.307***                            0.184***
                                                                      (0.031)                             (0.038)


  Regional dummies                                Yes                   Yes              Yes                Yes
  Noise controls                                  Yes                   Yes              Yes                Yes
  Test Private= Aut. gov.: p-value               0.005                 0.000            0.666              0.208
   Observations                                    513               513                  318              318
Notes: Significance at the 1% level denoted by *** and ** for 5% and * 10% level. OLS estimates with robust
standard errors in parentheses under coefficients. The Management variable takes the average of all 20
management questions. Autonomous government schools are escolas de referência in Brazil and private-aided
schools in India. Population density is at the NUTS3 level. Noise controls include 17 interviewer dummies, day
of week; time of day interview conducted, interview duration, reliability measure, and job post of interviewee.
The competition variable is collected during the survey itself by asking the principal “How many other schools
offering education to 15 year-olds are within a 30-minute drive from your school?” STEM background refers to
principals with a background in Science, Technology, Engineering, Maths, and Business. The autonomy questions
were asked and measured during the survey. For personnel autonomy, we ask “To hire a full-time teacher what

                                                        50
agreement would you need?, for budgetary autonomy, we ask “What is the largest capital investment you can
make without prior authorization from outside?” and for academic content autonomy, we ask “To add a new class
- for example, introducing a new language such as Mandarin - what agreement would you need?”. To measure
the degree of autonomy we use a 1-5 scale where 1 refers to no authority to make any decision and 5 refers to
complete authority to make any decision. Principal accountability variable measures the degree to which the
principal is responsible for delivering the school targets and the principal strategy variable measures the degree to
which the principal communicates a well-established strategy for the school for the next 5 years.




                                                        51
 TABLE C1: SAMPLING FRAME SOURCES
 Brazil                 Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais (INEP)
 Canada                 Scott’s Directories (Private company compiling information for all schools in Canada)
                        District Information System for Education (DISE)
 India                  Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE)
                        Indian Council of Secondary Education (ICSE)
 Italy                  Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca
 Sweden                 Skolverket (Swedish National Agency for Education)
 Germany                Various state departments
 United States          National Center for Education Statistics
 United Kingdom         Department for Education



TABLE C2: THE SAMPLING FRAME
                                    BR        CA        DE          IN        IT      SE     UK         US
Number of schools (#)             28,390     4,122     7,184       49,856   4,954    4,142   4,243    24,301
                                             300-
Pupils (median)                     258                 579         218      745     209     845       407
                                              499
Regular Government Schools
                                   71.5                 77.1        65.1     66.5    87.8    45.9      65.4
(%)
Notes: BR=Brazil, CA=Canada, DE=Germany, IN=India, IT=Italy, SE=Sweden, UK=United Kingdom,
US=United States. Sampling frame is the total number of schools eligible for the survey. The sampling frame
includes all schools with 50 or more pupil offering education to 15 year-olds. Pupils is the median number of
pupil in the school. When this information was not available, the school was kept in the sampling frame. The
number of pupil is available for 97% of the sampling frame in Canada, 64% of the sampling frame in Germany
(information available for BA, BR, BW, NRW, SH states only), for 85% of the sampling frame in India, 68% of
the sampling frame in Italy (information available for government schools only), 95% of the sampling frame in
Sweden. For all other countries – Brazil, UK and US – this information is available for 100% of the sampling
frame. Regular Government Schools refers to the percentage of regular government schools which are funded
& managed exclusively by government authorities (this excludes private and autonomous government schools).
This information is not available for Canadian schools.




                                                      52
 TABLE C3: THE SURVEY RESPONSE RATES
                                              BR                      CA                  DE                  IN
                                       All      Eligible       All      Eligible   All      Eligible   All      Eligible
  Interviews completed (%)             37.6        58.1        13.9        19.1    22.7        26.0    35.1        41.5
  Interviews refused (%)               8.2         12.7        4.5          6.1    14.3        16.3    7.6          9.0
  Scheduling in progress (%)           18.9        29.2        54.5        74.8    50.4        57.7    41.8        49.5
  School not eligible (%)              35.4          -         27.1          -     12.7          -     15.6          -
  Sample, numb. of firms (#)                  1377                    1073                631                 907
  Interviews completed (#)                    517                     149                 143                 318


                                              IT                      SE                  UK                  US
                                       All      Eligible       All      Eligible   All      Eligible   All      Eligible
  Interviews completed (%)             45.2        56.6        29.8        35.6    7.3          7.9    17.2        20.1
  Interviews refused (%)               11.8        14.7        1.7          2.0    11.5        12.5    5.5          6.4
  Scheduling in progress (%)           22.9        28.7        52.2        62.4    73.6        79.6    63.0        73.5
  School not eligible (%)              20.2                    16.3          -     7.6           -     14.3          -
  Sample, numb. of firms (#)                  773                     295                 1482                1618
   Interviews completed (#)                     349                  88                  108                279
Notes: BR=Brazil, CA=Canada, DE=Germany, IN=India, IT=Italy, SE=Sweden, UK=United Kingdom,
US=United States. 1) Interviews completed reports all the companies contacted for which a management
interview was completed. These numbers might differ from the number of observations used in this paper because
we drop any interviews which have a reliability score of less than 5. We compute this measure by adding the
scores (on a 1-5 scale) of two indicators provided by the interviewee after the interview is completed: i) the
interviewee’s knowledge of the management practices current in place at his or her school, and ii) the
interviewee’s willingness to reveal information about the management practices of his or her school. 2)
Scheduling in progress reports all the companies contacted with no interview run or manager refusing to be
interviewed. 3) Interviews refused reports all companies contacted in which the manager refused to take part in
the interview. 4) No longer eligible reports all schools contacted which do not offer general education to 15-year
olds or have less than 50 pupils. It also included organizations out-of business or for which no phone number was
found. Survey sample is the total number of firms that were randomly selected and contacted from the complete
sampling frame.




                                                          53
TABLE C4: SELECTION ANALYSIS
Country:                        BR         CA          DE          IN         IT          SE         UK          US

Panel A                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)

Dependent variable:                                      =1 if school interview occurred

Log(pupils)                   0.053      0.118**     0.024       0.114      -0.107      0.024       0.089     -0.085**

                             (0.055)     (0.056)     (0.137)    (0.073)     (0.167)     (0.166)    (0.124)     (0.043)
Regular Government
Schools                       0.151                  0.047     0.593***                 0.031       -0.077      0.038

                             (0.106)                 (0.171)    (0.099)                 (0.213)    (0.110)     (0.094)
Log(population density
in the region)               -0.065*     -0.091      0.059     -0.253***     0.046      -0.050      0.065      -0.076*

                             (0.038)     (0.059)     (0.173)    (0.060)     (0.124)     (0.070)    (0.050)     (0.039)
Panel B

Dependent variable:                     =1 if school interview occurred and pupil outcomes available

Log(pupils)                   0.072     0.214***               -0.212**                 0.054      0.274**      0.011

                             (0.054)     (0.069)                (0.086)                 (0.168)    (0.124)     (0.057)
Regular Government
Schools                     0.322***                             0.001                  0.104       -0.082    0.713***

                             (0.106)                            (0.108)                 (0.216)    (0.111)     (0.147)
Log(population density
in the region)                -0.043    0.251***                -0.093*                 -0.074     0.082*       0.045

                             (0.038)     (0.076)                (0.054)                 (0.072)    (0.049)     (0.050)
Observations                   847         754        379         678         348        230        1339        1298
Notes: Probit with marginal effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. BR=Brazil, CA=Canada,
DE=Germany, IN=India, IT=Italy, SE=Sweden, UK=United Kingdom, US=United States. Regular Government
Schools refers to the percentage of regular government schools which are funded & managed exclusively by
government authorities (this excludes private and autonomous government schools). This information is not
available for Canadian schools. Population density is at the state-level in Brazil, India, and the US, province-level
in Canada, and NUTS 2 regions in Germany, Italy, Sweden and the UK.




                                                        54
Canada, private ersatzschulen in Germany, friskolor in Sweden, academies, foundation, and voluntary-aided schools in the UK, and charter and magnet schools in the US.
Population density is at the NUTS3 level. The competition variable is collected during the survey itself by asking the principal “How many other schools offering education
to 15 year-olds are within a 30-minute drive from your school?” STEM background refers to principals with a background in Science, Technology, Engineering, Maths, and
Business. The autonomy questions were asked and measured during the survey. For personnel autonomy, we ask “To hire a full-time teacher what agreement would you
need?, for budgetary autonomy, we ask “What is the largest capital investment you can make without prior authorization from outside?” and for academic content autonomy,
we ask “To add a new class - for example, introducing a new language such as Mandarin - what agreement would you need?”. To measure the degree of autonomy we use a
1-5 scale where 1 refers to no authority to make any decision and 5 refers to complete authority to make any decision. Principal accountability variable measures the degree to
which the principal is responsible for delivering the school targets and the principal strategy variable measures the degree to which the principal communicates a well-
established strategy for the school for the next 5 years.




                                                                                     55
