NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES PRIVATE INFORMATION INFLUENCE AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE PURCHASE
DECISIONS?
Frank A. Sloan
Patricia A. Robinson
Lindsey M. Eldred
Working Paper 20679
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20679

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

This paper was funded in part by a grant from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA, #R01AA017913-01A1). The sponsor had no role in the design or conduct of this study.
There are no conflicts of interest nor any financial disclosures for any of the authors. We also thank
Hanming Fang, University of Pennsylvania, and Ahmed Khwaja, Yale University, for their collaboration
in writing the proposal that led to the grant, and for assistance in developing the questionnaire used
in this study. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Frank A. Sloan, Patricia A. Robinson, and Lindsey M. Eldred. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Private Information Influence Automobile Insurance Purchase Decisions?
Frank A. Sloan, Patricia A. Robinson, and Lindsey M. Eldred
NBER Working Paper No. 20679
November 2014
JEL No. D82,I12,R41
ABSTRACT
This study quantifies the importance of private information, separates the extent to which the positive
correlation between the accident probability and insurance coverage reflects adverse selection and
moral hazard, and analyzes market segmentation on objective accident risk. We use data we collected
to examine the importance of potential sources of private information in individuals third- and first-party
insurance choices. Individuals with higher subjective accident probabilities have less liability exposure
post insurance purchase and more often experience an accident, conditional on factors insurers use
for risk classification. This evidence is consistent with the positive correlation between accident occurrence
and liability insurance coverage. We find that the positive correlation almost completely reflects adverse
selection. In analysis of insurer sorting, we find that accident-free drivers obtain coverage from insurers
with higher independent agency quality ratings. High-quality insurers eschew low-quality drivers on
measured dimensions because these drivers are more likely to possess private information about their
driving ability and proclivities that affect expected loss. Drivers with a higher risk on factors observable
to insurers tend to have private information about their accident risk. This sorting process reflects an
institutional response to asymmetric information, and assures a continuous supply of private insurance
to unsafe drivers.

Frank A. Sloan
Department of Economics
Social Sciences Rm 236
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-1111
and NBER
fsloan@duke.edu
Patricia A. Robinson
Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences Building, Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
alex.robinson@duke.edu

Lindsey M. Eldred
Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences Building, Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708-0097
lindsey.eldred@duke.edu

I. Introduction
Adverse selection and moral hazard plague all types of insurance markets in varying
degrees. An additional anomaly of insurance markets is the important role of underwriting.
Rather than take all potential customers by setting premiums that cover expected losses, insurers
routinely reject applications from some potential customers. Various government interventions
designed to protect consumers have affected private insurance markets, including rules
pertaining to underwriting and premium-setting and mandatory insurance purchase
requirements. At least some of these interventions in combination with adverse selection and
moral hazard might be expected to discourage provision of certain types of coverage as well as
institutional responses by suppliers of insurance.
Private information held by consumers is the source of adverse selection and moral
hazard. In the case of adverse selection, consumers possess some private information about the
probability of loss that is unknown to the insurer when insurance is purchased. In contrast, moral
hazard arises because having insurance causes behavioral changes of insureds not easily
observable by insurers. In the context of automobile insurance, adverse selection and moral
hazard occur when consumers possess an extensive amount of private information about their
accident risk, ex ante, i.e., before the insurance purchase for adverse selection, and drive with
less care conditional on the insurance purchase for moral hazard. In some cases, observable
information is, for practical purposes, “private” since private insurers are not allowed by statute
or regulation to use the information on accident risk in premium setting.
This study of the U.S. automobile insurance markets in four states, North Carolina,
Pennsylvania, Washington, and Wisconsin, has three objectives: (1) to quantify the importance
of private information; (2) to explain the positive correlation between the extent of insurance

2

coverage and ex post accident risk by quantifying moral hazard and hence to separate the extent
of adverse selection from moral hazard; and (3) to analyze the practice of segmenting the market
into good versus bad drivers as a response to private information and state restriction. Market
segmentation may be an efficient mechanism for supplying insurance in a market in which
consumers differ in terms of observable and unobservable accident risk.
Empirical studies of insurance purchase decisions have demonstrated that consumers
possess private information when deciding whether to, and what insurance contract to purchase,
and importantly, their private information comes in multi-dimensional forms. This information
potentially comes from such sources as private information about risk types, as highlighted in
classical models of insurance markets (Rothchild and Stiglitz 1976), but also in preferences, e.g.,
risk aversion, thrill seeking, tastes for goods that may encourage risk taking such as alcohol, and
in subjective beliefs about the adverse consequences of risky behaviors. Also individuals may
differ in cognitive ability, which affects their knowledge of the law and adverse consequences of
risky behaviors, and, in the context of driving and automobile insurance, in their altruism toward
other drivers and in driving skills, which in turn may affect choice of insurance contract and the
amount of exposure to financial risk the individual bears when driving.
Even though recent literature has made substantial progress toward understanding the
role of some types of private information, e.g., risk aversion, empirical analysis of sources of
private information available to consumers in making insurance purchasing decisions has relied
on data obtained from secondary sources. General-purpose surveys have sometimes included a
few questions about private information relevant to insurance choices. By contrast, this study
uses data collected specifically for our research. The data can be used to examine the
importance of a wide variety of potential sources of private information simultaneously in

3

individuals’ choices of third-party and first-party insurance policies.
We show that individuals with higher subjective probabilities of an accident have less
liability exposure—the objective of liability insurance being to reduce such exposure, and are
more likely to experience an accident ex post, conditional on factors used by insurers in risk
classification. This evidence is consistent with a positive correlation between accident
occurrence and liability insurance. We also show that individuals’ self-rating of driving ability
and subjective probability of reckless driving are important determinants of the individual’s
subjective probability of an accident.
We use these underlying dimensions of private information about accident risk to
measure moral hazard. In particular, we take advantage of survey questions that elicit how
individuals’ subjective probabilities of reckless driving change in response to changes in
financial penalties from having a traffic violation, which is analogous to having different levels
of financial exposure to an accident. We use relationships previously established in this study
between subjective probabilities of reckless driving and subjective probabilities of an accident
and between subjective probability of an accident and ex post accident risk in combination with
our findings on responses to financial penalties to quantify moral hazard and thus separate
adverse selection from moral hazard.
Finally, we investigate sorting of drivers among insurers based on drivers’ accident risk.
We observe a pattern that accident-free drivers select insurers, which are higher quality in terms
of ratings by independent agencies. Conceptually, there are two types of drivers, those with a
clean driving record during the past three years and those with prior accidents or violations
during this look-back period. Some insurers may eschew the risky type because these drivers are
likely to have private information about their driving abilities and proclivities that affect the

4

future probability of a loss. This sorting process, which leads to some insurers specializing in
provision of coverage to high risk/high loss variance drivers, reflects an institutional response to
asymmetric information and assures a continuous supply of private insurance to unsafe drivers.
This study makes several contributions to research on the role of private information
and its consequences for how insurance markets function. First, our results extend our
understanding of how subjective beliefs are formed, namely that: individuals’ beliefs about the
probabilities of engaging in reckless driving behaviors in the future are directly related to their
subjective beliefs about experiencing an accident in the same future time period: and subjective
beliefs about the probability of an accident are reflected in the extent to which people are
exposed to loss from accidents after purchasing insurance and in subsequent realizations of
accidents. Second, individuals are able to gauge in quantitative terms the extent to which
reckless driving will result in higher insurance premiums, which implies that experience-rated
premiums can deter reckless driving. Third, using our survey data, we implement a method for
quantifying moral hazard, which allows us to separate adverse selection from moral hazard.
Our method for quantifying the extent of moral hazard does not rely on the assumption of
negative state dependence. Fourth, we examine sorting by insurers according to the objective
risk of an accident in an insurance market with mandatory minimum levels of insurance
coverage and discuss why such sorting occurs as a response to adverse selection. To our
knowledge, ours is the second study to investigate how insurer underwriting policies reflect
insurers’ priors about private information, and the first study to do this for an insurance market
in which insurance coverage is mandatory.
The organization of the remaining sections is as follows: Section II describes institutional
features of the U.S. automobile insurance market. Section III describes basic features of the

5

survey we conducted for this study. Section IV focuses on the role of private information in the
automobile insurance market—particularly the relationships between individuals’ subjective
probabilities of being involved in an automobile accident in the next year and various other
dimensions of private information, insurance contract choice, and ex post accident risk. In
Section V, we use information from hypothetical scenarios posed in our survey to assess the
extent of moral hazard. In Section VI, we investigate the relationship between observable and
unobservable accident risk and various measures of insurer quality. Section VII discusses
implications of our findings and study conclusions.
II. Background on Automobile Insurance Markets
Government intervention in the automobile insurance markets reflects financial
externalities of such insurance (e.g., absent insurance, accident victims may not be able to
recover their losses), perceived consumer ignorance of the attributes of insurance policies, and
the widespread notion that driving is a right, particularly since driving is often essential for
employment and performing various household duties. Financial externalities have led to
mandatory insurance coverage. Consumer ignorance has led to review of policy forms to assure
that the terms of the contract of understandable to consumers. The notion of driving as a right has
been a factor in premium regulation, community rating, take all comers, guaranteed renewability
of policies, and formation of public high-risk pools. There is some segmentation of the market by
risk class as reflected by the presence of private surplus line insurers in some states, i.e., insurers
specializing in insuring the highest-risk drivers.
In the U.S., mandatory liability insurance coverage is nearly universal if one includes
financial responsibility laws, which require that the individual be able to demonstrate the
financial ability to cover the loss in the event of an accident, as a weak form of mandatory

6

coverage. Every state, except for New Hampshire, requires that drivers offer proof of financial
responsibility.2 All other states mandate financial responsibility, and most states require it be in
the form of a minimum level of liability insurance that covers personal injury and property
damages to a third-party if they cause an accident. Of our four study states, North Carolina,
Pennsylvania, and Washington offer some drivers other options to satisfy financial responsibility
including a choice between liability insurance, self-insurance, proof of assets over a specified
amount, an uninsured motorist fee, or a cash or surety bond deposited with the state, but liability
insurance is often the most practical option for drivers.3 The requirement that drivers purchase
minimum amounts of liability insurance prevents unraveling of contracts offering such minimum
coverage, which has occurred in other insurance markets, e.g., health insurance (Cutler and
Reber 1998).
In addition to mandatory insurance, there are many types of optional automobile
insurance coverage, including collision insurance which covers property damage to the
policyholder’s own vehicle in the event of an accident. We focus on liability insurance, which
typically has no deductible, and secondarily on first-party collision insurance, which is typically
subject to a deductible.
Even though most drivers are, in effect, required to carry liability insurance, some
insurers may not insure high-risk drivers. Often the stated reason is that they do not have claims
2

N.H. Stat. Rev. Ann. § 264.2. New Hampshire requires drivers to obtain liability insurance in the case of a
conviction for motor vehicle law violations, but does not require insurance before a conviction occurs. Among the
four study states, Wisconsin did not mandate liability insurance coverage prior to June 1, 2010. As of this date the
state requires minimum liability coverage. 2 Previously, drivers were not required to obtain liability insurance or
prove financial responsibility in order to register their vehicles. Our data on insurance coverage are for after this
statutory change was implemented.
3
NC Gen. Stat. § 20-309 (2013); 17 Pa.C.S. § 1782 (2013); Wash. Rev. Code. Ann. § 46.30; § 46.29.550,
46.29.630, 46.29.090, (2013). This option, for most drivers, is not feasible as it frequently requires a large cash
deposit or bond; beyond the reach of the average driver. Furthermore, even though it is authorized by statute, not all
states present this as an option to all consumers and interested drivers must meet certain specifications and work
directly with the state to set up financial responsibility other than liability insurance.

7

experience to assess the risk of such drivers. In three of the four states, all except North Carolina,
insurers can refuse to write coverage.
There are four ways states deal with the underwriting issue that some persons may not be
able to secure “affordable” coverage and hence be unable to drive legally: a high-risk pool; an
assigned-risk system; a state-run reinsurance facility; or a state-funded plan. Of the study states,
only North Carolina has a reinsurance facility.4 All insurers selling automobile insurance in the
state must take part, and as a result, an insurer may choose to insure a high-risk driver under its
regular plan or transfer it to the reinsurance facility.5 In contrast, Pennsylvania, Washington, and
Wisconsin utilize an assigned risk plan. These plans also require all automobile insurers to
participate.6 The state assigned risk plans are run by a state-created office governed by a board
of insurance companies licensed in the state. However, unlike a reinsurance facility, assigned
risk plans do not offer choice of insurer.
Automobile insurers commonly use experience rating to increase or decrease premiums
according to recent driving history (Lemaire 1995). Some states regulate experience rating with a
statewide point system. Of our study states, North Carolina mandates insurance increases with a
state-created system. Moving violations, including at-fault accidents, speeding tickets, and
Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) convictions, are assigned points and the number of points on
your driving record determines the premium surcharge.7 The other study states regulate

4

NC Gen. Stat. § 58-37-1 (2013)
Although empirical support is lacking, the underlying rationale is that such reinsurance gives drivers the ability to a
free choice of insurance carrier. It also means that individuals do not know when they are insured under the
reinsurance facility as the individual’s insurance contract is issued by the (primary) insurer.
6
75 Pa.C.S. § 1741 (2013); Wash. Rev. Code. Ann. § (2013); Wis. Stat. § 632.35 (2013); Wis. Admin. Code Ins §
6.54 (2013).
7
For example, in North Carolina a driver with an otherwise clean record who is at-fault for an accident causing less
than $1,800 of property damage will get one point added to his driving record resulting in a mandatory thirty percent
premium increase.
5

8

surcharges but do not require specific schedules.8
Insurance applications require basic demographic information including location, age,
gender, race, and marital status. However, in some states, these are protected categories and
companies are not allowed to set premiums without proper justification. The rules vary across
our study states.9 In all study states, premiums may reflect accident risk in the location in which
insurance is sold. The statutes are silent regarding insurer requests for information on driving
characteristics, such as annual mileage, vehicle specifications or use. The driving record of an
insured driver may be a significant source of information on driving risk for an insurer. Insurance
companies in the United States can purchase an individual’s three-year driving record—
including convictions, violations, and related activity recorded by the department of motor
vehicles—for a nominal fee.
Insurers rarely if ever request some types of private information insureds are likely to
possess because it is impossible to verify statements made by potential or actual insureds from
independent sources, e.g., on risk preferences, use of intoxicating substances, and quality of
driving. Insurers might ask about specific chronic conditions known to affect accident risk such
as alcohol use disorder, epilepsy, or narcolepsy. Such information can be verified from medical
records or health insurance claims.
8

In Pennsylvania, drivers cannot be surcharged or non-renewed if the claim resulting from an accident in the
preceding three years if the insurance company is reimbursed for at least 60 percent of the total amount of the paid
claim(Pennsylvania Insurance Department 2013). Wisconsin requires surcharges be applied uniformly and are
required to be filed with the Office of the Commission of Insurance (Office of the Commissioner of Insurance 2011)
9
North Carolina prohibits risk classification based on age and gender although insurers are allowed to impose a
surcharge for drivers with less than three years driving experience. NC Gen. Stat. § 58-36-10 (2013). Pennsylvania
prohibits unfair discriminatory underwriting (underwriting not backed by empirical evidence) based on race,
religion, nationality, age, sex, family size, occupation, place of residence, or marital status. 40 P.S. § 1171.5(7)(iii)
(2010). In contrast, Washington prohibits refusal of insurance or limits on benefits payable based on gender, marital
status, or sexual orientation, but allows these factors to be used when “bona fide statistical differences in risk or
exposure have been substantiated.” Wash. Rev. Code. Ann. § 48.30.300 (2013). Similarly, like Pennsylvania,
Wisconsin prohibits denying benefits or refusing coverage based on sex, age, marital status, sexual preferences,
location, race, or religion; however, the state does allow rate setting based on these characteristics, so long as there is
credible supporting information. Wis. Stat. § 632.35 (2013); Wis. Admin. Code Ins § 6.54 (2013).

9

III. Data
Battelle Memorial Institute conducted a three-wave survey of drinkers and drivers on our
behalf in eight cities in four states during 2010-12, called the Survey of Alcohol and Driving
(SAD). When possible, the questionnaire design was guided by questions included in prior
surveys, albeit not all asked in the same survey. This study relies on data from all three waves.10
The first wave, administered by telephone, included questions on: demographic
characteristics/income/wealth; alcohol consumption; accident/traffic violation history; and
altruism. The second wave, administered by computer about a month after wave 1, elicited
information for which visual displays are helpful and/or questions involved detailed scenarios
which would be challenging to pose orally (e.g., for eliciting risk preferences, willingness to pay
to avoid paralysis from an automobile accident), and details about the respondent’s automobile
insurance policy. The third wave, also administered by computer, was conducted about a year
after wave 1.11
Since the primary focus of the study was on drinking and driving, eligibility for the SAD
required respondents to have driven and to have consumed alcohol during the last month,
residence within one of eight study cities, and be age 18+. The eight cities were: Raleigh and
Hickory, North Carolina; Philadelphia and Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania; Seattle and Yakima,
Washington; and Milwaukee and La Crosse, Wisconsin. These represent a broad geographic
spread of large and small cities. While eight cities are not representative of the U.S., the four
study states in which the cities are located vary in alcohol consumption, rates of DWI, arrest

10

Although the SAD began before June 2010, information on insurance policies respondents had was obtained after
this date.
11
Survey instruments for the SAD can be found at (http://dialog.econ.duke.edu/dapstudy).

10

rates, criminal laws pertaining to DWI, demographic composition, and insurance law and
regulation.12
The mean age of the study participants is 43.8. Mean educational attainment is 15.6
years, implying that on average, respondents nearly had a college degree, which is substantially
above the U.S. average. Mean household income is $81,470, also above average. Over half of
sample is female (54.6%); 13.1 percent are non-white, and 46.6 percent are married. The
participant recruitment process was designed to oversample persons who consumed large
amounts of alcohol in order to study DWI decision-making and behaviors of such individuals in
detail.
IV. Private Information and Insurance Contract Choice
A. Overview
We first assess the role of private information (1) in individuals’ choices of automobile
insurance coverage and hence their maximum exposure to loss, (2) in their accident risks, and (3)
in the correlation between the two. An institutional feature of tort law in the U.S. is that when
the defendant’s liability obligation exceeds the person’s wealth, the defendant is considered to be
judgment proof (Shavell 2005). Our null hypothesis is that individuals in our sample who
purchase very complete insurance and have no financial exposure from automobile accidents are
12

Per capita consumption of ethanol in gallons in 2007—NC (2.0), PA (2.2), WA (2.4), and WI (3.0) (National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 2009). Arrest to population ratios varied from 0.25 percent (WA) to
0.67 percent (WI) in 2009 (our calculation from arrest data we obtained from each state). The four large cities—
Seattle, Philadelphia, Raleigh, and Milwaukee—have populations 380,000-1.4 million. The smaller cities—Yakima,
Hickory, Wilkes-Barre, and La Crosse—have populations 37,000-82,800. The racial makeup of each city varies,
e.g., Philadelphia and Milwaukee with large African-American populations, 43 and 37 percent, respectively, Yakima
with a large Hispanic population, 34 percent. Further, auto insurance varies greatly among the cities. According to
(Smith and Wright 1992) in an article entitled “Why is Automobile Insurance in Philadelphia So Damn Expensive,”
automobile liability insurance premiums in Philadelphia were about twice as high as they were in Seattle. Seattle’s
were about 50 percent higher than those in Milwaukee. Raleigh/Durham did not make the list. The authors attributed
high premiums in some cities, at least in part, to large numbers of uninsured motorists in some markets. Ratios of
uninsured motorist to bodily injury claims varied from 0.38 in Philadelphia, 0.14 in Milwaukee, to 0.089 for Seattle.

11

no more likely than others to report having an accident after purchasing their insurance. For
example, a person with a net worth of $1 million but with 100/300 (lower limit maximum insurer
payment per person for bodily injury and upper limit maximum total insurer payment per
accident, in thousands of dollars) would face a maximum liability exposure of $700,000.
Like Finkelstein and McGarry (2006), we divide sources of information into three
categories: (1) information insurers use in risk classification and hence in premium-setting; (2)
information insurers are likely to elicit from consumers but which is not specifically used in
risk classification; and (3) multiple sources of private information not available to insurers. We
examine private information in multiple domains--the financial domain and driving domain,
altruism toward others on the road, and subjective beliefs about the probability the person will
engage in reckless driving in the next year—speeding or drinking and driving—to determine
which types of private information can explain subjective beliefs about the probability of
having an accident in the next year, observed insurance purchases, and ex post accident rates.
B. Three Types of Information
B.1. Objective Factors Used by Insurers in Premium Setting
Accident determinants used by insurers for risk classification fall into these general
categories: demographic characteristics; driving attributes; driving history; and city. In our
analysis of objective factors, demographic characteristics are: male under age 25; female under
25; and currently married. For driving attributes, we include binary variables for whether the
person reported driving 15,000+ miles per year and type of primary vehicle—sedan, sport car,
SUV, minivan, truck, or other—whether the person reports driving to work, driving a motor
vehicle regularly as part of a job, and primary vehicle age. Driving history includes the number
of: citations for speeding; arrests for DWI; and accidents during the past three years.

12

We use a linear probability model to determine the relationship between accident risk and
information used by the insurer for risk classification. We estimate the following equation
(1),
where Accident is a binary variable for whether the person was involved in an accident in the
past three years, and X is a vector of characteristics used by the insurer for risk classification.
The dependent variable takes three alternative forms: (1) any accident; (2) any chargeable
accident—a person is deemed responsible; and (3) any non-chargeable accident—a person is
involved but not deemed responsible for causing the accident.
Table 1 reports the results of estimating eq. (1) for the three variants of the dependent
variable. Young drivers, male and female, those who drive 15,000+ miles/year, and/or have prior
speeding citations and DWI arrests have higher probabilities of an accident in the follow-up year.
Persons currently married, drive a sports car, and residents of Yakima have a lower probability
of an accident. Since most persons with accidents had non-chargeable accidents, results for the
probability of having a non-chargeable accident are quite similar to those for the probability of
having any accident.
We use the results from Table 1, col. 2, to calculate the predicted probability of an
accident for each individual and include this predicted probability measure in subsequent
analyses to account for information about accident risk known to the insurer.
B.2. Attributes Observed by Insurers but Not Used in Premium Setting
Attributes observed by insurers but not used in risk classification are household income,
educational attainment in years, and race/ethnicity.
B.3. Multiple Dimensions of Private Information

13

In conceptualizing types of private information we consider these dimensions: driving
skills and precaution levels; risk preferences; cognitive ability; impulsivity; depression; altruism;
and maximum willingness-to-pay to avoid injury and disability. Each of these dimensions of
private information was measured by the SAD.
Insurers know about the person’s prior accident and arrest records, but the individual may
know more about his or her quality of driving and precaution levels than is reflected in the
person’s driving history. To measure self-rated driving skills, the SAD asked respondents to rate
their driving ability relative to others—worse, about the same, better, or much better. To
measure precaution levels, the SAD elicited at baseline the individual’s subjective probabilities
of speeding 15 miles per hour or more over the speed limit and of driving at least once after
having too much to drink in the next year. The SAD elicited, a year later, actual incidents of
speeding and drinking and driving episodes during follow-up.
Risk preferences in the financial and driving domains may affect risk-taking in driving
situations as well as demand for insurance. The SAD used the same measure of financial risk
tolerance as the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Following the HRS, SAD posed a
hypothetical scenario to gauge the respondent’s financial risk tolerance. The questions posed a
gamble between a 50 percent probability of doubling lifetime income if the person wins the
gamble and a 50 percent probability, alternatively, of losing half, one third, or one tenth of
lifetime family income. The SAD elicited a more detailed measure of risk tolerance than the
HRS. Based on the responses, we group respondents into three mutually exclusive categories: (1)
least risk tolerant—respondents who rejected a gamble involving a 50/50 chance of doubling
income or reducing income by 10 percent; (2) moderately risk tolerant—accepted gamble when
odds are doubling income and losing anywhere from 10 to 50 percent of income; and (3) most

14

risk tolerant—accepted gamble involving doubling income versus losing all income (risk neutral
to risk lover) or accepted a gamble involving loss of all income versus increasing income by 67
to 100 percent (risk lover).
Barsky et al. (1997) showed that this measure is positively associated with various
dimensions of risk taking outside the financial domain. The authors did not compare responses to
the HRS’s questions on financial risk tolerance to driving risk-taking. While financial risk
preferences are assumed to generalize to various decision-making contexts, some empirical
evidence raises a question of the validity of assuming context-invariant risk preferences
(Barseghyan et al. 2011; Einav et al. 2012). A utility function over wealth may relate much more
directly relate to demand for insurance coverage than to risk-taking as a driver since reckless
driving may be enjoyable to some drivers. If so, risk-takers in the financial domain may eschew
insurance coverage for this reason, but they may demand insurance coverage because they
realize that they have a higher probability of an accident because they are risk takers as drivers.
To measure risk tolerance in the driving domain, the SAD described the following
scenario: “Imagine that you have to go to an important business meeting. There are heavy police
patrols on the road you are traveling. You are a little tight in time to get to the meeting. If you do
not speed, you are certain to be late by 10 minutes. If you speed 15 miles an hour over the speed
limit, you can get there on time if you are not caught by the police. There is a 10% chance that
you will be caught by the police and you will be sure to be late for the meeting by 30 minutes.
Assume that the police only would give you a warning in this case, so that you would pay no fine
or incur premium increases. Would you: (1) not speed and be late for your meeting; (2) speed
less than 10 mph and be late less than 10 minutes; (3) speed 15 mph and take chances on being
caught?”

15

Cognitive ability may affect the individual’s ability to weigh potential benefits and costs
of specific choices (Fang et al. 2008) and/or accuracy of a person’s subjective beliefs.13 The
SAD included several measures for cognition, each based on questions from the HRS. To
measure recall, the SAD incorporated an exercise in counting backwards to assess attention and
processing speed, and an object naming test to assess language, and recall of the date and name
of the Vice President of the United States and the Governor of the state in which the respondent
resided. Second, to measure working memory, the SAD included a serial 7 subtraction test based
on a sequence of 5 questions, starting with 100 – 7, with the next question based on the
respondent’s answer to the first question -7, and so on. The maximum (best) score on this
variable is 5. Third, the SAD measured the respondent’s numeracy. The numeracy question
sought to learn whether or not the respondent was able to make percentage calculations.
Impulsivity is a general term describing a tendency to act on a whim, hence disregarding
a more thought-out rational long-term strategy for maximizing personal welfare (Madden and
Johnson 2010). An impulsive individual may not consider future consequences of present actions
and hence be more accident-prone. In psychology, impulsivity is an aspect of personality. In the
context of subjective beliefs about having an accident, an individual who is impulsive may
recognize that she is likely to act on a whim in the future, thus exposing her to a higher
probability of personal harm (Frank A. Sloan et al. 2013). A parallel is the sophisticate in the
literature on self-control versus the naïf who lacks self-control but is not able to incorporate lack
of future self-control in making current decisions (Gruber and Köszegi 2001).
To measure impulsivity, the SAD incorporated impulsivity questions developed by
Loewenstein et al. (2001). To conserve interview time, the SAD used an abbreviated version of
13

Evidence on the relationship between cognitive ability and accuracy of risk assessment from the SAD is mixed
See Frank A. Sloan et al. (2013).

16

the Loewenstein et al. scale. In the SAD, respondents were asked at wave 1 to respond on a 5point scale to 12 statements designed to measure impulsivity. The scale ranged from strongly
agree with the statement to strongly disagree. The statements to which respondents were to
respond were: “1. I do things on impulse that I later regret; 2. I act on impulse; 3. I finish what I
start; 4. I often do things on the spur of the moment; 5. I plan for the future; 6. I always consider
the consequences before I take action; 7. I control my angry feelings; 8. There are so many little
jobs that need to be done that I sometimes just ignore them all; 9. I fly off the handle; 10. I never
seem to be able to get organized; 11. I rarely make hasty decisions; and 12. I am not a worrier.”
By leading to a feeling of hopelessness, depression may increase subjective beliefs about
probabilities of adverse events occurring (Hepburn et al. 2009). To the extent that depression
increases subjective probabilities of an accident arising from careless driving, it may increase the
individual’s precaution level. However, it may also lessen the individual’s belief that the
individual can control one’s fate, which may have the opposite effect. The SAD measured
depression with questions from the SIG-E-CAPS, a screener for depression (Guck et al. 2003;
Lieberman 2003), a screening tool widely used in clinical practice (Wise and Rundell 1994).
SIG-E-CAPS contains questions about sleep problems (S), loss of interest (I), guilt,
worthlessness, hopelessness, and regret (G), lack of energy, fatigue (E), reduced cognition or
difficulty with concentration (C), appetite—either increased or decreased (A), psychomotor
retardation (lethargy) or agitation (anxiety) (P), and suicidality (S). In total, the SAD included
nine symptoms, the eight just listed plus depressed mood. The SAD asked survey participants to
respond affirmatively if the person had a symptom during any full two-week period during the
last 12 months. Our depression measure is a count of these symptoms.

17

Persons who are more altruistic, especially concerned about harming strangers, may be
safer drivers and hence less accident-prone.14 The SAD made statements relative to altruism
toward non-family members, none of which reference alcohol consumption or DWI. Nine of the
statements dealt with altruism without referring to family members. Cet. par., we expect persons
who are less selfish toward non-family members, i.e., internalize the externalities involving harm
to others without incentives, to be less likely to drink and drive. The statements that did not refer
to family members were: “1. I am hurt if what I do isn’t recognized; 2. I help so I can live with
myself; 3. I am resentful when I do things for others; 4. people think I am selfish; 5. people think
I am cold; 6. I’m not known for generosity; 7. I try to be thoughtful; 8. I think of myself as
charitable; and 9. I go out of my way to help others.” Response options were: 1. “agree;” 2.
“neutral;” and 3. “disagree.” The SAD phrased the statements so that some imply altruism while
others imply selfishness. This was done to encourage respondents to read and consider each item.
Persons who place a lower value on avoiding injury and/or disability should be more
prone to take risks that increase the probability of personal injury, including automobile
accidents. The SAD included a set of questions designed to value the non-pecuniary loss from an
automobile accident resulting in permanent paralysis. The question design sought to avoid
common pitfalls in contingent valuation research and was based on questions one of us has used
in previous surveys of willingness to avoid multiple sclerosis, a disability, and smoking-related
diseases (Frank A. Sloan et al. 1998; Perreira and Sloan 2002; Khwaja et al. 2009). Respondents
were asked to compare two areas: Area A which has the same monthly cost of living as the place
where the respondent currently lives and is assumed to have a 0.01 probability of a person
14

There is little empirical evidence on this relationship. Using the same measure of altruism from SAD as in this
paper, Frank A. Sloan and Eldred (2013) found that more altruistic persons toward strangers were less likely to drink
and drive. In a study of adolescent driving behavior, Ulleberg and Rundmo (2003) found that more altruistic persons
were more likely to exhibit positive attitudes toward safe driving.

18

getting into a automobile accident per year that results in the person becoming paralyzed. Area B
has a $X per month higher cost of living per year and a 0.008 probability of being involved in an
automobile accident resulting in the person being paralyzed. To avoid starting point bias, the
starting values for $X were randomly assigned. Based on several rounds of questions, a final
value for willingness to pay to avoid a 0.002 probability of being paralyzed from an automobile
accident was assigned. The final value is the amount a person would pay per month in return for
a reduced probability of paralysis of 0.002 per year.
To examine the relationship between the subjective probability of an accident in the
following year and specific sources of private information, conditional on objective information
used and not used by insurers, we estimate:
(2),
where Private Info. is a vector of individual characteristics and beliefs not observed by the
insurer. X, objective factors used in risk classification, and Z, factors observed by insurers but not
used in risk classification.
Judging from the mean values of the covariates, most respondents think they are better
than average drivers (Table 2, col. 1). The majority are moderately financially risk tolerant. Only
a few respondents are most financially risk tolerant. On driving risk tolerance, most respondents
also fall into the moderate category. However, almost a quarter of sample persons are most risk
tolerant, higher than for financial risk tolerance. Forty-five percent believe that they would speed
in excess of 15 miles per hour during the next year. By contrast, the subjective probability of
drinking and driving in the next year is 0.17 for the analysis sample as a whole. The objective
probability of an accident is 0.21.

19

Self-rating of driving ability is monotonically related to the subjective probability of an
accident—people who believe they are worse drivers than others have a 0.10 higher subjective
probability of an accident relative to those who believe they are much better drivers than others
(col. 2). As one’s self-rated driving ability improves, the subjective probability of an accident
during the following year falls.
Subjective probabilities of speeding and drinking and driving are positively related to the
subjective probability of an accident. A one percentage point increase in the subjective
probability of speeding or drinking and driving is associated with a 0.03 percentage point
increase in the subjective probability of an accident.
More impulsive persons attach a lower probability of being involved in an accident in the
next year, possibly because they underestimate the probability of taking impulsive actions in the
foreseeable future. Higher income individuals had lower subjective probabilities of being in an
accident, possibly because they intended to be more careful drivers, given they would be less
likely to be judgment proof in the event of an accident. We find no evidence that risk tolerance,
cognition, depression, altruism, and willingness-to-pay to avoid paralysis from an accident affect
subjective beliefs about accident risk.
C. Choice of Insurance Coverage
C.1. Financial Exposure to Liability from an Automobile Accident
The SAD asked whether the person had liability insurance, and if so, what the liability
limits were. The liability limits represent a measure of the quantity of liability insurance
purchased, but the ultimate objective of such insurance is to protect the consumer against the
financial risk from an automobile accident, which in turn depends on the individual’s wealth.

20

To measure the individual’s maximum financial exposure to loss from an automobile
accident, we subtract the higher liability limit from the person’s household net worth with zero as
the lower bound on exposure. For individuals without liability insurance, this is simply equal to
the maximum of zero and net worth. Higher liability exposure corresponds to less complete
insurance coverage. We estimate the following relationship:
(3).
The coefficient of interest is

, which measures the effect of an individual’s subjective

probability of being involved in an accident during the following year on the maximum financial
exposure to an automobile accident, given the individual’s level of insurance coverage. For X,
we use the predicted objective probability of an accident in the following year (from eq. 1). The
classic model of uni-dimensional asymmetric information about risk type implies that

—

an individual with a higher subjective probability of an accident will choose more complete
insurance, or lower maximum liability exposure.
We find a statistically significant negative relationship between the subjective probability
of an accident and level of liability exposure conditional on the objective predicted probability of
an accident (Table 3, col. 5). Each additional 0.01 increase in the subjective probability of an
accident in the following year leads to a $4,207 decrease in maximum loss exposure. The
parameter estimate on the objective probability is positive but statistically insignificant,
reflecting higher premiums for higher objective accident risk, and possibly sorting on objective
risk, as discussed below. We perform the same test on only those individuals who have liability
insurance and obtain similar result (col. 6). The marginal effect of a 0.01 increase in the
subjective probability is slightly higher in absolute value than before -$4,574.
C.2. Demand for Collision Insurance

21

Substituting binary variables to measure the individual’s collision coverage, we estimate
determinants of collision coverage. The relationship between the subjective probability of an
accident and having collision insurance is also consistent with the classic prediction because the
first dependent variable is defined for no collision coverage, but the parameter estimate is
imprecisely estimated (col. 7). When the dependent variable is 1 for persons with collision
insurance with a deductible exceeding $500/year, neither parameter estimate on the subjective
probability of an accident nor its objective counterpart are statistically significant at conventional
levels (col. 8).
D. Private Information and Ex Post Accident Risk
D.1. Relationship between Ex Ante Beliefs about Accident Probability and Ex Post
Accident Risk
The results in Table 3 show that the subjective accident probability affects individuals’
choices about liability exposure. The importance of this finding depends on the degree to which
individuals’ subjective accident probabilities predict ex post accident risk. We explore this
relationship next.
To investigate whether the subjective probability of an accident also affects individual
accident risk, conditional on the insurer’s classification of the consumer’s accident risk, we
estimate:
(4).
The dependent variable is a binary variable for whether the person had an accident in the year
after the SAD elicited the subjective probability of an accident. The parameter of interest is

,

which relates the subjective probability of an accident to actual accident occurrence. If
individuals’ subjective probabilities are accurate,

If individuals’ subjective probabilities

22

are unrelated to individuals’ objective probabilities of an accident,
can, but have difficulties forming subjective probabilities,

. If, in general, people
.

Although the parameter estimates on the subjective probability of any accident during
follow-up are positive, the parameter estimates have large associated standard errors (Table 4,
cols. 1 and 2). The parameter estimate on the predicted objective probability of an accident is
0.30 and is statistically significant at better than the 0.01 level (col. 2). In an alternative
specification with the total number of accidents, the number of chargeable, and the number of
non-chargeable accidents as the dependent variables (cols. 3-8), the parameter estimates on the
subjective probability of an accident in the following year are uniformly positive and statistically
significant at conventional levels for the number of accidents (cols. 3-4) and the number of
chargeable accidents (cols. 5-6). The corresponding parameter estimates on the subjective
probability in the analysis of number of non-chargeable accidents are about of the same
magnitude as for chargeable accidents but not statistically significant. The predicted probability
of an accident, however, while positive in the analysis of all three dependent variables, is not
statistically significant in the analysis of number of chargeable accidents, possibly reflecting a
lack of statistical power. Taken in combination with the result showing that people with a higher
subjective probability of an accident buy more complete liability insurance, these results imply
adverse selection.
It remains possible that there are other dimensions of private information not captured by
the subjective probability of an accident in the following year, e.g., unmeasured dimensions of
risk and time preferences related to insurance coverage. For this reason, and to compare our
results with those from previous studies, we perform two additional statistical tests.
D.2. Positive Correlation Tests

23

Most previous studies of asymmetric information in insurance markets have focused on
adverse selection. However, some recent empirical studies have found evidence of favorable
selection (Fang et al. 2008). Favorable selection might arise in automobile insurance markets if
persons who are not risk averse in the financial domain tend to be more careless drivers, thereby
increasing the probability of an accident. Thus, depending on their previous driving records,
persons who are not risk averse in the financial domain may be more likely to purchase complete
automobile insurance coverage. Or favorable and adverse selection may offset each other.15
We perform two versions of the correlation test. First, we estimate a linear probability
model of accident occurrence as a function of insurance coverage, controlling for risk
classification, similar to Finkelstein and Poterba (2004):
(5),
where CInsurance is a vector of insurance coverage characteristics. With asymmetric
information about risk type,

.

The parameter estimate on the binary variable for zero exposure is positive and
statistically significant. (Table 5, Panel A). Fully insured are 0.047 more likely to have an
accident in the following year (col. 2) than are individuals with above $225,000 maximum loss
exposure. Even after conditioning on insurer risk classification, fully insured individuals are
0.044 more likely to have an accident (col. 3). Therefore, we reject the null hypothesis of
symmetric or offsetting dimensions of private information in liability insurance. The parameter
15

In addition, the literature, e.g., Finkelstein and Poterba (2004), has shown that asymmetric information may
manifest itself in ways other than the positive correlation property. Aspects of insurance contracts chosen by the
individual may reveal their private information. In FP’s analysis, such a dimension was a minimum payment from
the annuity irrespective of longevity (“guaranteed payment”). In our study’s context, insurers may differ in both
underwriting policy and, except for North Carolina, in the extent to which violations and accidents are experiencerated. Thus, a person with a clean driving record but with private information that she has a relatively high
probability of a violation and/or accident may be unlikely to purchase insurance from an insurer with strict
underwriting and experience-rating policies.

24

estimates on level of the collision insurance deductible are very imprecisely estimated. Results,
not shown, using number of accidents as a dependent variable, are very similar to those reported
in Panel A. Thus, the main takeaway is persons with complete insurance have a higher accident
probability in the following year.
Second, we employ a procedure suggested by Chiappori and Salanie (2000)—that is, we
estimate two equations with bivariate probit:
(6a)
(6b),
where Zero Exposure is a binary variable set to 1 if the individual has zero liability exposure,
i.e., complete liability insurance coverage. We measure the correlation, , between the error
terms of these two equations. With asymmetric information about risk type, there should be a
positive correlation between the residuals of these two equations—i.e.,

.

The correlation is positive and statistically significant, 0.15 based on data from the whole
sample, and 0.14 when we condition on persons with liability insurance, which further supports
our finding that people with more complete liability insurance coverage—i.e., with less exposure
to financial risk following an accident—are more likely to be involved in an accident during the
follow-up year (Panel B). This positive correlation between completeness of insurance coverage
and ex post accident risk may reflect both adverse selection and moral hazard. In the next section
we disentangle these two phenomena.
V. Separating Adverse Selection from Moral Hazard
A. Overview
Abbring et al. (2003) used panel data from insurance companies to distinguish between
adverse selection and moral hazard based on negative state dependence. In the absence of moral

25

hazard, an individual’s probability of getting involved in an accident this year should be
independent of whether or not the person was involved in an accident last year. With moral
hazard, however, and experience-rated premiums, having an accident in the previous year should
lead to higher levels of precaution and a lower probability of an accident this year. This implies
that a finding of negative state dependence can be taken as evidence of moral hazard.16
We do not use this approach for two reasons: (1) our panel consists of only two periods
and (2) the probability of a chargeable accident in a year is low, providing in combination with
our sample size, little statistical power to reject the null hypothesis of no negative state
dependence. Fortunately, responses to a set of questions posed as hypotheticals in our survey
allow us to employ an alternative approach for quantifying moral hazard and hence to parse
effects of moral hazard and adverse selection.
Our approach involves several steps (Fig. 1). We describe our method for estimating each
step below.
B. Step 1. Relationship between Expected Premium Increases and Reckless Driving
The penalty from reckless driving was measured in the SAD by the change in the
expected premium after speeding 15+ miles per hour over the posted speed limit, which reflects
the probability of being pulled over and convicted for speeding by this amount of the limit, both
elicited by the SAD. Given this expected premium increase, the SAD asked respondents to
estimate the (subjective) probability of speeding in the next year. After eliciting this probability,
the SAD posed scenarios for which the probability of being pulled over for speeding varied, first
by randomly chosen values of 0.10, 0.20, or 0.30, and second for three times these values. For

16

See Ceccarini (2008) for an application of this idea.

26

each scenario, the SAD asked for the probability that the person would speed. For each scenario
we calculate the following expected premium increase:

(7)
We use individuals’ subjective probabilities as elicited by the SAD for each of the four terms in
eq. (7) at baseline and at the one-year follow-up, which yields six observations for each person.17
We pool these observations and estimate the following equation with individual respondent fixed
effects and standard errors clustered at the individual level:
(8)
The coefficient of interest is

, which measures the mean individual change in subjective

probability of speeding due to a given percent increase in premium. The null hypothesis is
—i.e., no moral hazard.
In addition, the SAD elicited the individual’s subjective belief about the expected
premium increase following a DWI conviction and the probability of drinking and driving in the
next year given the person’s subjective beliefs about a DWI conviction. Respondents were also
asked the probability of drinking and driving if the expected premium increase doubled. We thus

17

The SAD asked for the subjective probability of being convicted for speeding conditional on speeding. In both
waves the mean subjective probability of being pulled over for speeding, conditional on speeding, was 0.24 and the
mean subjective probability of being convicted, also conditional on speeding, was about 0.5. This puzzling result
may reflect the possibility that, at least in some of the SAD study cities, e.g., Seattle, the individual receives a
speeding citation other than by being pulled over, such as by automated camera. Alternatively, some respondents
may have interpreted the question about conviction as conditional on being stopped. Our calculation assumes the
latter.

27

obtain four observations/person and follow the same approach as for the speeding scenarios to
estimate eq. (7) with Drinking and Driving replacing Speeding.
C. Step 2. Relationship between Reckless Driving and Subjective Probability of an Accident
The second step measures specific dimensions of private information that determine the
residual component of individuals’ subjective probabilities of an accident—the component not
explained by the objective probability of an accident. The results of this analysis are reported
above in Table 2.
D. Step 3. Relationship between Subjective Probability of an Accident and Ex Post Risk
Third, we measure the relationship between the subjective probability of an accident and
the ex post probability of an accident. The parameter estimate

from eq. (4) measures this

relationship.
E. Results
On average, the mean subjective probability of speeding 15+ mph over the speed limit in
the next year is 0.45 at baseline and 0.40 at the follow-up interview (Table 6). In both waves the
mean subjective probability of being pulled over for speeding 15+ mph, conditional on such
speeding, is 0.24, and the mean subjective probability of being convicted, conditional on being
pulled over for speeding, is about 0.5. The mean expected premium increase due to a speeding
conviction is 0.28 at baseline and 0.33 at follow-up. In both waves the mean subjective
probability of drinking and driving is 0.17, and the expected premium increase due to a DWI
increased from 0.77 at baseline and 0.86 at follow-up. The mean subjective probability of being
pulled over conditional on drinking and driving is 0.10 and 0.11 in the two waves, respectively.
The probabilities of a DWI conviction conditional on being pulled over for drinking and driving
are 0.60 and 0.61.

28

Doubling the expected premium increase from speeding leads to a 0.23 lower probability
of speeding, and doubling the expected premium increase from drinking and driving leads to a
0.10 lower probability of drinking and driving (Table 7). These relationships capture the first
step in Fig. 1. The parameter estimates on the subjective probability of speeding of 0.026 and
0.031 for the subjective probability of drinking and driving in the next year (Table 2, col. 2)
capture the second step in Fig. 1. To measure the third step in Fig. 1, we use the parameter
estimate on the subjective probability of an accident of 0.048 (Table 4, col. 2), and in sensitivity
analysis, the parameter estimate on the subjective probability of 0.130 col. 4).
Table 8 summarizes the parameter estimates for each step in Fig. 1, for each of the two
types of reckless driving. The product of the estimates from the three analysis steps for speeding
is -0.0003 or -0.03 percent. Similarly, the corresponding effect for drinking and driving is -0.03
percent. Using the alternative estimate for the relationship between objective and subjective
probability of an accident yields slightly higher estimates of -0.08 percent for speeding and -0.04
percent for drinking and driving. What makes the moral hazard effects so low is that the
marginal effects of reckless driving on the probabilities of accidents are low. This is plausible for
anyone who has observed the many speeders on a highway. Very few accidents result per
speeding episode. In sum, the presence of asymmetric information in the automobile insurance
market contributes substantially more to adverse selection than to moral hazard.
VI. Sorting of Policyholders Based on their Accident Risk
A. Rationale for Sorting
A major attribute of insurance markets is that insurers often reject applicants rather than
sell insurance to all comers at an actuarially fair price plus a load for administrative and market
expense plus profit. A commonly stated reason noted by insurers is that they cannot develop an

29

actuarially fair premium for some consumers. Hendren (2013) formalized this argument. In his
framework, there are low- and high-risk types. For the low-risk types, consumers are likely to
have little private information. However, high-risk individuals may consist of persons who were
simply unlucky in the past in being involved in accidents and who filed claims for this reason
and those who have private information about their risk type. The unlucky persons may have the
ex ante accident risk of low-risk insureds. Hendren showed empirically that indeed high-risk
persons who are rejected by insurers often possess additional private information about their risk
types.
Hendren’s empirical analysis encompassed markets for long-term care, disability, and life
insurance, all types of coverage voluntarily demanded by consumers. By contrast, automobile
liability insurance coverage is mandatory in nearly every state. So outright rejections are not a
possibility, although insurers may reject applicants for coverage above the mandatory liability
limits. Rejections of applications for automobile insurance are rare. According to the SAD,
only2.2 percent had been rejected by an insurer in the last three years at baseline and only 1.7
percent had been rejected in the past year at follow-up.
A plausible mechanism for harder-to-rate drivers in the automobile insurance market is
for insurers to sort drivers on the basis of objective accident risk, as in Hendren (2013), with the
difference being that the drivers are accepted for some level of coverage rather than being
rejected outright, but the high-risk drivers “pay” for their additional risk in part by being insured
by lower-quality insurers, where quality is measured by such attributes as poorer customer
service, e.g., greater hassles in collecting from insurers, a smaller network of firms available for
repairs of damage, and generally offering lower value for the money. By specializing, lowerquality insurers become specialized in gauging not-easily observed characteristics of their

30

customers and dealing with their “hard-luck” stories. Few respondents to the SAD were covered
by surplus line insurers on high-risk pools.
Our empirical analysis of sorting in the automobile insurance market involves two steps.
In Step 1, we show that higher-risk drivers measured on objective characteristics used by
insurers for risk classification tended to be insured by lower-quality insurers. In Step 2, we show
that higher-risk drivers based on the same objective characteristics tended to have more private
information about their accident risk.
B. Step 1: Choice of Other Dimensions of Insurance Contracts
We obtain data on insurers from three additional sources: J.D. Power, Insure.com, and
Consumer Reports. Each of these sources report consumer ratings along multiple dimensions of
quality for large automobile insurance companies. Insure.com also reports coverage options and
discounts offered by each insurer that is included in the study. The large insurers reported in
these studies cover approximately 83 percent of our sample for J.D. Power ratings and 77 percent
of our data for Consumer Reports ratings and Insure.com ratings and insurer characteristics.
Consumer Reports, available online by subscription, publishes automobile insurance
ratings based on a survey of 102,207 subscribers. The reader score is a measure of overall
satisfaction with claims handling based on the subsample of 29,116 survey respondents who had
a claim during 2009 to mid-2012. The score ranges from 0 to 100, where 100 indicates all
respondents are completely satisfied; 80, very satisfied; 60, fairly well satisfied; and 40,
somewhat dissatisfied on average. The premium satisfaction rating reflects satisfaction with
premium paid based on the entire sample, and it varies from 1 to 5, increasing in satisfaction.
Insure.com published ratings of 20 large automobile insurance companies based on a
survey of 5,600 insurance customers conducted from September-November 2012. The overall

31

score, which varies from 0 to 100, is an aggregate measure of: satisfaction with claims
processing, customer service; premium paid given the coverage; the percent of respondents who
said they would renew their coverage (plan to renew); and the percent of respondents who said
they would recommend or already recommended the insurer. Insure.com also reports coverage
options, including whether or not the company offers accident forgiveness (accident forgiveness
offered), and a distribution of reasons that respondents bought from the company (e.g., saw
commercial).
J.D. Power also publishes customer satisfaction ratings of U.S. automobile insurance
companies online. It also reports ratings of customers’ claims experience, as does Consumer
Reports, they also report ratings based on customers’ experience purchasing a new automobile
insurance policy. Ratings include: (1) overall claims satisfaction, (2) overall purchase
experience, (3) claims service interaction, which is based on claimants’ ratings of the insurer
representative or agent handling the claim, and (4) local agent interaction, which reflects
purchasers’ experiences interacting with the insurer’s local agent or staff. All ratings vary from 2
to 5, where 5 is among the best, 4 better than most, 3 average, and 2 the rest.
Given that private information affects individuals’ choice of the level of liability
coverage to purchase, a question remains whether private information affects individuals’ choice
of insurer based on other dimensions of insurance contracts such as coverage options, discounts,
and insurer quality scores. We base empirical tests of the effect of private information on choices
concerning other coverage attributes using the following general specification.
(9),
where Attribute alternatively measures consumers’ ratings, policy options, or discounts reported
in Consumer Reports, Insure.com, or J.D. Power for the SAD respondent’s insurer. Of particular

32

interest are the parameter estimates on the vector

from each equation. If

in eq. (9),

then an individual’s subjective probability is related to the attribute represented by the dependent
variable.
Table 9 reports the results of estimating these two sets of equations on the subsample of
SAD respondents whose insurers have a reported value for a particular attribute. Panel A
includes attributes measuring the overall quality of an insurance contract. An individual with a
higher objective probability of an accident is more likely to be insured by a low quality insurer
(Panel A, cols. 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10). This result is consistent with sorting based on observable risk
and is robust across many different measures of overall quality. Relative to their objective
counterparts, the estimated parameters on the subjective probability of an accident are generally
small, albeit positive, and mostly statistically insignificant. Conditional on the objective accident
probability, individuals with a higher subjective belief of an accident are more likely to choose a
high quality insurer. An individual with private information about his risk type is likely to put
more effort into seeking a high quality insurer relative to an individual with the same observable
risk type but no private information because he anticipates that his true risk type will be revealed
over time and he would prefer to be with an insurer with a high rating, which reflects claims and
premium satisfaction.
Panel B includes specific quality attributes of an insurance contract. Individuals with high
objective accident risk tend to have insurers with lower premium satisfaction, claims service
interaction, and local agent interaction scores. They are more likely to have a policy with
accident forgiveness and more likely to be insured by an insurer with a high proportion of
customers who bought from that insurer because they saw a commercial. With the exception of
premium satisfaction, coefficients on the covariate for the subjective probability of an accident

33

are insignificant and vary in sign. For premium satisfaction, the coefficients are positive and
significant at the 0.10 level or better. A plausible reason is that high-risk individuals think that
they have a higher probability of an accident than the insurer does and the insurer’s prediction
determines the premium.
These findings suggest a number of mechanisms by which sorting occurs in the market
for automobile insurance. First, dissatisfaction with premiums based on the objective probability
of an accident simply reflects consumer dissatisfaction with paying experience-rated premiums.
Second, dissatisfaction with claims service and local agents could also reflect provision of lower
quality service by insurers frequented by drivers with a high objective accident risk. Moreover,
since lower-quality drivers have more accidents, they have more negative interactions with their
insurers. Accident-free drivers have less reason to complain about poor service. Third, people
with high accident probabilities would understandably be more likely to rely on commercials for
information about insurers than rely on advice from friends who might be reluctant to encourage
an accident-prone friend to purchase coverage from their insurers.
C. Step 2: Private Information by Risk Type
To gauge the importance of private information for persons with difference objective
accident risk, we rank order the sample by predicted accident risk and split the sample into
terciles according to the objective accident probability. We re-estimate eq. (3) with the sample
split into terciles, low, medium, and high objective accident risk. The dependent variable is a
binary for whether or not the respondent had an accident during the follow-up year. The
explanatory variables are the subjective probability of an accident during the follow-up year and
the objective risk of an accident during this period.

34

The results are striking (Table 10). The high-risk tercile has private information about
accident risk that could not be detected across the whole sample or for the low and medium
(objective) risk individuals. This leads to the conclusion that as insurers suspect, drivers who are
classified as high risk have private information about their accident risk that drivers in the other
risk categories do not possess.
VII. Discussion and Conclusion
Not surprisingly, the information insurers routinely collect on their customers predicts the
objective probability of an accident during the policy year. Factors such as youth, gender, miles
driven/year, and prior speeding citations and arrests for DWI, are predictive of the probability of
an accident. The subjective probability of an accident in the following year is systematically
related to the individual’s projection of his or own care in driving. It is not only possible to elicit
subjective probabilities of speeding 15 or more miles per hour over the speed limit and of
drinking and driving during the past year, but these probabilities are systematically related to
subjective beliefs about having an accident. People make judgments about the quality of their
own driving ability that are systematically related to their subjective probabilities of having an
accident. And the objective probability of an accident is positively related to its subjective
counterpart.
We find that drivers who reported higher subjective probabilities of an accident in the
following year were more likely to purchase more complete liability insurance coverage after
accounting for the probability of an accident based on information used by insurers in risk
classification.
Findings from positive correlation tests and bivariate probit analysis also show a positive
relationship between maximum exposure to loss from an automobile accident and ex post

35

accident risk. However, this relationship is consistent with both adverse selection and moral
hazard. Using a series of questions posed by our survey, we estimate the amount of moral hazard
to be very small, which implies that the positive correlation test and bivariate probit results
mainly reflect adverse selection, which is consistent with our earlier results showing that persons
with higher subjective beliefs about the probability of an accident in the following year tend to
purchase more complete liability coverage. Along the way to determining the extent of moral
hazard, we document that persons who expected higher premium increases conditional on their
being cited for speeding 15 miles per hour and over and arrested for drinking and driving have
lower subjective probabilities of speeding and drinking and driving, suggesting a deterrent effect
from imposing higher premium penalties on reckless driving.
Unlike most other lines of insurance, state laws require that drivers purchase a minimum
level of liability insurance coverage. Thus, even in the presence of asymmetric information, there
will be no unraveling of coverage at the statutorily-determined levels of liability coverage. There
could be unraveling of contracts offering deeper coverage and collision coverage, but we do not
observe this. Most respondents to our survey had liability coverage well above the statutory
liability limits. One mechanism that mitigates unraveling of the latter contract types is sorting of
insured by objective risk. Sorting may reduce the adverse effects of private information by, for
example, making it more difficult for accident-prone drivers to collect damages since they are
more likely to have a lower-quality insurer. Persons classified as high risk on objective factors
which insurers use in risk classification do possess more private information about their accident
risk, but insurers that specialize in covering such individuals can account for this in premiumsetting given segmentation in this market. Our findings on sorting are new.
Another factor making unraveling less likely in the automobile insurance market is that

36

claims frequency is relatively high and the claims tail is relatively short compared to other lines
of third-party insurance, such as medical malpractice insurance. Thus, to the extent that there is
learning about customer riskiness, it occurs fairly rapidly.
When we began this study, we sought an answer to the question of why in the presence of
adverse selection insurers do not obtain more information about their customers. The answer
seems to be that they do not have to. Drivers with a high accident risk, as determined by
objective factors used in risk classification, are more likely to possess private (Frank A Sloan and
Chepke 2008) information about their driving skills and risk-taking propensities. According to
our survey, insurers outright rejected very few persons outright. Rather than formally reject
applicants, there are more subtle mechanisms for rejecting high-risk drivers, an example being a
receptionist in a high-quality insurer’s office advising a high-risk driver to take his business
elsewhere. Poorer drivers pay more, not only in terms of higher premiums but in lower-quality
service.
According to the old adage, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.” In the automobile insurance
market, institutional responses by private firms have done the fixing. Although there are minor
suggestions, e.g., highly experience-rated premiums may deter reckless driving, in contrast to
other lines of insurance, such as medical malpractice insurance and workers’ compensation, there
is no important constituency for reform. Rather, empirical research on risk perceptions as in this
study clarifies the role and sources of private information and market responses for coping with
it.

37

Acknowledgements
This paper was funded in part by a grant from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism (NIAAA, #R01AA017913-01A1). The sponsor had no role in the design or conduct
of this study. There are no conflicts of interest nor any financial disclosures for any of the
authors. We also thank Hanming Fang, University of Pennsylvania, and Ahmed Khwaja, Yale
University, for their collaboration in writing the proposal that led to the grant, and for assistance
in developing the questionnaire used in this study.

38

REFERENCES
Abbring, J. H., Heckman, J. J., Chiappori, P. A., & Pinquet, J. (2003). Adverse selection and
moral hazard in insurance: Can dynamic data help to distinguish? Journal of the
European Economic Association, 1(2‐3), 512-521.
Barseghyan, L., Prince, J., & Teitelbaum, J. C. (2011). Are risk preferences stable across
contexts? Evidence from insurance data. The American Economic Review, 101(2),
591-631.
Barsky, R. B., Juster, F. T., Kimball, M. S., & Shapiro, M. D. (1997). Preference parameters and
behavioral heterogeneity: An experimental approach in the health and retirement
study. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 537-579.
Ceccarini, O. (2008). Does experience rating matter in reducing accident probabilities? A test
for moral hazard. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Chiappori, P. A., & Salanie, B. (2000). Testing for asymmetric information in insurance
markets. Journal of Political Economy, 108(1), 56-78.
Cutler, D., & Reber, S. (1998). Paying for health insurance: The trade-off between
competition and adverse selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 433466.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., Pascu, I., & Cullen, M. (2012). How general are risk preferences?
Choices under uncertainty in different domains. American Economics Review,
102(6), 2606-2638.
Fang, H., Keane, Michael P., & Silverman, D. (2008). Sources of advantageous selection:
Evidence from the medigap insurance market. Journal of Political Economy, 116(2),
303-350, doi:10.1086/587623.
Finkelstein, A., & McGarry, K. (2006). Multiple dimensions of private information: Evidence
from the long-term care insurance market. American Economic Review, 96(4), 938958, doi:doi: 10.1257/aer.96.4.938.
Finkelstein, A., & Poterba, J. (2004). Adverse selections in insurance markets: Policyholder
evidence from the U.K. annuity market. Journal of Political Economy, 112(1), 183208.
Gruber, J., & Köszegi, B. (2001). Is addiction “rational”? Theory and evidence. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 116(4), 1261-1303.
Guck, T. P., Elsasser, G. N., Kavan, M. G., & Eugene, J. (2003). Depression and congestive
heart failure. Congestive Heart Failure, 9(3), 163-169.
Hendren, N. (2013). Private information and insurance rejections. Econometrica, 81(5),
1713-1762, doi:10.3982/ecta10931.
Hepburn, S. R., Barnhofer, T., & Williams, J. M. G. (2009). The future is bright? Effects of
mood on perception of the future. Journal of Happiness Studies, 10(4), 483-496.
Khwaja, A., Sloan, F., & Wang, Y. (2009). Do smokers value their health and longevity less?
Journal of Law and Economics, 52(1), 171-196.
Lemaire, J. (1995). Bonus-malus systems in automobile insurance (Vol. 19): Springer.
Lieberman, J. A. (2003). The differential diagnosis of fatigue and excessive dysfunction in
primary care. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64(Suppl. 14), 40-43.

39

Loewenstein, G., Weber, R., Flory, J., Manuck, S., & Muldoon, M. (2001). Dimensions of time
discounting. Paper presented at the Conference on Survey Research on Household
Expectations and Preferences, Ann Arbor, MI,
Madden, G. J., & Johnson, P. S. (2010). A discounting primer. In G. J. Madden, & W. K. Bickel
(Eds.), Impuslivity: The behavioral and neurological science of discounting (pp. 1137). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (2009). Per capita ethanol
consumption for states, census regions, and the United States, 1970–2007 (Gallons
of ethanol, based on population age 14 and older)
Office of the Commissioner of Insurance (2011). Consumer's guide to auto insurance.
Madison, WI: Office of the Commissioner of Insurance.
Pennsylvania Insurance Department (2013). Questions and answers: A supplement to the
Automobile Insurance Guide.
http://www.portal.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/community/auto_insurance/9187/
auto_insurance_questions_and_answers/590976. Accessed February 12 2014.
Perreira, K. M., & Sloan, F. A. (2002). Excess alcohol consumption and health outcomes: a 6
‐year follow‐up of men over age 50 from the health and retirement study.
Addiction, 97(3), 301-310.
Rothchild, M., & Stiglitz, J. (1976). Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay
on the economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
90(4), 629-629.
Shavell, S. (2005). Minimum asset requirements and compulsory liability insurance as
solutions to the judgment-proof problem. RAND Journal of Economics, 36(1), 63-77.
Sloan, F. A., & Chepke, L. M. (2008). Medical malpractice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sloan, F. A., & Eldred, L. M. (2013). Do preferences of drinker-drivers differ? [Working
paper].
Sloan, F. A., Eldred, L. M., Guo, T., & Xu, Y. (2013). Are people overoptimistic about the
effects of heavy drinking. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 47(1), 93-127.
Sloan, F. A., Viscusi, W. K., Chesson, H. W., Conover, C. J., & Whetten-Goldstein, K. (1998).
Alternative approaches to valuing intangible health losses: The evidence for
multiple sclerosis. Journal of Health Economics, 17(4), 475-497, doi:10.1016/s01676296(97)00025-8.
Smith, E., & Wright, R. (1992). Why is automobile insurance in Philadelphia so damn
expensive? The American Economic Review, 82(4), 756-772.
Ulleberg, P., & Rundmo, T. (2003). Personality, attitudes and risk perception as predictors
of risky driving behaviour among young drivers. Safety Science, 41(5), 427-443.
Wise, M., G., & Rundell, J. R. (1994). Concise guide to consultation psychiatry. Washington,
D.C.: American Psychiatry Press.

40

Table 1 — Objective probability of an accident based on characteristics used by the insurer
Mean
(1)

Any accident
(2)
0.213

Mean of dependent variable:
Demographic characteristics
Male <25
0.021
(0.144)
0.196
Female <25
0.041
(0.198)
0.112
Married
0.466
(0.497) -0.060
Driving characteristics
Miles > 15k/yr
0.154
(0.360)
0.116
Drives to work
0.760
(0.429)
0.015
Drives for work
0.321
(0.467)
0.033
Speeding violations
0.526
(1.280)
0.033
DWI arrests
0.039
(0.299)
0.083
Vehicle characteristics
Age
8.548
(5.592) -0.002
Type
Sedan (omitted)
0.613
(0.487)
Sport
0.026
(0.158) -0.130
SUV
0.219
(0.415)
0.025
Minivan
0.060
(0.237) -0.026
Truck
0.070
(0.255)
0.045
Unknown
0.014
(0.116) -0.066
City
Raleigh (omitted)
0.386
(0.487)
Hickory
0.059
(0.235)
0.003
Seattle
0.164
(0.371)
0.028
Yakima
0.039
(0.194) -0.123
Milwaukee
0.110
(0.313) -0.064
Lacrosse
0.081
(0.272) -0.072
Philadelphia
0.115
(0.319) -0.012
Wilkes-Barre
0.048
(0.213) -0.057
Constant
0.207
N
1,177
R2
0.063
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Dependent variable is binary indicator for accidents reported in Wave 1

Any chargeable accident
(3)
0.035

**
*
**

(0.084)
(0.062)
(0.025)

0.022
0.053 *
-0.015

(0.038)
(0.028)
(0.011)

***

(0.034)
(0.029)
(0.026)
(0.009)
(0.043)

0.061 ***
-0.001
-0.019
0.006
0.026

(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.004)
(0.019)

***
*

*

*

***

Any non-chargeable
accident
(4)
0.187
0.194 **
0.045
-0.053 **
0.064 **
0.006
0.053 **
0.032 ***
0.051

(0.080)
(0.059)
(0.024)
(0.032)
(0.028)
(0.025)
(0.009)
(0.041)

(0.002)

0.001

(0.001)

-0.003

(0.002)

(0.076)
(0.030)
(0.051)
(0.048)
(0.245)

-0.003
-0.011
-0.012
0.015
0.025

(0.034)
(0.013)
(0.023)
(0.022)
(0.111)

-0.137 *
0.043
-0.021
0.023
-0.103

(0.072)
(0.028)
(0.049)
(0.046)
(0.234)

(0.053)
(0.035)
(0.063)
(0.040)
(0.046)
(0.040)
(0.057)
(0.039)

0.055 **
-0.016
0.008
-0.036 **
-0.020
-0.012
-0.024
0.035 **

(0.024)
(0.016)
(0.028)
(0.018)
(0.021)
(0.018)
(0.026)
(0.018)

-0.050
0.040
-0.141 **
-0.041
-0.062
-0.008
-0.046
0.190 ***

(0.050)
(0.034)
(0.060)
(0.038)
(0.044)
(0.038)
(0.055)
(0.038)

0.044

0.056

Table 2 — Relationship between subjective probability of an accident and other information
Subjective probability
of accident
(2)

Mean
(1)
Dependent variable:
Private information
Driving self-rating
Worse than others
About the same as others
Better than others
Much better than others (omitted)
Financial risk tolerance
Least financially risk tolerant
Moderately financially risk tolerant
Most financially risk tolerant (omitted)
Driving risk tolerance
Do not speed (least risk tolerant)
Speed <10 mph (moderately risk tolerant)
Speed 15 mph (most risk tolerant) (omitted)
Cognitive ability (0-16)
Impulsivity (increasing)
Depressed (binary)
Altruism (non-familial)
WTP to avoid paralysis (monthly)
Subjective prob. of speeding
Subjective prob. of drinking and driving
Demographic information
Household income ($100k)
Education (years)
Non-white
Objective probability of accident
Constant
N
R2
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

0.135
0.000
0.000
0.023
0.247
0.492
0.238

(0.146)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.150)
(0.432)
(0.499)
(0.013)

0.357
0.599
0.044

0.099 ***
0.041 ***
0.029 ***

(0.030)
(0.012)
(0.011)

(0.479)
(0.489)
(0.006)

0.012
0.006

(0.022)
(0.021)

0.253
0.512
0.235
14.470
37.090
0.182
23.000
36.790
0.449
0.165

(0.435)
(0.499)
(0.013)
(1.741)
(3.476)
(0.385)
(2.619)
(33.952)
(0.398)
(0.292)

0.002
-0.011

(0.013)
(0.011)

-0.003
-0.002 **
-0.011
0.002
0.000
0.026 **
0.031 **

(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.011)
(0.002)
(0.000)
(0.012)
(0.015)

0.811
15.610
0.130
0.214

(0.641)
(1.944)
(0.337)
(0.103)

-0.021 ***
0.000
-0.010
0.179 ***
0.169 **

(0.007)
(0.002)
(0.013)
(0.043)
(0.080)

1,139

0.073

Table 3 — Relationship between insurance coverage and subjective and objective probability of an accident
Liability

Dependent variables:
Liability exposure ($100k)
No collision insurance | Has liability insurance

Mean (std. dev.)

Liability
exposure
($100k)
(1)

Liability
exposure |
Has liability
insurance
(2)

1.967
(5.45)

2.007
(5.536)

Deductible > $500 | Has collision insurance
Independent variables:
Subjective probability of accident
Objective probability of accident
Constant

0.134
(0.141)
0.210
(0.099)

0.133
(0.140)
0.210
(0.098)

Collision
Deductible
No collision
> $500 |
insurance |
Has
Has liability
collision
insurance
insurance
(3)
(4)

0.138
(0.346)

0.134
(0.144)
0.213
(0.102)

Liability
Liability
exposure
($100k)
(5)

OLS

Liability
exposure |
Has liability
insurance
(6)

Collision
Deductible
No collision
> $500 |
insurance |
Has
Has liability
collision
insurance
insurance
(7)
(8)

0.163
(0.370)
0.152
(0.703)
0.210
(0.098)

-4.207 ***
(1.255)
2.130
(1.789)
2.057 ***
(0.375)
970
0.012

N
970
915
1,108
934
R2
Standard errors in parentheses
Exposure regressions exclude individuals with indeterminate liability limits (1,000 <= Upper Limit < State Minimum).
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

-4.574 ***
(1.329)
2.064
(1.884)
2.148 ***
(0.392)
915
0.013

-0.086
(0.073)
0.178 *
(0.103)
0.112 ***
(0.025)
1,108
0.004

0.071
(0.085)
0.183
(0.124)
0.111 ***
(0.03)
934
0.009

Table 4 — Relationship between accident occurrence and subjective probability of an accident

Subjective probability of accident
Objective probability of accident
Constant

Any accident
(1)
(2)
0.077
0.048
(0.058)
(0.058)
0.300 ***
(0.081)
0.079 ***
0.019
(0.011)
(0.02)
1,173
1,172
0.002
0.013

Observations
R2
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Subjective probability of accident is measured in the baseline year.
Accident occurrence is measured in the follow-up year.

Number of accidents
(3)
(4)
0.170 **
0.130 *
(0.067)
(0.067)
0.410 ***
(0.094)
0.076 ***
-0.006
(0.013)
(0.023)
1,173
1,172
0.006
0.021

Number of chargeable
accidents
(5)
(6)
0.081 ***
0.076 ***
(0.024)
(0.024)
0.054
(0.034)
0.002
-0.009
(0.005)
(0.008)
1,173
1,172
0.010
0.012

Number of non-chargeable
accidents
(7)
(8)
0.084
0.050
(0.061)
(0.061)
0.360 ***
(0.085)
0.074 ***
0.002
(0.012)
(0.021)
1,173
1,172
0.002
0.017

Table 5 — Relationship between accident occurrence and insurance coverage

Panel A: Linear Probability Model
Dependent variable:
Liability insurance
Fully insured (zero exposure)
Exposure level if <= $225k
Exposure level if > $225k
Collision insurance
Deductible > $500
Deductible <=$500
Objective probability of accident
Constant
N
R2

Mean
(1)

Any accident
(2)

0.089

(0.009)

0.455
0.579
8.575

(0.015)
(0.037)
(0.619)

0.122
0.680
0.210

(0.010)
(0.014)
(0.003)

1,082

Whole sample
Panel B: Bivariate probit
(1)
Correlation coefficient
0.150 **
(0.073)
Coefficients in Accident equation
Objective probability of accident
1.930 ***
(0.546)
Constant
-1.773 ***
(0.138)
Coefficients in Zero exposure equation
Objective probability of accident
0.424
(0.409)
Constant
-0.071
(0.095)
N
970
Standard errors in parentheses
Exposure regressions exclude individuals with indeterminate liability limits.
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

0.047 **
0.011
0.001
0.018
-0.012
0.069 ***
1,083
0.006

Any accident
(3)

(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.002)

0.044 **
0.011
0.000

(0.022)
(0.022)
(0.002)

(0.032)
(0.023)

0.019
-0.009
0.340 ***
-0.003
1,082
0.020

(0.032)
(0.023)

(0.025)

Has liability insurance
(2)
0.137 *
(0.075)
2.162 ***
-1.809 ***

(0.561)
(0.142)

0.540
-0.048
911

(0.428)
(0.099)

(0.031)

Table 6 — Subjective probabilities and expected premium increases due to reckless driving
Mean

Std.
dev.

Speeding
Subjective prob. of speeding 15mph+

0.45

0.40

Subjective prob. of speeding 15mph+ (2)

0.40

0.39

Subjective prob. of being pulled over | Speeding 15mph+

0.24

0.25

Subjective prob. of being pulled over | Speeding 15mph+ (2)

0.24

0.23

Subjective prob. of speeding conviction | Speeding 15mph+

0.51

0.37

Subjective prob. of speeding conviction | Speeding 15mph+ (2)

0.50

0.36

Expected premium increase | Speeding 15mph+ conviction

0.28

0.28

Expected premium increase | Speeding 15mph+ conviction (2)
Drinking and driving

0.33

0.35

Subjective prob. of drinking and driving

0.17

0.30

Subjective prob. of drinking and driving (2)

0.17

0.30

Subjective prob. of being pulled over | Drinking and driving*

0.10

0.13

Subjective prob. of being pulled over | Drinking and driving* (2)

0.11

0.13

Subjective prob. of DWI conviction | Pulled over for drinking and driving*

0.60

0.33

Subjective prob. of DWI conviction | Pulled over for drinking and driving* (2)

0.61

0.32

Expected premium increase | DWI conviction

0.77

1.17

Expected premium increase | DWI conviction (2)

0.86

0.93

Observations
Excludes individuals without liability insurance
(2) indicates a question elicited in Wave 3; otherwise, Wave 2
* This question relates specifically to weekend drinking and driving.

1,119

Table 7 — Relationship between subjective probability of reckless driving and premium increase

Mean
(1)
Dependent variables
Subjective prob. of speeding 15mph+
Subjective prob. of drinking and driving
Independent variables
Expected premium increase | Speeding 15mph+
Expected premium increase | Drinking and driving

Expected premium increase | Drinking and driving =

Subjective prob.
of drinking and
driving
(3)

0.390
(0.392)
0.120
(0.261)
0.053
(0.124)
0.076
(0.170)

Constant
Observations
R2
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Excludes individuals without liability insurance
Expected premium increase | Speeding 15mph+ =

Subjective prob.
of speeding
15mph+
(2)

4,270

-0.230 ***
(0.071)
0.390 ***
(0.005)
6,350
0.007

-0.097 ***
(0.021)
0.120 ***
(0.002)
4,421
0.011

E[Premium increase|Speeding conviction] *
P(Speeding conviction|Pulled over) *
P(Pulled over|Speeding 15mph+)
E[Premium increase|DWI conviction] *
P(DWI conviction|Pulled over) *
P(Pulled over|Weekend drinking and driving)

Table 8 — Moral Hazard
Main Analysis
∆ Subj. prob. of reckless driving / ∆ Penalty
∆ Subj. prob. of accident / ∆ Subj. prob. of reckless driving
∆ Obj. prob. of accident / ∆ Subj. prob. of accident
∆ Obj. prob. of accident / ∆ Penalty

Speeding
-0.230 ***
0.026 **
0.048
-0.0003

Drinking and
driving
-0.097 ***
0.031 **
0.048
-0.0001

Sensitivity analysis
∆ Subj. prob. of reckless driving / ∆ Penalty
∆ Subj. prob. of accident / ∆ Subj. prob. of reckless driving
∆ Obj. prob. of accident / ∆ Subj. prob. of accident
∆ Obj. prob. of accident / ∆ Penalty

Speeding
-0.230 ***
0.026 **
0.130 *
-0.0008

Drinking and
driving
-0.097 ***
0.031 **
0.130 *
-0.0004

∆ Penalty = 100% increase in premium
Excludes individuals without liability insurance
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 9 — Private information and quality of insurer
Overall claims
Reader score
Overall score
satisfaction
Consumer Reports

Panel A: Overall quality of insurer

(1)

Subjective probability of accident

0.617
(0.462)

Objective probability of accident
N
R2
Demographics

Panel B: Specific quality attributes
Subjective probability of accident
Objective probability of accident

794
0.026
yes

(2)
0.815 *
(0.464)
-2.083 ***
(0.668)
794
0.038
yes

Insure.com

(3)

(4)

0.574
(0.843)

787
0.010
yes

0.769
(0.849)
-2.197 *
(1.225)
787
0.015
yes

Overall purchase
experience

J.D. Power

(5)

(6)

0.110
(0.141)

803
0.009
yes

0.148
(0.142)
-0.397 *
(0.204)
803
0.014
yes

Plan to renew

J.D. Power

(7)

(8)

0.162
(0.216)

821
0.029
yes

0.241
(0.217)
-0.836 ***
(0.310)
821
0.038
yes

Insure.com

(9)

(10)

-0.089
(1.254)

787
0.019
yes

0.449
(1.256)
-6.057 ***
(1.813)
787
0.032
yes

Premium satisfaction

Claims service
interaction

Local agent interaction

Accident forgiveness
offered

Reason for buying:
saw commercial

Consumer Reports

J.D. Power

J.D. Power

Insure.com

Insure.com

(1)
0.243 *
(0.131)

(2)
0.298 **
(0.132)
-0.576 ***
(0.190)
794
0.029
yes

N
794
R2
0.018
Demographics
yes
Standard errors in parentheses
Demographics included are income, education, and race
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

(3)
-0.095
(0.277)

803
0.023
yes

(4)
-0.022
(0.279)
-0.755 *
(0.401)
803
0.027
yes

(5)
-0.188
(0.262)

795
0.019
yes

(6)
-0.124
(0.264)
-0.718 *
(0.378)
795
0.024
yes

(7)
0.153
(0.108)

822
0.014
yes

(8)
0.117
(0.109)
0.382 **
(0.158)
822
0.021
yes

(9)
-0.439
(0.859)

787
0.022
yes

(10)
-0.701
(0.864)
2.949 **
(1.247)
787
0.029
yes

Table 10 — Private information about risk type by objective risk terciles

Subjective probability of accident
Objective probability of accident
Constant
Observations
R2
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Tercile 1
(1)
-0.013
(0.081)
-0.048
(0.256)
0.054 *
(0.033)
383
0.000

Accident
Tercile 2
(2)
-0.186 *
(0.109)
0.768
(0.745)
-0.028
(0.149)
385
0.010

Tercile 3
(3)
0.281 ***
(0.105)
0.287
(0.195)
-0.017
(0.066)
383
0.027

