NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKETS FOR SCIENTIFIC ATTRIBUTION
Joshua Gans
Fiona Murray
Working Paper 20677
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20677
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

Thanks to Matthew Grennan, Michael Ryall, Sotaro Shibayama, participants at the IO Workshop (Vancouver),
REER Conference (Altanta), AIEA-NBER Innovation and Entrepreneurship Conference (Deijong) and
seminar participants at Harvard Business School, MIT, Toronto and Melbourne for helpful discussions.
Responsibility for all views remain our own. We thank the Sloan Foundation for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20677.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joshua Gans and Fiona Murray. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Markets for Scientific Attribution
Joshua Gans and Fiona Murray
NBER Working Paper No. 20677
November 2014
JEL No. O31,O34
ABSTRACT
Formal attribution provides a means of recognizing scientific contributions as well as allocating scientific
credit. This paper examines the processes by which attribution arises and its interaction with market
assessments of the relative contributions of members of scientific teams and communities – a topic
of interest organizational economics of science and in understanding scientific labor markets. We
demonstrate that a pioneer or senior scientist’s decision to co-author with a follower or junior scientist
depends critically on market attributions as well as the timing of the co-authoring decision. This results
in multiple equilibrium outcomes each with different implications for expected quality of research
projects. However, we demonstrate that the Pareto efficient organisational regime is for the follower
researcher to be granted co-authorship contingent on their own performance without any earlier precommitment to formal attribution. We then compare this with the alternative for the pioneer of publishing
their contribution and being rewarded through citations to back to it. While in some equilibria (especially
where co-authoring commitments are possible) there is no advantage to interim publication, in others
this can increase expected research quality.
Joshua Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com
Fiona Murray
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-470
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
fmurray@mit.edu

2
“Not for us is the limelight and the applause. But that doesn't mean the game is not worth
the candle or that we do not in the end win the game. In the long run, the economic scholar
works for the only coin worth having – our own applause.”
Paul Samuelson (1961)

1

Introduction
The reward structure in science is determined by a series of norms at the heart of

which is peer recognition:
Recognition of what one has accomplished is thus largely a motive derived from
institutional emphases. Recognition for originality becomes socially validated
testimony that one has successfully lived up to the most exacting requirements of
one’s role as scientist. The self-image of the individual scientist will also depend
greatly on the appraisals by his scientific peers of the extent to which he has lived
up to this exacting and critically important aspect of his role. As Darwin once
phrased it, “My love of natural science … has been much aided by the ambition to
be esteemed by my fellow naturalists.” (Merton, 1957)

At least in part, recognition incentives come from the notion of priority – being the
acknowledged pioneer of a piece of scientific knowledge. But evaluating the degree of
recognition requires that an additional assessment be made by one’s peers – an assessment
of impact. While relatively simple for a single scientist, such as Darwin seeking esteem
from his colleagues, as scientific production is (now) rarely an isolated individual
endeavour, the assessment of individual recognition today also involves drawing
inferences regarding the relative contribution of different scientists to a particular
pioneering body of knowledge. In this regard, recognition is more than just a currency of
reward but a currency of attribution. Put another way, recognition is not a reward that can
be conferred on individual scientists without constraint; rather, it is a reward that must be
allocated among colleagues and co-authors.

3
Scientists have developed a number of mechanisms that play a critical role in
determining the allocation of recognition amongst them. 1 One such mechanism is coauthorship. This arises when two scientists each contribute a sufficient amount to a research
output that they include both of their names in the contribution. In the simplest case,
attribution is then equally shared. In some areas, norms beyond co-authorship – particularly
name ordering – potentially influence attribution of relative contribution. Another
mechanism comes in the form of formal acknowledgement of contribution. To the extent
that scientific work builds on the work of other scholars, that prior contribution is generally
acknowledged in the form of a citation. But, even in this context, a citation can take a
variety of forms; from the briefest mention of influence to a more extended discussion of
the significance of prior work (although these nuances are rarely considered in today’s
citation counting approaches).
If actual contribution were observable, then such formal mechanisms – coauthorship and citation – would not play a role in the allocation of scientific rewards. In
reality, actual attribution is typically imperfectly observed and consequently, the signal
provided by formal attribution assists the “peer market” in assessing contribution. This
suggests that attribution has a market value. Moreover, that value is determined by
expectations and, in equilibrium, the process by which formal attribution is allocated. To
take an extreme example, if it was customary to permit scientists’ authorship even for
extremely small contributions, the market could infer little of their relative contribution

1

The origins of peer recognition as central to the reward structure in science have been documented by David
(2008). He demonstrates that peer review emerged from the desire of scientific patrons to assess that the work
produced by their sponsored scholars was actually of high quality. From this evolved a set of social norms
that tied scientific achievement to peer recognition. Stern (2004) provides evidence of this socialization;
demonstrating that scientists sacrifice monetary income in order to participate in scientific activities (notably
publication and presentations) that confer peer recognition.

4
from a particular scientist’s inclusion in the authorship group. In this situation, authorship
would have little or no value as a currency for attribution.2
The value of scientific attribution as determined by the interaction between
scientific practice and the peer market itself determines and can be influenced by
instrumental factors; namely, the allocation of rewards and the consequent impact on
incentives of scientists to provide effort and attention (Dasgupta and David, 1994). In that
regard, the allocation of scientific attribution is akin to a determination of ownership over
the stream of credit associated with a research output (thus playing a role similar to equity
allocation among founders). Such allocation will have an impact on scientific incentives
(in a manner akin to Hart and Moore, 1990). However, beyond this, there is an interaction
between those incentives and market assessments of what formal attribution signals. If
formal attribution has a limited impact on incentives, it will also send a limited signal to
the market as to actual effort expended by scientists and hence, of relative contribution. In
other words, formal attribution is potentially fragile and vulnerable to a vicious cycle of
devaluation.
Given all of this, it is perhaps surprising that economists have not turned their
attention to an understanding of the equity aspects of scientific rewards and precisely how
the market for scientific attribution operates.3 While there is past research in economics
that examines the effect of scientific rewards on incentives to produce research (e.g.,
Dasgupta and David, 1994), there are no papers that take a comprehensive examination of
the markets for scientific attribution. The closest paper is that of Engers, Gans, Grant and

This is perhaps also why “self-citations” tend to carry less weight than external citations. See Gans and
Murray (2014) for no real discussion of this issue beyond the mention of the word “citation.”
3
There is a literature on the allocation of credit as a managerial tool for incentivizing team performance
(Tumlinson, 2012), but this has been focused on issues of discrimination.
2

5
King (1999) whose model we build upon here. They examine the incentives of co-authors
with regard to name ordering on papers modelling a situation where co-authors can choose
to send a signal of relative contribution or alternatively to choose alphabetical ordering (as
is the norm in economics and much of the social sciences). They demonstrate that the signal
of relative contribution is muted when the market places some weight on alphabetical
ordering; something that damages the author with a “higher” name (such as Acemoglu)
relative to one with a “lower” name (such as Zuckerman). The end result could be a drive
towards alphabetical ordering and no market signal coming from name ordering. Here, we
consider a broader set of instruments for scientific attribution with a consequent set of
predictions for the production of most scientific knowledge (well beyond the social
sciences).
The goal of the present paper is to provide an analysis that considers a market for
attribution that interacts with various organisational regimes for assigning formal
attribution (such as co-authorship and, later, citation). Our approach, motivated by the
general structure of scientific labs,4 is based on the interactions between a pioneer and
follower scientist. As Stephan (2012) documents, labs are often “owned” by a faculty
principal investigator (or PI) and employ a variety of other scientists and staff including
those formally in training such as PhD students as well as those engaged in staff-type
employment such as post-doctoral fellows. Importantly, output from the lab, whether
formally co-authored by the PI or not, is typically known as being undertaken in the PI’s
lab. Hence, here we consider a pioneer scientist as akin to the PI of a lab and a follower as
one of the employed scientists in the lab (such as a postdoc or graduate student).

4

As opposed to narrower conceptions of collaboration considered by Engers et al. (1999).

6
Importantly, as Stephan (2012) notes, scientists might collaborate and contribute to a
project but not be listed as a co-author. This has raised concerns about exploitation, but
also this may impact on the incentives for different scientists in their collaborative efforts.
In our setup, both the pioneer and follower scientists contribute effort that improves
the quality of research with a signal received as to their relative contributions. We explore
two mechanisms as to how that private signal is potentially translated into a market signal.
In the baseline model, the pioneer and follower scientists negotiate over whether both are
included as co-authors or not in the follow-on research. In an extension, the scientists
operate at arm’s length with a choice made by an editor as to formal attribution of the
pioneer in the form of a citation in the follower’s paper. The difference between the two
models is the weight each places on private factors versus social or efficiency factors in
determining attribution, and the environments modelled are ones where we expect private
(rather than social) factors to dominate.
Our principal findings are as follows. First, a pioneer scientist’s choice of
committing to co-authorship prior to a project beginning depends on whether each
scientist’s efforts are complements in producing high quality research. When they are
substitutes, the pioneer chooses not to collaborate. Second, the set of outcomes whereby
fruitful collaboration can be facilitated is expanded when the pioneer can choose to
formally assign co-authorship at later stages. Indeed, by leaving the follower scientist
without formal co-authorship unless they contribute to a significant degree, the follower
(a) receives high-powered incentives to expend research effort and (b) can actually realise
a higher payoff than other organisational regimes. The latter effect comes from the fact that
when outsiders in the market know that follower co-authorship is assigned ex post in this

7
manner, they receive a perfect signal of the follower’s contribution if they are, in fact, a
co-author. However, this outcome is only possible if, in fact, the pioneer scientist can
commit to ex post co-authorship conditional on effort. Without that commitment, the
pioneer has an incentive to renege on their promises. Third, we demonstrate that, when
such commitment is not possible, an organisational mode whereby the pioneer publishes
their research contribution and the follower cites them in subsequent work can lead to the
same high-powered incentives so long as the editorial process is able to distil relative
contributions. Consequently, our results demonstrate that while practices of assigning coauthorship later in the research production process can be optimal, when such regimes
cannot be committed to, a process that divides research outputs into readily identified and
solely “owned” constituent parts (or ‘slice’s as they are often known) can also generate
more efficient outcomes.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we set up the model and our key
assumptions. Section 3 then examines equilibrium outcomes when the pioneer scientist is
choosing their co-authoring regime. Citations as an organization regime and reward
structure are considered in Section 4. Section 5 considers extensions while section 6 offers
conclusions.

2

Model Setup
The production of research involves two sequential stages, t  {1, 2} where

scientists can generate either a routine or an exceptional contribution. Those contributions
then determine the overall quality of the research produced and both stages must be
performed for any useful research output to be generated.

8
In each stage, by expending effort, ei  [0,1] , a scientist, i, generates a contribution
to knowledge. The quality of the contribution at stage t, denoted St, can either be (H) or
(L). St = L, which arises with probability 1  ei , means that the stage 1 research was routine
whereas St = H, which arises with probability ei , means that it was exceptional. It is
assumed here that the costs incurred by a scientist at each stage are identical, specifically,
c(ei), with c (0)  0 , c, c  0 for all ei. Below we will rely upon the specific functional
form, c(ei )  12 ei2 , to derive closed form solutions, but all results here would hold for the
more general cost function specification.
For simplicity, we assume that the significance of the stage 1 contribution does not
impact on the costs at stage 2. Instead, the contributions impact on the overall outcome that
may arise at the end of stage 2. Specifically, it assumed that research output can be of high
quality (V < 1), low quality (v < V) or no value (0). If (S1, S2) = (H, H), then research
output is V with certainty. If (S1, S2) = (H, L) or (L, H), then research output is v. Finally,
if (S1, S2) = (L, L), then research output has quality 0.5 The key feature of this specification
for the production of research is that the market does not receive a perfect signal of the
contribution at each stage from an observation of paper quality. Specifically, an
observation of paper quality, v, does not provide a signal, in itself, of whether an
exceptional contribution was produced in stage 1 or 2. Of course, one can imagine other
forms of signal obfuscation, and these will be explored below.
Two asymmetries are introduced with respect to the two research stages. First, there
are two types of scientists: pioneers (P) and followers (F). Each is distinguished by their

5

This specification involves a significant departure from Engers et al. (1999) who made the strong
assumption that the level of research quality was independent of the relative contribution of each scientist.

9
skill competencies for a research stage. Followers can only engage in research for stage 2.6
Pioneers can engage in research in both stages but they have a diminished competency with
regards to stage 2. This is captured by assuming that a pioneer scientist cannot generate an
outcome where S2 = H. As a consequence, a pioneer scientist engages in no effort in stage
2 even for the case where they are the sole contributor to a project. The second asymmetry
is that the scientist conducting research at the second stage knows the quality of the
contribution made at the initial research stage. This is a standard assumption in models of
cumulative knowledge (Scotchmer, 2004).
We focus on several critical decisions. First, as a pioneer scientist has the option to
collaborate with a follower, we consider P’s decision to collaborate or not. This mirrors
the authority relationship in a laboratory that is our motivation in this paper. Second, a
collaboration can result in a formal acknowledgement of that in the form of co-authorship.
This is a choice, as many collaborations in a lab environment involve some discretion as
to whether a follower is acknowledged as a co-author or not. Third, the timing and nature
of the co-authoring contract may be discretionary. For instance, the collaboration and coauthoring decisions may be made ex ante, interim or ex post. An ex ante co-authoring
commitment is a contract to include both scientists as authors prior to effort being expended
by either. An interim commitment occurs after the pioneer scientist’s contribution has been
resolved. Finally, an ex post commitment occurs after both scientists’ contributions have
been resolved. The latter may take the form of an incentive commitment to the follower
who, say, receives co-authorship only if S2 = H and not otherwise. These decisions may
not all be feasible (i.e., capable of the required commitments) and will depend on the

6

It could only add a little descriptive complexity to allow followers to conduct research at stage 1 without
any changes to the results that follow.

10
scientists involved, but they span a wide range of the options available. To build
understanding, we will focus on particular cases where different decisions are feasible.

2.1

Market Attribution
What drives the incentives of scientists is, of course, attribution “awarded” to them

by the “market.” Following Engers et al. (1999), this is something that we assume enters
directly into a scientist’s utility function. That is, a scientist can infer, through interactions
with other scientists, what their assessment is of them. Thus, we need not model any active
assessment by the market for some purpose but only the impact of such an assessment. Of
course, one can imagine microfoundations for this process, including assessment of career
concerns of junior scientists, the salary determination of all scientists or some sociological
model of acknowledgement and peer recognition. However, the important feature here is
that the scientists’ themselves care about attribution from the market and so we assume
that is a component of their utility.
In making an assessment, it is assumed that the market (a) knows the roles (or
competencies) of each scientist in a team and (b) assesses both the quality of a project and
also forms beliefs over each scientist’s relative contribution. The rationale for (a) is that
the project is coming out of P’s lab and so P’s status, role and competency are broadly
understood. In an extension below, we consider what happens when the market does not
have knowledge of the roles or competencies of each scientist.
With regard to (b), we assume that, if the market observes a paper of quality V, it
correctly infers that the contribution of both scientists was H and, more critically, equal.
Thus, the market will assign each an equal share of the paper’s “award.” In contrast, if the
market observes a paper of quality, v, that was the output of a collaboration, it faces a more

11
difficult inference problem. We will examine the outcome of that below. However, here
we assume that if the market knew with certainty that (S1,S2) = (H,L), then it would
attribute the entire value of the paper to P and, similarly, if it knew that (S1,S2) = (L,H), it
would attribute the entire value of the paper to F. The rationale here is that without the H
contribution, the paper’s value would be 0 and so the “marginal” contribution of the H
contributing scientist is v. It should be noted that these attribution rules are assumptions
but that the results below still apply for variations of those rules.
Of course, market assessments of the contribution of each scientist in a
collaboration will depend on the nature of decisions open to them. Thus, like scientist roles,
we will make different assumptions of the market’s understanding of the nature of
attribution decisions scientists can feasibly choose. The modelling challenge, outlined
below, is to match these with assessments of contribution. It is assumed that the market
never observes (S1, S2) but can observe research quality and whether formal attribution of
a co-authoring relationship is given. Based on this information, the market attributes a share
of research value, V or  v as the case may be, to the pioneer and a share 1  V or 1   v
to the follower.7
Given this, if the scientists knew they would be co-authoring ex ante, they would
choose their effort levels to maximize the following payoffs:

 P  eP  eF ( H )ˆVV  (1  eF ( H ))ˆvv   (1  eP )eF ( L)ˆvv  c(eP ) and
 F  eP  eF ( H )(1  ˆV )V  (1  eF ( H ))(1  ˆv )v   (1  eP )eF ( L)(1  ˆv )v  c(eF ) .

7

One might ask why these shares should sum to one. A rationale is presented by Gans and Murray (2014)
based on generating the joint efficiency of choices to collaborate or not. Additional evidence is contained in
Bikard, Murray and Gans (2014).

12
Here ˆV and ˆ v are the scientist’s expectations of market attribution shares. Importantly,
F is able to choose effort, eF ( S1) , following an observation of P’s S1 contribution, and P
anticipates this. Given this, using the quadratic specification for effort costs, the effort
choices of each scientist are:
eF* ( H )  (1  ˆV )V  (1  ˆ v )v

(1)

eF* ( L)  (1  ˆ v )v

(2)

eP*   (1  ˆV )V  (1  ˆv )v ˆVV  ˆvv   1  (1  ˆv )v ˆvv .

(3)

Below we search for full market equilibrium outcomes where each scientist’s expectations
of market weightings correspond to the actual market weightings.

2.2

Optimal Attribution
At this point, it is instructive to consider what attribution shares would generate an

optimal outcome – such as maximizing expected paper quality – given the resulting effort
choices of scientists. This will assist us in comparing various market outcomes to potential
benchmark performance.
To this end, assume that shares can be related directly to contribution; that is, there
is perfect information on contribution. In this case, P’s share is a function  S1S 2 and the
resulting effort choices are given by:
eF* ( H )  (1   HH )V  (1   HL )v

(4)

eF* ( L)  (1   LH )v

(5)

eP*   (1   HH )V  (1   HL )v  ( HHV   HLv)   HL  (1   LH ) LH v  v .

(6)

13
Notice that a higher  HL and a lower  LH increase both P and F effort. Thus, it is optimal
to set  HL  1 and  LH  0 in order to maximize expected paper quality. Given this,
eF* ( H )  (1   HH )V , eF* ( L)  v and eP*  (1   HH )V ( HH V  v)  v yielding expected

paper quality of:

 (1   HH )V ( HHV  v)  v  (1   HH )V (V  v)  v   1  (1   HH )V ( HHV  v)  v  v2

.

(7)
The setting of  HH involves a trade-off between P’s and F’s incentives. When v  V , it
can readily be seen that  HH  1 is optimal while if v  0 , expected paper quality is
(1   HH ) 2  HH V 4 , which is maximized at  HH  13 . Of course, given our assumptions, the

market will always set  HH 

3

1
2

and, thus, will not achieve this optimal level.

Co-Authorship Equilibria
Having set up the research and market attribution environments, we first consider

the pioneer scientist’s decision to co-author or work on their own. We will start by
examining ex ante co-authorship before adding timing options of interim and ex post coauthorship to consider the equilibria that arise with a full set of options available.

3.1

Market Assessment
As noted above, when paper quality is v, the market cannot easily determine

whether P or F had the exceptional contribution. In this situation, the market forms
expectations of the effort levels of each scientist, eˆP , eˆF ( H ) and eˆF ( L) , respectively.
Thus, the probability that (S1,S2) = (H,L) is eˆP (1  eˆF ( H )) while the probability that

14
(S1,S2) = (L,H) is (1  eˆP )eˆF ( L) . Therefore, conditional on its observation of a paper of
quality, v, the market’s assessment of P’s relative contribution is:

ˆ v 

eˆP (1  eˆF ( H )) 1  (1  eˆP )eˆF ( L)  0 
eˆP (1  eˆF ( H ))
.

eˆP (1  eˆF ( H ))  (1  eˆP )eˆF ( L)
eˆP (1  eˆF ( H ))  (1  eˆP )eˆF ( L)

(8)

Note that this specification for market beliefs easily encompasses other situations other
than ex ante co-authorship. For instance, under single authorship, eˆF ( H )  eˆF ( L)  0 and
so ˆv  1 , whereas, in a situation that will be analysed below, it may be that co-authorship
is only granted when S1 = L. In this case, the probability that paper quality is v and there
is co-authorship (rather than sole authorship) is (1  eˆP )eˆF ( L) while the probability that
(S1,S2) = (H,L) is 0, so that, in this case, ˆ v  0 .

3.2

P’s Decision to Co-Author
Given the setting here, we assume that P makes the decision to co-author and does

so with regard to their expected payoff. Of course, that payoff is constrained by market
expectations that are not influenced by P’s decision. Several issues arise in this regard.
First, what is P’s alternative option? Given the setup here, P can choose not
collaborate with F. We denote this choice as (S) for “sole” authorship. In this case, S2
always equals L, ruling out a paper quality of V. On the other hand, P appropriates all of
the paper’s value. Hence, by sole authoring, P chooses effort to maximize eP v  c(eP )
which yields eP*  v , expected paper quality of v 2 and an expected payoff to P of

1
2

v2 .

Second, when can P make a decision to bring F on as a co-author? P could make
the decision ex ante (prior to any effort being expended), at an interim stage (following the
revelation of S1) or ex post (after the revelation of S2). Let us denote these choices as (C0),

15
(C1) and (C2), respectively, where “C” indicates co-authorship and {0, 1, 2} indicate the
stage co-authorship is given. We examine cases where some or all of these choices are
feasible options for P.
Third, when P can choose the timing of co-authorship, is P able to commit to a coauthoring offer? In some situations, we can imagine that a co-authoring offer is a binding
commitment. In others, there may be some contractual incompleteness that means that P’s
decision must be self-enforcing ex post. We will examine varying assumptions with regard
to commitment to better understand the mechanisms of co-authorship.

3.3

Ex Ante Co-Authorship (C0)
To consider the possible equilibrium outcomes, it is instructive to consider, first, a

situation where the decision to co-author can only be made ex ante (prior to effort choices).
In this situation, it is assumed that both P and F will be listed as co-authors on the paper
and that the market understands that this is the process. Thus, the market assessment will
be as described in (8).
Given this, the following proposition lists the pure strategy equilibrium outcomes
of the full game under an assumption of rational expectations where eˆP  eP* ,
eˆF ( H )  eF* ( H ) and eˆF ( L)  eF* ( L) .

Proposition 1. The following are pure strategy rational expectations equilibrium of the full
game when only (C0) is feasible.
(i) (all attribution to P): for all (V , v ) , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v ,
eF* ( H )  12 V and eF* ( L)  0 ;

(ii) (all attribution to F): for V  2v (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , eP*  0 , eF* ( H )  0 and
eF* ( L)  v ;

(iii) (mixed attribution): for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 , V (242vv V ) ) , eP*  12 V ,
eF* ( L)  14 (2v  V )(2  V ) , eF* ( H )  V (1  14 V )  v(1  12 V ) .

16

To find the equilibrium outcomes, we take the effort subgame outcomes, (4) – (6), and
impose the requirement that expectations regarding market weights are met and look for
the resulting fixed point(s). The third equilibrium in Proposition 1 is listed for completeness
but can be readily demonstrated to be unstable, and so it will not be considered in the
discussion that follows. The equilibrium (i) where all “equity” in a paper of quality v is
assigned to P (i.e., (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) ) exists for any range of paper quality values. In this
equilibrium, F only receives a positive return if V arises. Thus, F will only expend effort
when S1 = H and so will only end up being a co-author of a paper of quality v if S2 = L.
This reinforces the market assignment to P as, in equilibrium, it is always the case that
quality, v, signals that P’s contribution is H. In this situation, the equilibrium expected
paper quality is

1
8

 v(2  V )  V  2v(2  V )  V  , which increases with V.
2

2

There also exists an equilibrium where all equity in a paper of quality v is assigned
to F (i.e., (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) ). In this situation, S1 = H does not arise in equilibrium. Thus,
expected paper quality is v 2 . This is the same paper quality that would arise if P were a
sole author. To see that this is an equilibrium, note that, if S1 = H did arise, then
eF* ( H )  max[ 12 V  v, 0] . If V  2v , this effort would be positive and it would be easy to

see that P would have an incentive to expend positive effort, deviating from the equilibrium.
However, when V  2v , F’s effort remains at 0, reinforcing the equilibrium outcome. It is
important to note that when V  2v , this equilibrium outcome co-exists with the outcome
where (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) .
Proposition 1 assumes that the co-authoring decision has been made. When P can
choose whether to co-author or not, what survives? Note first, that P does not earn any

17
value in the equilibrium where (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) and thus, under these market expectations,
P would choose to single author. This would result in a paper of the same quality as would
result under co-authorship in that case. Second, when (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , P earns
1
32

(V 2  2v(2  V )) 2 . Comparing this to P’s sole authorship payoff of

1
2

v 2 , it is easy to

demonstrate that P prefers to co-author if V  2v .
Proposition 2. The only pure strategy rational expectations equilibrium of the full game,
when only (C0) and (S) are feasible, are (i) if V  2v , co-authorship with (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1)
and (ii) if V  2v , sole authorship.
The intuition is fairly straightforward. Under co-authorship, the most that P can receive is
1
2

V but under single authorship the most P can achieve is v. As it always appropriates the

full value of v should it arise in either case, P loses nothing by ceding co-authorship for
this scenario. However, co-authorship reduces the probability of this scenario by the same
amount that it increases the probability of the scenario where P receives half of V. Thus,
the marginal value of co-authorship is driven by whether 12 V is greater than v or not.
Note, however, that in terms of maximizing expected paper quality or joint surplus,
P’s decision to co-author is socially suboptimal and should occur for a threshold value of
V lower than 2v. The reason for this is that it would be preferable to allow F some equity
when v arises with (S1,S2) = (L,H) but, instead, the equity the market attributes is the same
regardless of how v arises.

3.4

Interim Co-Authorship (C1)
The above analysis assumed that the only time a co-authoring decision could be

made is ex ante (prior to effort being expended). Here, we consider what happens when the
decision by P can be made after the resolution of S1. As before, we begin by considering

18
what happens when interim co-authorship is the only option (with a decision of sole
authorship being only available after the realization of S1) before considering what
happens when ex ante co-authorship or sole authorship is possible.
Note, first, that if S1 = L, then it is always (weakly) optimal for P to offer coauthorship to F. In this situation, sole authorship nets P a payoff of 0 whereas co-authorship
could net P more if ˆ v  0 . Second, as before, a paper quality of V is only observed if there
is interim co-authorship and, in this case, (S1,S2) = (H,H) so that ˆV 

1
2

always.

Otherwise the following proposition characterises the possible equilibrium outcomes:
Proposition 3. The following are pure strategy rational expectations equilibrium of the full
game when only (C1) is feasible.
(i) for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , with co-authorship both when S1 = L and H and
with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and eF* ( L)  0 ;
(ii) for (V  2v)V  4v (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , with co-authorship only arising when S1
= L with eP*  v and eF* ( L)  v .
The first equilibrium involves the same outcome as equilibrium (i) in Proposition 1 but
only exists over a limited domain. The reason is that when S1 = H, sole authorship earns
P, v from that point on whereas co-authorship nets P, 12 V ( 12 V  v)  v . Thus, co-authorship
is only preferable if V  2v . The second equilibrium involves no co-authorship when S1 =
H. If the market expects that this is the case then, when a paper quality of v arises, the
market assesses with certainty that S2 = H and so sets ˆ v  0 . In this case, expected paper
quality is v 2  (1  v)v 2 ; higher than the level that arises under sole authorship. The only
possible deviation is that P chooses to co-author when S1 = H. If it did this then, given that

(ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , eF* ( H )  max[ 12 V  v, 0] and, from that point, P would earn ( 12 V  v) 12 V

19
rather than v. This deviation is not profitable if V  2v  4 Vv . Thus, for 0  V  2v  4 Vv ,
equilibria (i) and (ii) in Proposition 3 co-exist.
Proposition 3 considers situations where P could not commit upfront to ex ante coauthorship or sole authorship. It can be easily seen that when V  2v , then P would be
indifferent between ex ante co-authorship and interim co-authorship under equilibrium (i).
However, what if (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) (as consistent with equilibrium (ii))? In this case, we
know that for V  2v  4 Vv , (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) is an equilibrium and could earn P an ex ante
payoff of v 2 , the same as sole authorship. If P committed to F to allow co-authorship when
S1 = H, P’s ex ante payoff would be 14 V 2 ( 12 V  v  12 ) as P would choose an effort level of
1
2

V in this case. Note that this payoff is non-positive. Hence, P would not find it optimal

to commit to ex ante co-authorship. Interestingly, this occurs despite the fact that P would,
for V  2v , prefer the ex ante co-authorship as in Proposition 1 (i). However, given the
market expectations of an interim co-authorship decision, P cannot achieve that outcome.
What are the efficiency implications of having an option to choose interim coauthorship? To examine this, observe that when V  2v , expected paper quality is the same
under both ex ante and interim co-authorship when (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) ; i.e.,
1
8

 v(2  V )  V  2v(2  V )  V  . For V  2v , equilibrium (ii) of Proposition 3 involves a
2

2

higher expected paper quality of v 2 (2  V ) than the expected paper quality of v 2 that can
be achieved under P’s sole authorship (the expected outcome from Proposition 2). In this
situation, interim co-authorship as an option improves efficiency.
It is less straightforward to rank outcomes based on expected paper quality when

0  V  2v  4 Vv and, under interim co-authorship, (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) . In this case, expected

20
paper quality in equilibrium (i) of Propositions 2 and 3 and that for equilibrium (ii) in
Proposition 3 cannot be easily ranked except to say that for v sufficiently low, interim coauthorship involves expected paper quality no higher than ex ante co-authorship and for

V  23 , there exists v close to V where interim co-authorship with (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) results
in higher expected paper quality than the equilibria where (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) . In effect, P
ends up expending more effort to ensure that it does not lose attribution to F; thus, raising
expected paper quality.

3.5

Ex Post Co-Authorship
We now consider what happens when P can offer F an “option” contract contingent

on F’s contribution in stage 2. Specifically, what if co-authorship is granted if S2 = H while
it is not granted if S2 = L? The following proposition characterises the equilibrium outcome
contingent upon this contract being offered and committed to.
Proposition 4. Suppose that only (C2) is feasible. Then, if V  2v , a pure strategy rational
expectations equilibrium of the full game with a contingent contract exists and involves
(aˆV , aˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and eF* ( L)  v .
Before explaining why this is an equilibrium, it is useful to note that this involves both P
and F choosing the highest levels of effort associated with any organisational regime
considered
1
8

this

far.

Consequently,

expected

paper

quality

is

 v  2  V   4v(2  v)  3V   V  , which is higher than any other equilibrium outcome
2

4

where V  2v .
Recall that, in our earlier analysis of optimal attribution, it was optimal to set

 HL  1

and

 LH  0

.

This

would

maximize,

eF* ( L)  (1   LH )v

and

eF* ( H )  (1   HH )V  (1   HL )v . What prevented this outcome under ex ante and interim

21
co-authorship was that either  HL   LH or, under one equilibrium in interim co-authorship,
co-authorship would not arise when S1 = H. Under ex post co-authorship, co-authorship is
contingent upon the realisation of S2 allowing both  HL to differ from  LH and for coauthorship to arise when S1 = H. This combines the good features of both ex ante and
interim co-authorship. Thus, if S2 = L, no co-authored paper arises and P receives full
attribution; that is,  HL  1 . By contrast, if S2 = H then a co-authored paper arises and, if it
is of quality v, then F receives full attribution; that is,  LH  0 . Thus, both  HL and  LH
end up being at their optimal levels.

3.6

Equilibria under Commitment
We now turn to consider which organizational regimes survive as equilibrium

outcomes when all options considered thus far can be chosen and agreed upon ex ante. That
is, when each option can be committed to by P.
To build intuition, suppose that the market assumes, consistent with the ex post coauthorship equilibrium in Proposition 4, that when a paper of quality v is co-authored then
S2 = H with certainty; hence, they set the attribution share at  v  0 . The chosen effort
levels are consistent with this expectation. In this case, it can be demonstrated that P
receives the same ex ante expected payoff as equilibrium (i) in Proposition 1 for ex ante
co-authorship and will be indifferent between these. Suppose, however, that ex ante, P
offers co-authorship given expectations (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) . Then eF* ( H )  12 V  v ,
eF* ( L)  v and eP*  max[eF* ( H ) 12 V , 0] . If V  2v , P’s payoff would be 0 while if V  2v ,

it would be ( 12 V  v) 2 14 V 2  81 ( 12 V  v) 2V 2  ( 12 V  v) 2 81 V 2 which is a lower payoff. Thus,
a deviation to ex ante co-authorship is not profitable. What about a deviation to interim co-

22
authorship? When S1 = L, offering P co-authorship at that stage with market expectations
of (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) is equivalent to what would arise under ex post co-authorship. At S1 =
H, denying P co-authorship would net P v instead of 14 V 2  (1  12 V )v . This deviation is not
profitable if V  2v . Finally, note that P’s payoff under the contingent contract equilibrium
in Proposition 4 is the same as under equilibrium (i) in Proposition 1. Therefore, P will not
prefer to commit to sole authorship so long as V  2v .
What other equilibria are possible when ex post contingent contracting is feasible?
Note, first, that when (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) and V  2v , P will find it optimal to offer an ex post
contingent contract. Thus, the parameter range allowing the interim contract (ii) in
Proposition 3 narrows to V  2v . Second, when (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , offering a contingent
contract does not change F’s incentives. Thus, ex ante co-authorship (equilibrium (i) of
Proposition 1) and its ex post variant (equilibrium (ii) of Proposition 3) continue as possible
equilibrium outcomes. Summarizing we have:
Proposition 5. The following are pure strategy rational expectations equilibria of the full
game when P can commit to (S), (C0), (C1) or (C2).
(i)
for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , with ex ante and interim co-authorship both
when S1 = L and H and with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and
eF* ( L)  0 ;

(ii)

for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) with ex post contingent co-authorship when

(iii)

S2 = H with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and eF* ( L)  v ;
for V  2v (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , with interim co-authorship only arising when
S1 = L with eP*  v and eF* ( L)  v ;

(iv)

for V  2v sole authorship with eP*  v .

Proposition 5 demonstrates that when there is a full range of co-authoring timing choices
that can be committed to by P that there are multiple equilibrium outcomes for each
parameter range. Specifically, when V  2v , ex ante, interim and ex post co-authorship are

23
all equilibrium outcomes. However, as already noted, the equilibrium (ii) with ex post
contingent co-authorship involves the highest expected paper quality and joint surplus for
P and F. Interestingly, the equilibrium with ex post co-authorship also involves the highest
expected payoff for F. This is because it involves F receiving the highest equity when S2
= H. Importantly, this equilibrium is (weakly) Pareto superior to equilibrium (i) as P’s
expected payoff is the same as ex ante co-authorship.
In contrast, when V  2v , both interim co-authorship and sole authorship are
equilibrium outcomes. Each of these involves the same expected payoff to P while interim
co-authorship involves a higher expected payoff to F, and so Pareto is superior. However,
because of its efficiency, the equilibrium with interim co-authorship results in a higher
expected paper quality and joint surplus than what is expected with sole authorship by P.

3.7

No Commitment to Co-Authorship
The above analysis assumes that P commits to a co-authoring agreement and that

the market understands that this commitment is possible. But what happens when P cannot
commit to a co-authoring agreement? Specifically, what happens if co-authorship is an
incomplete contract meaning that P can ask for collaboration but ex post not offer formal
co-authorship?
First, note that for equilibria where ˆv  1 , then P has no reason not to offer coauthorship if paper quality is v. In contrast, for equilibria where ˆ v  0 , then P can
appropriate more by not having F formally listed as a co-author. This might arise under
contingent ex post co-authorship or interim co-authorship when S1 = L. In each of these
cases, a single authored paper of quality v is achievable on the equilibrium path and so P
can appropriate v as a payoff by not co-authoring, regardless of F’s contribution. As P

24
cannot commit to co-author in this situation equilibria (ii) and (iii) in Proposition 5 are not
feasible under any commitment.
Second, what happens when (S1, S2) = (H, H)? In this situation, P could omit F as
a co-author. However, in that scenario, the market still understands that P could not have
achieved a paper with a quality of V without assistance. Thus, the attribution to V remains
at V 

1
2

even if the market is not able to attribute the remaining share to a particular

scientist. Thus, as single authorship with a paper quality, V is not on the equilibrium path,
P has no incentive to renege on co-authorship under this scenario. Thus, the equilibrium
outcomes (i) and (iv) in Proposition 5 remain feasible.
In summary, an inability to commit to co-authorship removes the Pareto superior
equilibria from Proposition 5 as possible outcomes. This suggests that mechanisms that
allow P to commit to co-authoring contracts will be welfare enhancing. This might be
achieved by a relational contracting outcome (in a broader multi-agent setting), but the
establishment of that relies on market expectations – namely, (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , consistent
with such outcomes. If those expectations are not present in the market, it may be difficult
for an individual research team to establish them. However, in the next section, we focus
on a situation whereby a third party (journal editors) may play a commitment role.

4

Citations
Both sole authorship and co-authorship are “integrated” solutions to the

organization of collaborative research. They are integrated in the sense that the entire
output of research is owned by one or both scientists. This stands in contrast to a “nonintegrated” solution to organizing collaborative research whereby both scientists produce

25
separate outputs that are “owned” by separate parties. Such a solution would arise if P
published their stage 1 research as a separate publication with F publishing their stage 2
research as a follow-on publication. The linkage between them would then be described by
a citation contained in F’s publication. Here we consider this “publish and cite back”
alternative and compare it to the various forms of co-authorship considered above.
To keep the model here consistent with the model thus far, we assume that, should
P publish their research prior to stage 2, that research has no intrinsic value. Instead, it is
only after F completes stage 2 and publishes their research that the entire body of research
can be ascribed a value of V, v or 0 as the case may be. Admittedly, this assumption is
contrary to what is usually assumed about publications per se, but it does capture the notion
that what is valuable are “bodies” of works rather than individual works themselves. In
addition, it has the second effect of providing no reason for P to publish other than to
receive a citation and receive some attribution from the entire body of work. To be sure, in
reality, there are other reasons to publish, but this specification allows us to abstract away
from those.
Another reason for publication of interim results is that P may not know who might
be able to carry on follow-on research. To rule this out, we assume that only F has the
ability to complete the body of work for valuable research. Again, the purpose of this is to
provide the pioneer with a stark choice between publishing interim results and co-authoring
with the (already identified) follow-on researcher. To the extent that searching for followeron researchers is of productive value, this will increase the motivation for publishing
interim results above and beyond the reasons explored here (Jiang, Thursby and Thursby,
2012).

26
This setup allows us to preserve the structure of the model – including effort to
research relationships and market assessment assumptions. What changes is how formal
attribution of contribution occurs. Formal attribution in the form of co-authorship came
from internal processes – in this case, the choice of P whether to allow a formal attribution
or not. Formal attribution in the form of citation could arise in a similar way (via agreement
between the scientists), but here we consider a more natural alternative that it is determined
by a journal editor. The process we have in mind is that all research is published in a journal
with the editor of that journal being interested in maximizing expected paper quality for
the journal. In setting citation policy, the editor is (potentially) constrained by market
expectations as to what a citation means for the allocation of credit between P and F. What
the editor could do is receive, through referees, a perfect signal of (S1, S2) and offer a
citation as a mapping from (S1, S2) outcomes. For instance, an editor may choose to request
a citation by F to P’s work whenever S1 = H. Or, instead, an editor may choose to request
a citation in all instances or none at all.
We assume that, if a research body of quality, v, involves a paper by F that cites
P’s work, then the market attributes a share,  v , for that body of research to P and the
remainder to F. If there is no citation, then F appropriates the entire value, v, in this instance.
On the other hand, if the research body is of quality, V, then regardless of whether there is
a citation or not, the market attributes a share, 1  V , to F. If there is a citation, the
remainder is attributed to P; otherwise, that share is “lost.”
The journal editor’s citation policy and market expectations (ˆV , ˆ v ) are known
prior to either P or F beginning research. Thus, if P were to pursue an interim publication

27
of their results, then, I S1S 2 is an indicator function that takes on a value of 1 if a citation
occurs under outcome (S1, S2), the optimal effort choices are as follows:
eF* ( H )  (1  ˆV )V  (1  I HLˆ v )v

(9)

eF* ( L)  (1  I LH ˆ v )v

(10)

eP*   (1  I HHˆV )V  (1  I HLˆv )v  ( I HHˆVV  I HLˆv v)   I HLˆv  (1  I LHˆv ) I LHˆv v  v

.

(11)
Note that by setting I LH equal to 0 and I HL equal to 1, the journal editor can raise all effort
levels. Thus, to maximize journal quality, it is always optimal for the editor to require a
citation if (S1, S2) = (H, L), but not if (S1, S2) = (L, H). Similarly, note that setting I HH
equal to 1 boosts P’s effort while not reducing F’s (as the market will not change its
attribution to F for a paper of quality V). Thus, it is clear that, regardless of expectations of
market attribution, the journal editor will maximize expected paper quality that commits to
a policy of requiring a citation of F by P whenever S1 = H.
Given this, noting that ˆV  12 , the optimal efforts will become:
eF* ( H )  12 V

(12)

eF* ( L)  v

(13)

eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v .

(14)

Setting eˆP  eP* , eˆF ( H )  eF* ( H ) and eˆF ( L)  eF* ( L) , it is clear that, if a citation is observed
for paper quality, v, then ˆv  1 . Notice that this is equivalent to the equilibrium outcome
that can be achieved under ex post contingent co-authorship. Recall that for V  2v , this

28
generated the highest expected paper quality and joint surplus and for all parameter values,
this was preferable to sole authorship.

4.1

The interim publication choice
Given this expected outcome from citation, when will P choose to have an interim

publication? The following proposition states the equilibrium outcomes:
Proposition 6. The following are pure strategy rational expectations equilibria of the full
game when P can commit to (S), (C0), (C1), (C2) or publish after stage 1:
(i)
for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , with ex ante and interim co-authorship both
when S1 = L and H and with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and
eF* ( L)  0 ;

(ii)

(iii)

for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) with ex post contingent co-authorship when
S2 = H or interim publication when S1 = L (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) with
eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and eF* ( L)  v ;
for V  2v (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , with interim co-authorship only arising when

S1 = L with eP*  v and eF* ( L)  v ;
(iv)
for V  2v sole authorship with eP*  v .
The following are pure strategy rational expectations equilibria of the full game when P
cannot commit to co-authorship but can publish after stage 1:
(v)
for V  2v , (ˆV , ˆ v )  ( 12 ,1) , with ex ante and interim co-authorship both
when S1 = L and H and with eP*  14 V 2  (1  12 V )v , eF* ( H )  12 V and
eF* ( L)  0 ;

V  2v

for

(vii)

e  14 V  (1  12 V )v , e ( H )  12 V and e ( L)  v ;
for V  2v (ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0) , with interim co-authorship only arising when
*
P

2

,

(ˆV , ˆv )  ( 12 ,0)

(vi)

with

*
F

interim

publication

with

*
F

S1 = L with eP*  v and eF* ( L)  v ;
(viii)

for V  2v sole authorship with eP*  v .

Importantly, interim publication is always an equilibrium when V  2v now just as sole
authorship is when V  2v , regardless of whether P can commit to co-authorship or not
and regardless of market expectations under co-authorship. Basically, interim publication
allows P to commit to evaluation by a journal editor motivated to maximize expected paper

29
quality. However, when V  2v , this leaves P worse off than sole authoring both stages of
research.
This analysis presumes that the journal editor does not take into account P’s
incentives to sole author or engage in interim co-authorship when setting the journal’s
citation policy. At the moment, no citation to P is given when (S1, S2) = (L, H). Could
granting a citation in this situation increase P’s incentive to engage in interim publication
and increase expected paper quality?
This option is only relevant when V  2v , for it is here that P might not choose
interim publication. When S1 = H, the only possible outcomes with interim publication are
that P receives v or V/2 whereas with sole authorship, P receives v with certainty and so
prefers this. There is no instrument available to the journal editor to ensure P receives more
under interim publication. In contrast, when S1 = L, the journal editor can ensure P receives
more by offering a citation with some probability, p, in this instance. This is only valuable
if ˆ v ( p)  0 is sustainable as a set of equilibrium market beliefs. However, given that
when S1 = H, there is no interim publication, and when S1 = L, there is interim publication,
the market can correctly infer that S1 = L and so will set ˆ v ( p)  0 , regardless of whether
there is a citation or not. Consequently, the journal editor is not able to use an increased
citation rate as a means of inducing P to engage in interim publication.
In recent times, there has been a push amongst some scientists to encourage or even
require publication of interim results (Nielsen, 2012). Proposition 6 demonstrates that
while interim publication might arise as an equilibrium outcome when V  2v , when

V  2v , this does not occur. Thus, what if interim publication was mandated? If V  2v ,
there would be a citation issued if S1 = H and none if S1 = L. Thus, the market receives an

30
accurate signal of P’s contribution and so will set  v  1 if a citation is observed. As has
already been noted, this involves a higher expected paper quality than other outcomes and
so compulsory publication can improve efficiency. The reason it does this is because it
ensures that, for marginal improvements, there is a way of dividing up “equity” between P
and F that otherwise P would want to avoid. However, it should be stressed that this
outcome is a result of the “editorial review” system being able to make assessments of
individual contributions in the first place. If such assessments can be made, even if signals
are imperfect (i.e., to cite or not), the market can properly infer attribution.

5

Extensions
We now turn to consider extensions that will be useful in identifying exogenous

variation that may assist future empirical researchers in understanding the organisation of
science and choices for attribution in more depth.

5.1

No market knowledge of roles
The model here assumes that the “market” (or, more specifically, scientists’

understanding of the market) has somewhat detailed knowledge about the roles of P and F
in co-authored outcomes. This may come from actual knowledge of the roles (e.g., the
paper came out of “P’s Lab”) or from signals embedded in the ordering of names (or other
details elaborating contributions) on a paper. However, because of the aggregation of
results and statistics through online platforms such as a Google Scholar, it is arguable that
metrics (such as the H-Index or paper counts) may have more weight for scientists than the
more “personalized” market feedback assumed thus far. Moreover, it is the rise of such

31
metrics that may have potentially altered the choices of scientists regarding the
organisation of collaborative activities.
To explore this, here we consider a situation where the market (a), if it observes a
formal collaboration (with co-authorship acknowledge), has no knowledge of which
scientist performed which role, and (b), if it does not observe a formal collaboration,
presumes that the sole author is responsible for all of the contributions in the project. Thus,
if there is formal co-authorship, the market places equal weight on each scientist being the
stage 1 researcher regardless of the quality of the resulting output. Thus, the market weight
assignment problem is trivial, and it sets V   v  12 .
In this situation, it is clear that the efforts under ex ante co-authorship would be
(from (1) – (3)): eF* ( H )  12 (V  v) , eF* ( L)  12 v and eP*  14 (V  v)2  1  12 v  12 v resulting
in a payoff to P of
1
8

 4v(1  V )V

2

1
32

 4v(1  V )V

2

 V 4  4v 2  3  (2  V )V   and expected paper quality of

 V 4  4v 2  2  (2  V )V   . It is straightforward to show that both P’s payoff

and the expected paper quality are lower in this equilibrium than the equivalent equilibrium
(Proposition 1(i)) where the market has knowledge of scientists’ roles. This is because
when the market has more knowledge, P appropriates more ex post surplus and engages in
higher effort, while F engages in higher effort as they are not insured if a paper of high
quality is not produced. This also means that P would be less inclined to co-author with F
when the market does not have knowledge of their roles.
From this it naturally follows that under ex post co-authorship, P earns even less
when market roles are obscured, but what happens under interim co-authorship is subtler.
In this situation, suppose that V < 2v and so, when market roles are observed, the

32
equilibrium where there is co-authorship only when S1 = L is relevant (Proposition 3 (ii)).
In this case, P appropriates a share of any resulting co-authored paper (where previously
they appropriated none). Thus, P is not indifferent between sole and interim co-authorship
and will favour the latter.
This implies that, if the market moves towards metrics that do not easily identify
scientists’ roles, then for projects where the marginal contribution of each scientist is likely
to be very high, fewer co-authored projects will be observed. By contrast, where the
marginal contribution of the follow-on researcher is relatively low, such changes would
result in more co-authored projects.

5.2

Larger Research Teams
The model considered in this paper is very simple in that there are only two

scientists. When there are more scientists who might be part of a collaborative project,
more complexity is introduced, but it is likely that the same issues will arise. In particular,
when P chooses whether to give formal attribution to another, it must consider both the
dilution of their own “equity” and the impact that will have on incentives. When there is
only one other scientist to consider, that latter impact is likely to be smaller. Hence,
considerations here might tend to suggest that there is a natural tendency for scientists to
limit the number of formal collaborators.
That said, the organisational regimes that involved higher powered incentives, such
as ex post co-authorship and interim publication, would become relatively more important
as they solved some of the free-riding issues that may arise. Thus, if larger research teams
are warranted, we expect to see an evolution in organisational forms alongside them that

33
allow for more substantial interim publication as well as different modes of ex post coauthorship.
Of course, larger research teams might also be associated with a dilution of the
market’s ability to identify the individual roles of scientists. In this case, the considerations
identified in the previous subsection may come into play. However, this is likely to be
associated with the visibility of individual scientists; something that we leave to a future
paper to consider in more detail.8

5.3

Alternative Reasons for Citations
Thus far, we have considered citations as a formal mechanism to signal attribution

amongst a body of work. However, citations also play another role. They can direct
scientists to the cited work and, so long as it is relevant, improve the productivity of future
research.
The first of these involves directing readers to the sources of knowledge that have
been drawn upon in one's work. This enables research-oriented readers, if they are
so minded, to assess for themselves the knowledge claims (the ideas and findings)
in the cited source; to draw upon other pertinent materials in that source that may
not have been utilized by the citing intermediary publication; and to be directed in
turn by the cited work to other, prior sources that may have been obliterated by
their incorporation in the intermediary publication. (Merton, 1988, p. 621)

How does the instrumental or productivity value of a “relevant” citation affect the role of
interim publication discussed so far? In particular, what happens when editors request
citations for instrumental value and, hence, include some citations even when S1 = L?

8

Merton (1988, p. 448) documented discussions by famous scientists that they sometimes agree to be a coauthor of a junior researcher to increase their visibility. The model here could be interpreted as applying to
that situation as well. Simcoe and Waguespack (2011) studied the effect of author visibility by examining
the changes in publication rates of papers were some authors became obscured in the “et al.” of multiauthored papers. On the Internet Engineering Task Force, a publication platform for engineers and computer
scientists, a change in policy led to some authors’ names being concealed as ”et al.” This permitted a study
of the effects of obscuring a relatively well-known authors on the publication chances of a paper they have
co-authored. That obscurity explained three-quarters of the differences in publication rates of known versus
relatively unknown scientists.

34
Earlier we demonstrated that when V < 2v, increasing the citation rate when S1 =
L, would not change market assessments of P’s and F’s contribution. This is because P
would not choose interim publication if S1 = H and thus, the market would correctly assess
S1 = L, whether there was a citation or not. What about when V > 2v? In this case, if the
editor requires a citation when S1 = L as well, the citation is no longer a pure signal. Indeed,
if citations always occur, this is akin to there being no signal when paper quality is v, and
so it is the same outcome as ex ante co-authorship. This will reduce expected paper quality.

6

Conclusion
The goal of this paper has been to embed an organisational economics approach

(namely, how ownership determines incentives for non-contractible actions) into the
economics of science. The bridge between those two literatures is provided by considering
the non-pecuniary motivations of scientists to receive favorable market assessments of their
relative contribution to collaborative projects. Our modelling innovation was to embed that
market not only in the processes by which formal attribution is allocated – in our model,
by a pioneer scientist – but also in a broader environment for attribution that involves thirdparty editors or referees.
The contributions arising from this were threefold. First, there is a difference
between formal attribution and equilibrium attribution. This is because formal attribution
provides an imperfect signal of real attribution and, in equilibrium, these differences must
resolve themselves. Second, as a consequence, it is not within the power of scientists, by
merely choosing their processes of formal attribution, to implement any desired real
attribution. The market constrains those outcomes in equilibrium. Third, as a consequence

35
of this, different organisational regimes have different incentive implications. Most notably,
delaying the formal assignment of co-authorship until later in the research production
process can enhance incentives in a Pareto improving manner.
This model, we believe, is a starting point for further analyses of the organisational
economics of science. While we have not explored some additional dimensions in this
paper, our model could be expanded to consider issues of the supply of scientists in a
context where there are career hierarchies and career concerns (Stephan, 2012). It could,
therefore, be used to both study those labor markets and also inform policies designed to
change the supply of scientists. In addition, our model could provide a framework for
considering the efficacy of certain measures of contribution utilised by public funding
agencies and how these impact incentives and, also, career paths. Finally, here we have
dealt with a fairly abstract and utility-grounded approach to scientist preferences. In reality,
there are many more instruments that assist in the acknowledgement of scientific
contributions and these themselves interact with market assessments and incentives.
Consider, for instance, the recent issues raised in economics over the Nobel Prizes for
contributions to general equilibrium theory (Duppe and Weintraub, 2014) as well as the
long-standing concerns regarding the presence of a Matthew effect in science (Merton,
1968; Azoulay, Stuart and Wang, 2014).

36

References
Azoulay, Pierre, Toby Stuart and Yanbo Wang (2014) “Matthew: Effect or Fable?”
Management Science, 60(1), pp.92-109.
Bikard, M., F. Murray and J.S. Gans (2014), “Exploring Tradeoffs in the Organization of
Scientific Work: Collaboration and Scientific Rewards,” Management Science,
forthcoming.
Dasgupta, Partha and Paul A. David (1994), “Towards a New Economics of Science,”
Research Policy, 23: 487-521.
David, Paul A. (2008), “The Historical Origins of ‘Open Science’: An Essay on Patronage,
Reputation and Common Agency Contracting in the Scientific Revolution,”
Capitalism and Society, 3(2): Article 5.
Duppe, Till and E. Roy Weintraub (2014), Finding Equilibrium: Arrow, Debreu, McKenzie
and the Problem of Scientific Credit, Princeton University Press: Princeton.
Engers, Maxim, Joshua S. Gans, Simon Grant and Stephen P. King (1999), “First Author
Conditions,” Journal of Political Economy, 107 (4): pp.859-883.
Gans, Joshua S. and Fiona Murray (2014), “Credit History: The Changing Nature of
Scientific Credit,” in A. Jaffe and B. Jones (eds.), The Changing Frontier, NER
forthcoming.
Gans, Joshua S., Fiona Murray and Scott Stern (2011), “Contracting Over the Disclosure
of Scientific Knowledge: Intellectual Property and Academic Publication,” mimeo.,
MIT.
Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
Journal of Political Economy, 98 (6): 1119-1158.
Jiang, Lin, Jerry Thursby and Marie Thursby (2012), “Scientific Disclosure and the Faces
of Competition,” mimeo., Georgia Tech.
Lissoni, Francesco, Fabio Montobbio and Lorenzo Zirulia, “Inventorship and authorship
as attribution rights: An enquiry into the economics of scientific credit,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 95: 49-69.
Merton, Robert K. (1957), “Priorities in Scientific Discovery,” American Sociological
Review, 22 (6): 635-659, rpt. in R. K. Merton, The Sociology of Science, ed.
Norman W. Storer, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973, Ch. 14.
Merton, Robert K. (1968), “The Matthew Effect in Science,” Science, 5 January, 159
(3810): 56-63; rpt. in R.K. Merton, The Sociology of Science, ed. Norman W. Storer,
Chicago: University Chicago Press, 1973, Ch. 20.
Merton, Robert K. (1988), “The Matthew Effect in Science, II: Cumulative Advantage and
the Symbolism of Intellectual Property,” Isis, 79 (4): 606-623.

37
Nielsen, Michael (2012), Reinventing Discovery: The New Era of Networked Science,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Samuelson, Paul A. (1961), “Economics and the History of Ideas,” rpt. in The Collected
Scientific Papers of Paul A. Samuelson, ed. Joseph E. Stiglitz, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1966, Vol. II, 1499-1516.
Scotchmer, Suzanne (2004), Innovation and Incentives, MIT Press: Cambridge.
Simcoe, Timothy and D. Waguespack (2011), “Status, Quality and Attention: What's in a
(Missing) Name?” Management Science, 57 (2): 274-290.
Stephan, Paula (2012), How Economics Shapes Science, Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Stern, Scott (2004), “Do Scientists Pay to be Scientists?” Management Science, 50 (6):
835-853.
Tumlinson, Justin (2012), “Adverse Selection in Team Formation under Discrimination,”
mimeo., Munich.
Zuckerman, Harriett A. (1968), “Patterns of Name-ordering among Authors of Scientific
Papers: A Study of Social Symbolism and its Ambiguity,” American Journal of
Sociology, 74: 276-291.

