                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE ROAD TO REDEMPTION:
                    POLICY RESPONSE TO CRISES IN LATIN AMERICA

                                           Carlos A. Vegh
                                          Guillermo Vuletin

                                        Working Paper 20675
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20675


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




Paper prepared for the 2013 IMF Annual Research Conference in honor of Stanley Fischer's 70th
birthday. We are extremely grateful to Julia Ruiz Pozuelo and Collin Rabe for research assistance.
 On a personal note, Vegh owes a huge debt of gratitude to Stan for 20 years of unwavering mentorship,
co-authorship, and support (dating back to Stan's arrival at the IMF in September 1994). Stan is one
of those rare individuals who combines truly remarkable professional credentials with equally astounding
personal qualities. Our profuse thanks to Vittorio Corbo as well as to two referees and the editors
of this Journal for extremely helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Carlos A. Vegh and Guillermo Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Road to Redemption: Policy Response to Crises in Latin America
Carlos A. Vegh and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 20675
November 2014
JEL No. E52,E62,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the fiscal and monetary policy responses to crises in Latin America over the last
40 years. We argue that, on average, Latin American countries have "graduated" in terms of their
policy responses in the sense that they have been able to switch from procyclical to counteryclical
policy responses. This average response, however, masks a great deal of heterogeneity with some
countries (such as Chile, Brazil, and Mexico) leading the graduation process and others (like Argentina
and Venezuela) still showing procyclical policy responses. We further show that countercyclical policy
responses have been effective in reducing the duration and intensity of crises. Finally, we relate our
analysis to the current crisis in the Eurozone and argue that, like in many instances in Latin America,
procyclical fiscal policy has increased the duration and intensity of the crisis.


Carlos A. Vegh
School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
Johns Hopkins University
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
cvegh1@jhu.edu

Guillermo Vuletin
Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
gvuletin@brookings.edu
1       Introduction
As much as one may wish otherwise, economic and …nancial crises have long
proved to be an inescapable feature of emerging markets’landscape and will
undoubtedly stay with us for as far as one can reasonably foresee.1 If any-
thing, after the so-called “great moderation” – which, with the bene…t of
hindsight, proved to be more a mirage than anything else –the recent crises
in Eurozone countries such as Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Italy, and Spain
clearly suggest that, far from being an endangered species, crises do not dis-
criminate between emerging and industrial countries and will erupt whenever
and wherever conditions “warrant it.” Moreover, good times –often driven
in emerging markets by booms in commodity prices and/or surges in capital
in‡ows –have often tended to mask a myriad of vulnerabilities that only be-
come apparent once the rainy days hit again. At that point, unfortunately,
it is typically too late to prepare for the crisis and the rainy days often be-
come hurricane-force storms, aided and abated by contractionary monetary
and …scal policy aimed at defending the currency and averting a debt crisis.
    Latin America’s “love story” with boom-bust cycles goes literally to its
birth as an independent continent. As Marichal (1989) masterfully recounts,
the …rst Latin American debt crisis took place in 1826-1828, after the loan
boom of 1822-1825 (which had originated mainly in London, the world …-
nancial center at the time) came to a screeching halt with the European
…nancial crisis of 1825-1826. We then observed a succession of new loan
booms, followed by major debt crises in 1873, 1890, and 1931. By now,
the …rst century of crises in Latin America covered by Marichal has reached
almost two centuries, with major crises in 1982 (Mexico’s default), 1994-1995
(the Tequila crisis, triggered by Mexico’s December 1994 devaluation), 1997-
1998 (global downturn, capital account reversal, and contagion from the 1997
Asian and 1998 Russian crises), 2001-2002 (Argentina’s default and exit from
a 10-year …xed peg to the dollar), and 2008-2009 (reverberations of the the
global …nancial crisis). We thus count 8 major regional crisis in 200 years
of history plus a myriad of lesser and/or more localized crises.
    1
     As First Deputy Managing Director of the IMF (from September 1994 to August
2001), Stan was, of course, an astute observer of, and critical protagonist in, many of
these crises (in particular, the Tequila crisis that started in December 1994, the Asian
crises of 1997-1998, and the Argentinean debacle that culminated in the December 2001
default). Through many speeches and lectures, Stan left us with a wealth of insights and
policy lessons that future policymakers will only ignore at their peril.


                                           2
    Latin America’s crisis-…lled history has thus provided an invaluable, if
unwilling, laboratory for the study of …nancial crises, as a profuse literature
can attest.2 Part of the analysis (particularly in case studies) has, of course,
focused on how policymakers have responded to crises from a macroeconomic
point of view, how such responses may have helped (or perhaps aggravated)
the crisis, and how they may have been shaped by “initial conditions;”that
is, the state of the economy when the crisis hit. Much less focus, however,
has been put on studying in a more systematic way how policy responses
have evolved over time and in particular on how their cyclical properties
(countercyclical, acyclical, procyclical?) may have changed, if at all, over
time. In fact, casual observation suggests that in some countries (Chile
immediately comes to mind) the policy response to crises has been evolving
over time (i.e., over the last 30-40 years), with early policy responses involving
contractionary (i.e., procyclical) monetary/…scal policy and later responses
involving expansionary (i.e., countercyclical) monetary/…scal policy.
    In an ironic twist, this phenomenon seems to have coincided with several
Eurozone countries travelling back through an economic time tunnel and
pursuing during the current crisis contractionary policies (particularly on
the …scal side) that are reminiscent of the typical response in Latin America
several decades ago (and still resorted to by several Latin American countries
today).
    Our goal in this paper is to provide some concrete evidence for the above
questions; in particular: how have Latin American countries responded to
crises over the last 40 years or so? How has the policy response evolved over
time, if at all? Speci…cally, do we observe, at least in some cases, what we
will refer as “policy response graduation”; that is a switch over time from
procyclical to countercyclical policy responses to crises? And, …nally, is
the current policy response in some Eurozone countries of the early Latin
American type? After hopefully answering these factual questions, we want
to know how initial conditions (debt/GDP ratio, …scal position, international
reserves, and so forth) have a¤ected the policy response? In other words,
how can we explain the phenomenon of policy response graduation (or lack
thereof?)?3
   2
     In addition to Marichal (1989), see Calvo (1986), Calvo and Vegh (1999), Corbo
and de Melo (1987), Corbo, de Melo, and Tybout (1986), Diaz-Alejandro (1984, 1985),
Dornbusch and Edwards (1991), Fischer (1995), Galiani, Heymann, and Tommasi (2002),
Hanson and de Melo (1983), Mussa (2002), and Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2009).
   3
     We should note that we will focus only on …scal and monetary policy. We are therefore


                                            3
    Although our focus on “policy response graduation” is closely related to
our recent work on graduation from …scal and monetary procyclicality in
developing countries (see Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) and Vegh and
Vuletin (2013)), here we take quite a di¤erent angle by focusing on policy
responses during crises rather than on the overall cyclical behavior of mone-
tary/…scal policy over the business cycle. Our approach is, in fact, very much
in the spirit of Didier, Hevia, and Schmukler (2012), who show that, unlike
the crises of the 1990s when emerging economies usually lacked the policy
tools that were available to advanced economies to respond countercyclically
to external shocks, the 2008-2009 global crisis represented a structural break
in the way emerging economies conducted their policies, as many of them
were able to implement countercyclical monetary and …scal policies. A re-
lated take is o¤ered by Ortiz et al (2009), who argue that looser policies
during episodes of sudden stops have reduced output losses during crises,
and Corbo and Schmidt-Hebbel (2013) and Alvarez and De Gregorio (2014),
who compare the policy responses in Latin America during the global …nan-
cial crisis to the response to the 1997-1998 Asian crises. Our analysis also
complements that of Forbes and Klein’s (2014), who focus speci…cally on the
macroeconomic e¤ects of policy responses rather than on how they may have
varied over time.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays the groundwork by provid-
ing an operational de…nition of a “GDP crisis” for a sample of eight Latin
American countries for various sample periods starting as early as 1970:1.4
We de…ne a crisis as beginning in the quarter in which real GDP falls below
the preceding 4-quarter moving average and ending in the quarter in which
real GDP reaches the pre-crisis level. Using this de…nition, we identify 34
crises and characterize their average duration and intensity. Since casual
analysis for countries such as Chile and others in the region suggests a policy
shift around the year 2000, we choose the year 1998 (a year without any
crisis) to divide our sample into a “before”and “after.” We show that, just
as a descriptive matter, the frequency, duration, and intensity of crises in
abstracting from other, potentially important, policy tools such as reserve requirements.
In Federico, Vegh, and Vuletin (2012), we show how developing countries (and Latin Amer-
ican countries in particular) have actively used reserve requirements for macro-stabilization
purposes.
   4
     As will become clear, quarterly data is essential for our purposes because we wish
to characterize monetary/…scal policy often during relatively narrow windows. This has
imposed some limitations in terms of available data.


                                             4
Latin America has fallen in the post-1998 period. In Section 3, we proceed
to analyze the cyclical properties of the …scal and monetary policy responses
to crises. We show that, on average, Latin America’s …scal and monetary
policy responses to crises have shifted from being procyclical before 1998 to
being countercyclical after 1998.5 In this sense, therefore, we could argue
that, on average, Latin America has graduated in terms of the policy response
to crises. This average response, however, masks a great deal of heterogene-
ity within our sample, with countries such as Chile and Brazil (and, to some
extent, Mexico) leading the way in this graduation process and countries
such as Argentina, Uruguay, and Venezuela still showing heavily procyclical
policy responses. But have countercyclical policy responses worked? This
is the question that we address in Section 4. Leaving aside at this point
potential endogeneity problems, we conclude that the evidence suggests that
countercyclical policies (particularly …scal policy) have contributed to lessen
both the duration and intensity of crises in Latin America.
    Unfortunately, endogeneity problems (hard to tackle and esoteric as they
may get) are critical in assessing many policy questions. While our small
data sample and peculiar nature of our dependent variable (pooled data from
narrow windows) prevent us from running typical IV regressions, we still go
some way towards addressing these issues in Sections 5 and 6 by coming up
with “instruments”and providing evidence for our main storyline: monetary
and …scal policy have been true responses to crises (as opposed to causing
them) and hence the countercyclicality of such policy responses has indeed
lessened the duration and intensity of crises (as opposed to policy responses
being determined by the duration and intensity of crises). Speci…cally, in
Section 5 we argue that, by and large, most of the 34 GDP crises were driven
or triggered by external shocks. To support this, we analyze the context in
which each crisis occurred (akin to a narrative approach). We show that
external factors such as the oil shocks of the 1970s, increases in global interest
rates in 1979-1981, Asian 1997 and Russian 1998 crises, and 2008 global
…nancial crisis have been key determinants or triggers of most GDP crises
we identify in Latin America. We provide complementary evidence to this
narrative analysis by showing the very high synchronicity (i.e., simultaneous
occurrence) of crises in our sample and its very high correlation with external
   5
     This is the result of an unweighted average across countries. A similar picture emerges
if one calculates a weigthed average (e.g. using the share of each country’s GDP in the
region), given the relatively importance of Brazil and Mexico.



                                             5
factors such as the Federal Funds rate (as an indicator of global liquidity)
and commodity prices which also suggest that crises have been, to a large
extent, exogenous to the policy responses.
    In Section 6, we construct what we call “readiness” indices, which are
based on initial conditions, and are thus, in principle, exogenous to subse-
quent policy responses to argue that it is indeed policy responses that have
caused changes in duration and intensity of crises.
    In Section 7, we turn our attention to the current Eurozone crisis to argue
that countries such as Greece, Ireland, Italy, and Portugal have been pursuing
procyclical (i.e., contractionary) …scal policy, as all Latin American countries
used to do (and some still do of course). We provide evidence in the form
of a …scal readiness index that suggests that this procyclical …scal policy has
indeed magni…ed the duration and intensity of the underlying crises.
    Section 8 o¤ers some concluding remarks.


2         Crises in Latin America:                               De…nition and
          basic statistics
Our sample for Latin American countries will consist of what is commonly
referred to as LAC-7 (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and
Venezuela) and Uruguay. These 8 economies’ GDP comprise almost 93
percent of the Latin American and the Caribbean region’s GDP. Table 1
lists the sample period for each of these countries. Unfortunately –and due
to the need to have quarterly data for our analysis – the sample period for
some countries begins later than in others. For Argentina, for instance, our
sample starts in 1970:1, whereas for Venezuela it starts in 1998:1. For all
countries except Venezuela, however, our sample starts in 1980 or earlier,
which gives us at least 33 years of quarterly data.6
    Analyzing policy responses to “crises”obviously requires de…ning a “cri-
sis.” For our purposes –and as already mentioned –we will de…ne a crisis
as beginning in the quarter in which real GDP falls below the preceding 4-
quarter moving average and ending in the quarter in which real GDP reaches
the pre-crisis level. As indicated in Table 1, using this de…nition we identify
34 crises in our 8 Latin American countries. The countries with the largest
number of crises are Argentina and Brazil (7 crises each) and the country
    6
        See Appendix 9.1 for sources of all the data used in the analysis.


                                                6
with the least number of crisis is Colombia (2 crises). Given the di¤erent
sample periods (and the di¤erent duration of each individual crisis), the table
also reports the frequency of crises (de…ned as the number of quarters that
a given country is in crisis over the total number of quarters in the sample
period). Under this metric, Argentina is the country with the highest fre-
quency (0.49), implying that, over the last 43 years, it has been in one crisis
or another half of the time, while Colombia is the country with the lowest
frequency (0.13). Table 1 also reports the average duration of crises, which
is 11 quarters for the whole sample. Uruguay exhibits the longest average
duration (18 quarters). The average intensity of crises (measured as the fall
in the level of GDP from the start of the crisis to the trough) is 8.6 percent,
with Uruguay also having the largest average intensity (14.8 percent).7
    If we take 1998 as our before-after date, how has the frequency, duration,
and intensity of crises change?8 Table 2 shows the results. On average,
we seem to observe higher frequencies before than after 1998. The average
frequency of crises fell from 0.42 before 1998 to 0.29 afterwards. This shift
is particularly pronounced in Brazil, Chile, Mexico, and Peru where the fre-
quency of crises is halved. A similar shift is observed with the duration
of crises; the average duration of crises before 1998 (17.5 quarters) falls to
8 quarters after 1998. As was the case with frequency and duration, the
average intensity has diminished after 1998. While the average fall in GDP
before 1998 was 14 percent from the start of the crisis to its trough, it is
   7
     Appendix 9.2 lists and characterizes each crisis in detail. In particular, it identi…es
the crisis period, the duration and intensity of the crisis, and, for later purposes, describes
the context in which each GDP crisis occurred, paying particular attention to the role
of external versus domestic factors as determinant or triggering factors. The appendix
also identi…es the shape of the GDP crisis (W, L, U, or V shaped), the most prevalent
exchange rate regime, and, based on Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2009), other type of crises (debt,
currency, in‡ation, banking, and stock market) that may have occurred at the same time.
Regarding the exchange rate regime, in most cases the exchange rate had some ‡exibility
(in 56 percent of the cases, compared to 35 percent with crawling bands and 9 percent
with …xed exchange rates).
   8
     While admittedly arbitrary, the choice of 1998 seemed a natural one. First – and
as discussed in Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) – the late 1990s appears to have been
a period where one can detect (through formal regressions using institutional quality as
an explanatory variable) a marked improvement in macroeconomic policy. Within this
period, 1998 seemed a natural candidate because no crisis took place in that year providing
us with a clean break in the series. We also wanted to leave a reasonably large window (15
years in this case) where one can observe the “after”e¤ects. If we modify our before-after
date slightly (e.g., 1997 or 2000) our main results are not a¤ected.


                                              7
just 6.6 percent after 1998. A similar message is conveyed when analyzing
the shape of GDP crises in Appendix 9.2. Before 1998 most crises are L,
U, or W shaped; however, V shaped crises are more prevalent after 1998. It
is important to note that after 1998 the sample includes the global crisis as
well as other late 1990s and early 2000s crises triggered by the Asian and
Russian and the end of the “dotcom” bubble in the United States in 2001.
This proves to be important because, unlike the tail winds in terms of cheap
capital and high commodity prices observed during the global crisis, this
external bonanza was not present in the late 1990s and early 2000s.
    In sum, the evidence is clear in suggesting that the frequency, duration,
and intensity of crises in Latin America has fallen in the post-1998 period.
Of course, at this point, there is not much more that we can say about what
this may mean in terms of the role of policy responses. The reason is that
the fall in any of the three elements (frequency, duration, and intensity) could
be due to exogenous factors (for instance, if crises have been mainly caused
by external factors, the frequency, duration, and intensity of such shocks
could have fallen) or endogenous factors (for example, it might be that the
frequency of shocks has fallen exogenously but that the fall in duration and
intensity has been due to better policy responses). To begin to address
these issues, the next section will characterize the policy responses to crises
in Latin America and subsequent sections will focus on endogeneity issues.


3       Policy responses
This section looks at the behavior of …scal and monetary policy in response
to the 34 crises identi…ed in Latin America in the previous section.9 We
begin by looking at the …scal policy response, both on the spending and
taxation side. Table 3 shows for each of the 8 countries in the sample the
average correlation during crises periods between the cyclical component of
government spending and tax policies and GDP before and after 1998.10 11
The table is very telling, as it pinpoints two countries (Chile and Mexico) that
    9
     For the time being, we will refer to them as “responses” implying, of course, that the
causality has run from the GDP crises to …scal/monetary policy and not viceversa. We
will come back to these issues of causality below.
  10
     The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott …lter.
  11
     Notice that for government spending, a positive (negative) correlation indicates pro-
cyclical (countercyclical) spending policy, whereas for the tax index, a negative (positive)
correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) tax policy.

                                             8
have clearly switched from having a procyclical …scal policy response before
1998 to a countercyclical policy response after 1998. Not coincidentally,
these are countries that are often hailed in the …nancial press for having
considerably improved their macroeconomic management over the years.12
Some other countries like Brazil and Peru have notably improved in some
…scal dimension (spending or tax). The other four countries tend to show
procyclical …scal response after 1998.13 In particular, Argentina, Uruguay,
and Venezuela all show pronounced procyclical spending responses.
   Table 3 also shows the monetary policy response by calculating the av-
erage correlation during crises between the cyclical component of a policy
rate and/or short-term market rate and real GDP.14 15 The four countries
that exhibit countercyclical monetary policy response after 1998 are Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, and Peru. As illustrated in Figure 1, the monetary policy
response to the 2008-2009 global crisis captures much of the 1998 behavior.
In Panel B, we can see the sharp drop in policy rates in Chile, Colombia,
Peru, and though less dramatic, in Brazil.16 These are, of course, the same
four countries that have shown countercyclical monetary policy in the post-
1998 period.17 In contrast, Panel A shows that in Argentina, Venezuela, and
  12
     In fact, Mexico and Chile formally became members of the OECD in 1994 and 2010,
respectively.
  13
     We should note that Colombia did not have crises before 1998 and we do not have
data for Venezuela before 1998.
  14
     Notice that in this case a positive (negative) correlation indicates a countercyclical
(procyclical) policy response.
  15
     Conceptually, any standard open economy model with imperfect asset substitution
would allow monetary authorities to use interest rates as a policy instrument, even under
predetermined exchange rates (see, for instance, Lahiri and Vegh (2003) and Flood and
Jeanne (2005)). Needless to say – and although we do not explicitly incorporate it into
our analysis of policy responses – the exchange rate regime has typically been a critical
dimension of the overall macroeoconomic policy framework, as emphasized in many pieces
by Stan Fischer himself (see, for instance, his 1986 and 2001 contributions). Having said
that, and as mentioned in Section 2, in most cases the de facto arrangement during the
crisis period had some ‡exiblility.
  16
     Chile is the most prominent case, with the Central Bank lowering the monetary policy
rate by 775 basis points from 8.25 percent in December 2008 to 0.5 percent in July 2009.
  17
     One may argue that the post-1998 countercyclical monetary policies may be heavily
in‡uenced by the post-2008 period, particularly if one thought that countries have been
able to pursue aggressive countercyclical monetary policies not because countries have
improved fundamentals or shifted policy, but rather because reduced rates in advanced
economies allowed emerging markets to also cut policy rates without generating large
depreciations. Our results do not seem to be driven by this possibility because if we


                                            9
Uruguay, policy rates actually increased during the global crisis.
    While in light of the di¤erent …scal and monetary “graduation” stories
described above it is di¢ cult to assess the overall policy stand in the region,
it seems that, on average, Latin America seems to have improved …scal and
monetary management. While in the pre-1998 period, the spending policy
response was clearly procyclical (with a correlation coe¢ cient of 0.56), it
fell to almost half (the correlation is 0.27) in the post-1998 period. In
terms of taxation policy, the shift from procyclicality to countercyclicality
between pre- and post-1998 is even more dramatic (from -0.27 in the pre-
1998 period to 0.08 in the post-1998 period). In terms of monetary policy,
the shift from procyclicality to countercyclicality between the pre- and post-
1998 periods is also quite noticeable (from -0.28 in the pre-1998 period to
0.05 in the post-1998 period). In sum, we have show that, on average,
Latin America’s …scal and monetary policy responses to crises has shifted
from being procyclical before 1998 to being acyclical or even countercyclical
after 1998. In this sense, therefore, we could argue that, on average, Latin
America has graduated in terms of the policy response to crises.
    This average response, however, masks a great deal of heterogeneity across
countries. On the one hand, we have countries such as Chile and Brazil,
which have switched from pro- to countercyclical policy responses on both
the …scal and monetary front. On the other hand, we have countries such
as Argentina and Uruguay that have shown consistent procyclical …scal and
monetary policy responses throughout the entire sample or a country such
as Venezuela (for which we do not have data before 1998), which has been
procyclical in both its monetary and …scal policy response after 1998. In
other words, while we …nd helpful to characterize the average behavior for
the region, we cannot overemphasize the heterogeneity across the di¤erent
countries in the region.


4     Has countercyclical policy worked?
We have just shown that, on average, both …scal and monetary response to
crisis in Latin America have become countercyclical (or less procyclical) in
calculate the cyclicality of monetary policy using the di¤erence between the country policy
rate and the U.S. Treasury bill rate, our main results remain valid. We should also note
that, as follows from Appendix 9.2, 10 of the 18 post-1998 crises are not related to the
global …nancial crisis.


                                            10
the post-1998 period. We know, of course, that in models of sticky prices
countercyclical macroeconomic policies are optimal. For instance, recent
theoretical work by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011) and Nakata
(2013) shows that the optimal …scal policy in a model with sticky prices is
indeed countercyclical.18 While Christiano, Eichenbaum,and Rebelo (2011)
take monetary policy as given, Nakata (2013) shows how both countercyclical
monetary and …scal policy complement each other. In fact, if …scal policy
were not available, the Central Bank would reduce interest rates even more
aggressively to raise output and consumption. In related work, which focuses
exclusively on monetary policy in a New-Keynesian, small open economy
model, Yakhin (2008) shows that the optimal cyclicality of monetary policy
may depend on the degree of …nancial integration: countries integrated in
international capital markets …nd it optimal to pursue countercyclical mon-
etary policy while the opposite is true of countries in …nancial autarky.
    Theoretical work thus clearly suggests that countercyclical policy should
alleviate the severity and duration of crises. What does the evidence for
our 8 Latin American countries say? To begin to address this question, we
will look at correlations between policies and outcomes.19 Needless to say,
this does not establish a causal relationship from countercyclical policies to
duration and intensity. We will address this issue later in the paper.20
    Panel A in Figure 2 shows the relation between the cyclicality of spending
policy (as captured by the correlation between the cyclical components of
government spending and GDP) and the duration of crises. The relation is
positive (implying that the more countercyclical …scal policy is, the lower is
the duration of the crisis) and signi…cantly so at least at the 5 percent level.
One possible interpretation of this relationship is that countercyclical …scal
policy has indeed helped in reducing the duration of crises in Latin America.
Panel B shows that the same is true of the intensity of the crisis: the more
countercyclical is spending policy, the lower the fall in GDP from start to
trough. Panels C and D show similar …ndings to those of panels A and B
  18
      In fact, both papers show that countercyclical …scal policy is even more powerful when
monetary policy has hit the zero lower bound, though this is naturally much less relevant
for emerging countries.
   19
      Naturally, this approach does not allows us to account for omitted variables that might
be correlated with …scal and monetary policy.
   20
      Having said that – and just for the sake of exposition – we will discuss some of the
results in terms of policies causing outcomes but, again, formally the issue of endogeneity
is addressed below.



                                             11
when focusing on tax policy. While the statistical signi…cance decreases, the
relationship supports that the more countercyclical tax policy is, the lower is
the duration of the crisis and the lower the fall in GDP from start to trough.21
    In turn, Panels E and F in Figure 2 show the relation between the cycli-
cality of monetary policy and the duration and intensity of crises. In both
cases the slope of the curves is negative, as expected (implying that a more
countercyclical monetary policy reduces both the intensity and the duration
of crises).
    In sum –and leaving aside for the moment potential endogeneity problems
–the evidence suggests that countercyclical spending policy has contributed
to lessen both the duration and intensity of crises in Latin America. While
the evidence is weaker for tax and monetary policy, there is some evidence
that it has contributed to reducing the duration and intensity of crisis. In
this light, we would interpret the fact that both the average duration and
intensity of crises in Latin America has fallen in the post-1998 period as
partly re‡ecting sounder macroeconomic policies in Latin America.


5      Endogeneity problem I: Is the policy re-
       sponse really a “response”?
Needless to say, we need to be very careful with how we interpret the data that
we have shown above because of potential endogeneity problems. Further,
we must be explicit about our view of the world to determine where the
main endogeneity problems may arise. To this e¤ect, Figure 3 o¤ers a very
schematic (and admittedly simple) ‡ow chart of our view of the world: (i)
external shocks cause a GDP crisis (i.e., whether a crisis takes place or not);
(ii) a GDP crisis in turn is characterized by two components: intensity and
duration; (iii) the GDP crisis will in turn cause a certain policy response;
and (iv) the policy response, in turn, will a¤ect the intensity and duration of
  21
     Our …nding that countercyclical …scal policy has helped in reducing the duration and
intensity of GDP crises is, of course, related to the issue of how big are …scal multipliers;
see, for instance, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011) and the references therein.          In
fact, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2011) argue that multipliers are larger in bad times
than in good times. Riera-Crichton, Vegh, and Vuletin (2014) further suggest that it
may matter whether government spending is going up or down and show that, at least for
OECD countries, …scal multipliers are even bigger in bad times when government spending
is actually increasing.


                                             12
the crisis (but not, of course, whether a crisis existed or not to begin with).
    In this view of the world, there are two potential reverse causality prob-
lems. The …rst (labeled R1 in Figure 3) is that, contrary to the direction in
the ‡ow chart, expected changes in policy could cause a GDP crisis. For ex-
ample, limited …scal space may cause markets to expect procyclical responses
and, as a result, to withdraw funds immediately after a global or domestic
shock. In other words, expected changes in …scal/monetary policy could be
causing a GDP crisis. The second (labeled R2 in Figure 3) is that, contrary
to the direction in the ‡ow chart, the duration/intensity of the crisis could
be in‡uencing the policy response (for example, the more severe the crisis,
the more policymakers may have to contract …scal policy because of lack of
external …nancing).
    This section addresses the …rst endogeneity problem (R1). This has
been a standard issue in the …scal procyclicality literature, where the typical
regression is meant to capture the following relationship:

             change in …scal policy =        +      change in GDP + ",

where and are coe¢ cients and " is the error. A positive would be in-
terpreted as evidence that …scal policy is procyclical; that is, it expands (con-
tracts) in response to higher (lower) output.22 In principle, we could try to
address this endogeneity problem by instrumenting for GDP, as in Jaimovich
and Panizza (2007), Ilzetzki and Vegh (2008), and Vegh and Vuletin (2012).
A good instrument would be, of course, some variable that is highly corre-
lated with the change in GDP but does not a¤ect directly the change in …scal
policy.23 While this is the approach that we have followed in previous work,
we would hesitate to do so here because our “relevant sample” (i.e., the set
of 34 crises) is small and discontinuous in the sense that it includes isolated
and small groups of observations from di¤erent periods.
    Instead, we …rst evaluate the background of each crisis in Appendix 9.2
following a narrative approach. We …nd that, even though domestic policy
failures were a factor in many instances, most of the 34 GDP crises were,
  22
      Rigobon (2004) and Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) have argued that reverse causal-
ity may be responsible for the now standard …nding in developing countries that …scal
policy has been procyclical. Ilzetzki and Vegh (2008), however, use several econometric
methodologies to establish that there is indeed causality from the cycle to …scal policy.
   23
      The three most common instruments are (i) a trade-weighted average of trade partners’
GDP; (ii) some measure of terms of trade; and (iii) the real rate on U.S. treasury bills.



                                           13
by and large, driven or triggered by external shocks.24 In fact, the last
40 years have been marked by major regional/global crises that have often
hit countries far away from the original epicenter. Examples are the two
oil shocks of 1973 and 1979, the rise in international interest rates triggered
by Volcker’s Federal reserve in 1979-1981, the Latin American debt crisis
following Mexico’s default in 1982, the Tequila crisis of 1995, the Asian crisis
of 1997, the Russian crisis of 1998, Argentina’s massive default in 2001, and
the global …nancial crisis of 2008. The global …nancial crisis is perhaps the
most clear example of an exogenous shock hitting Latin American countries
and leading to a recession. But other regional crisis, such as the Asian 1997
and Russian 1998 crises, also a¤ected Latin American countries by drastically
reducing the supply of international credit and forcing many countries to raise
interest rates to defend their currencies.
    Second, we provide complementary evidence to this narrative analysis by
showing the very high synchronicity (i.e., simultaneous occurrence) of crises
in our sample and its very high correlation with external factors such as the
Federal Funds rate (as an indicator of global liquidity) and commodity prices,
which also suggests that GDP crises have been, to a large extent, exogenous
to the policy responses.25 We de…ne “synchronicity”as the fraction of coun-
tries that are in a crisis (as per our de…nition) in any given quarter. An
index of 100 percent, for example, would mean that all of our eight countries
are in crisis in a given quarter. An index of 0 percent would mean that no
country is in crisis. We take a high synchronicity index as evidence that the
crises are being caused mainly by external factors a¤ecting the whole region
since the probability that many of our countries are in crisis at the same
time for strictly endogenous (and independent) reasons is clearly a very low
probability event.26 If, in addition, we can establish a signi…cant correlation
between our synchronicity index and some global factor, we then have an
explanation that complements our previous narrative approach as to what is
  24
     A few crises, like Peru 2000-2001 and Venezuela 2002-2004, were caused by domestic
political factors which, for our purposes, are still exogenous to monetary/…scal policy.
  25
     Conceptually, this approach is very much in the spirit of Ortiz et al (2009) who focus
on episodes of “systemic sudden stops” as a way of ensuring “exogeneity” of the policy
responses.
  26
     As a very simple illustration, if we assume that the probability that a country is in
crisis for domestic reasons is, say, 50 percent (and domestic-induced crisis are independent
events), the probability that all eight countries would be in crisis simultaneously is 0.4
percent (i.e., less than one percent).



                                            14
causing these simultaneous crises.
    Panel A in Figure 4 plots our synchronicity index and the Federal Funds
rate. Let us focus …rst on the synchronicity index. We clearly see four
periods of very high synchronicity, which essentially coincide with the tim-
ing of major …nancial crises over the last 35 years, which had widespread
international repercussions:

   1. Latin America’s debt crisis: Covers the period from the early to
      mid/late 1980s, with the synchronicity index starting above 80 percent
      in 1982:2 and remaining very high throughout the decade. This period
      essentially covers the infamous “lost decade” that “o¢ cially” began
      with Mexico’s default on August 12, 1982, which ushered the most
      serious debt crisis in Latin America’s history.27 This is also roughly
      the period analyzed in Diaz-Alejandro’s 1982 celebrated paper, which
      covers the crises in six (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and
      Venezuela) of our eight countries. While acknowledging the relevance
      of some domestic policy failures, Diaz-Alejandro forcefully argues that
      the role of negative external shocks (in particular what he refers to as
      “the breakdown of international …nancial markets and abrupt change
      in conditions and rules for international lending” as well as the sharp
      decline in terms of trade in the early 1980s) played a critical role in
      turning “a serious but manageable recession into a crisis unprecedented
      since the early 1930s.” The very tight global liquidity conditions were,
      of course, mainly caused by the rise in the Federal Funds rate engineered
      by Paul Volcker’s Federal Reserve from an average of 11.2 percent in
      1979 to a peak of 20 percent in June 1981, pushing unemployment
      in the United States above 10 percent. Fueled also by interest rate
      increases in Europe, the corresponding contraction in world trade in
      1981 caused prices of primary commodities to fall. The e¤ects of
      the Latin America’s debt crisis persisted throughout the decade with
      the region’s per-capita GDP falling from 112 to 98 percent of world
      average and from 34 to 26 percent of developed countries (Ocampo,
      2013). The lost decade’s dramatic e¤ect on GDP shows up clearly in
  27
    The 1980’s debt crisis was the …fth (and most recent) major debt crisis in almost 200
years of Latin American history. As Marichal (1989) describes in masterful detail, major
debt crises took place in 1826-28 (shortly after independence), 1873, 1980, and 1931.
Every one of these major debt crises was preceded by heavy borrowing from industrial
countries in a context of abundant global liquidity.


                                           15
      Figure 4, Panel A, where we see a high synchronicity from 1982:1 until
      the end of the decade, followed by fewer and fewer countries in crisis
      until the index reaches a minimum of 14.3 percent in 1993:3.
  2. Tequila crisis: Covers the year 1995, when the synchronicity index
     is almost 60 percent. This is, of course, the immediate aftermath of
     the so-called Tequila crisis,which started in December 1994 with the
     devaluation of the Mexican peso and followed a sharp rise in the Fed-
     eral Funds rate from 3 to 6 percent in …ve quarters (from 1993:4 to
     1995:1). A popular explanation for the Mexican crisis was that an un-
     willingness of international investors to roll over Tesobonos (short-term
     dollar- denominated debt), fueled by concerns about global illiquidity
     and domestic political events (such as the assassination in March 1994
     of presidential candidate Colosio), precipitated the crisis. More gen-
     erally, it has been argued that a high degree of capital mobility and
     …nancial globalization was at the root of Mexico’s crisis (see Calvo and
     Mendoza, 1996), which explains why it was dubbed the …rst …nancial
     crisis of the 21st century.
      One of the most notable aspects of the Mexican peso crisis was the sur-
      prisingly large spillover e¤ects, particularly on Brazil and Argentina,
      which endured large capital out‡ows and increases in interest rates.28
      The contagion was less severe, but still present, in other Latin Amer-
      ican countries. Empirical studies, such as Kaminsky and Reinhart
      (2000) suggest that …nancial sector linkages, be it through banks or,
      more generally, international capital markets, explain the bulk of the
      propagation.
  3. Asian, Russian, and Argentinean crises: Covers the period from
     1999:1 (when the synchronicity index reaches close to 80 percent) to
     2001:2 (when the synchronicity index is still 62.5 percent). This period
     encompasses a series of major international/regional crises that started
     with the 1997 Asian …nancial crisis, continued with the Russian 1998
     crisis, and culminated with Argentina’s massive default in December
     2001.
      The Asian …nancial crisis erupted in July 1997 when the Thai baht was
      allowed to ‡oat after a prolonged and futile defense of a peg. The crisis
 28
   See, for example, Calomiris (1999), Galiani, Heymann, and Tommasi (2003), and
Appendix 9.2 on Brazil 1995 crisis, based on Carvalho and Pires de Souza, 2011.

                                      16
       quickly spread through East Asia, particularly Indonesia, Korea, and
       Malaysia. In the aftermath of the Asian …nancial crisis, international
       investors cut lending to many developing countries, triggering a global
       growth slowdown and sharp fall in the price of oil.
       The Asian …nancial crisis was promptly followed by the August 1998
       crisis in Russia, when the government devalued the currency and de-
       faulted on the domestic debt. A …xed exchange rate and large …scal
       de…cits, compounded by the Asian …nancial crisis and the resulting fall
       in the prices of crude oil and non-ferrous metals, were the main factors
       behind this crisis. The crisis quickly spread to the Baltic states and
       other countries in the region and led to …nancial tremors around the
       world.29
       Finally, in December 2001 Argentina abandoned its 10-year Convert-
       ibility regime, whereby the peso was tied to the dollar on a one to one
       basis in a currency-board type arrangement, and defaulted on more
       than 90 billion worth of external debt.30 The Argentinean crisis led
       in turn to a severe banking crisis in Uruguay in July 2002, as Argen-
       tineans withdrew about a third of deposits from Uruguay’s banking
       system in response to a banking freeze in Argentina (see background
       in Table A.1, based on De la Plaza and Sirtaine, 2005).

   4. Global …nancial crisis: The full impact of the global …nancial crisis
      in Latin America was felt in the …rst quarter of 2009, when the syn-
      chronicity index reaches 100 percent implying that all of our 8 countries
      were undergoing a GDP crisis. The collapse of Lehman Brothers on
      September 15, 2008, triggered major shockwaves around the world as
      many large …nancial institutions teetered on the brink of disaster, un-
      able to get short-term funding and with asset prices imploding. The
      credit crunch and fall in international trade resulting from Lehman’s
  29
     In fact, the Brazilian crisis of January 1999 (when the peg to the dollar was abandoned
and the domestic currency allowed to ‡oat) is often partly attributed to the Asian and
Russian …nancial crises, which forced Brazil to raise interest rates to defend the currency
and cut …scal spending to maintain credibility and prevent further capital out‡ows; see,
for instance, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (1999) and the Brazilian 1998-1999 crisis in
Table A.1, based on De Carvalho and Pires de Souza (2011). In turn, the collapse of
Brazil’s exchange rate policy was an important factor in Argentina’s 1999-2001 recession,
which precipitated the December 2001 crisis (see Mussa, 2002).
  30
     See Mussa (2002) and Galiani, Heymann, and Tommasi (2003).


                                            17
        fall hit emerging markets very hard, with capital ‡owing out and cur-
        rency, asset, and stock market prices plummeting in late 2008/early
        2009 (see, for example, Dooley and Hutchison, 2009).
    Panel A in Figure 4 indicates that there is a highly signi…cant (at the
one percent level) and positive relationship between the level of the Federal
Funds rate and our synchronicity index. The corresponding correlation is
0.39. In a similar vein, Panel B shows a highly signi…cant (again at the
one percent level) and negative relationship between an index of commodity
prices and the synchronicity index (with a correlation of -0.53).31 Given
that both the Federal Funds rate and the index of commodity prices are
exogenous to the region, this complementary evidence supports our previous
narrative approach in that external factors have played a major role in most
of the region’s crises during the last 35 years.32


6       Endogeneity problem II: The readiness in-
        dex
As illustrated in Figure 3, a second endogeneity problem could arise because
there could be reverse causality from duration/intensity of the crisis to the
policy response (labeled R2 in the …gure). In other words, our implicit
regression would read as:
       duration/intensity of crisis =        +      monetary/…scal response + ".
But one could imagine reverse causality in the sense that the duration and/or
intensity of a given crisis could a¤ect the corresponding …scal and/or mone-
tary policy response. For example, a less intense crisis could induce policy-
makers to act more countercyclically when it comes to …scal policy (because,
  31
      The correlation of our synchronicity index with capital ‡ows to this region is -0.58 (and
signi…cant at the one percent level). We should note that there is a large literature on the
role of external factors in accounting for capital ‡ows into Latin America. For example,
both Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993) and Izquierdo, Romero, and Talvi (2008),
conclude that around 50 percent of the ‡ows can be accounted for by external factors.
This is fully consistent with our main storyline that external factors have accounted for
an important fraction, though certainly not all, of crises in Latin America.
   32
      Needless to say, some of our eight countries are major commodity producers (two
prime examples would be oil in the case of Venezuela and copper in the case of Chile)
and their behavior could in‡uence world prices but the e¤ect on a global commodity price
index is likely to be minor, if any.

                                              18
say, less …nancing is needed). One could misconstrued this fact as implying
that a more countercyclical …scal policy reduced the intensity of the crisis.
    To address this endogeneity problem, we develop an index of initial con-
ditions that we will label as the “readiness index.” In theory, this readiness
index could be a good instrument for the policy response because it tells us
how much “…scal and monetary space”(to use today’s jargon) policymakers
have to embark on countercyclical monetary and …scal policy. Hence, we
might expect the readiness indices to be positively correlated with the policy
response. Furthermore, the readiness index cannot, in principle, directly
cause the duration and/or intensity of the crises because the readiness in-
dex consists of initial conditions (i.e., variables that have been determined in
previous periods and that therefore cannot directly cause today’s GDP).33
    To construct the overall readiness index, we …rst compute …scal and mon-
etary readiness indices:

   1. Fiscal readiness index: This index attempts to measure the soundness
      of …scal policy during the eight quarters (or two calendar years for an-
      nual indicators) preceding a crisis. In other words, the index is trying
      to measure the existing “…scal space,”which in turn should partly de-
      termine the extent to which policymakers can engage in countercyclical
      …scal policy during the crisis.
       The …scal readiness index is de…ned as the sum of two components, each
       normalized between 0 and 10, which implies that the index may range
       between 0 (lowest …scal readiness) and 20 (highest …scal readiness).34
       The two components are: (i) …scal de…cit as percentage of GDP and
       (ii) total (public plus private) external debt as percentage of GDP.
       These variables are widely used in recent papers that formally analyze
       the issue of …scal space. In particular, Ostry et al (2010) de…ne …scal
       space as the di¤erence between a historical debt limit, derived from the
  33
     In other words, there is no reason to expect variables such as, say, the current account
de…cit or debt to GDP ratio in time t 1 to have a direct e¤ect on GDP at time t. For
this reason, and as will become clear below, we have chosen variables that are, in principle,
backward-looking.
  34
     We pool together data for Latin American and Eurozone countries to facilitate cross-
country comparisons. The only exception in which the lower bound (i.e., worst scenario)
of the normalization is carrried out at the regional level is for total (public plus private)
external debt as percentage of GDP. For this variable, values for some European countries
(such as Ireland in recent times) is close to 1,000 percent of GDP, while the highest value
for Latin American economies is about 50 percent of GDP.

                                             19
       country’s historical record of …scal adjustment, and the current level
       of public debt. Under this de…nition, either a lower level of existing
       public debt or a larger primary surplus (in response to, say, rising debt
       service) would increase the …scal space.

   2. Monetary readiness index: This index attempts to measure the pos-
      sible limitations faced by central banks in using monetary policy for
      countercyclical purposes. As argued by Didier, Hevia, and Schmukler
      (2012) and Vegh and Vuletin (2013), many developing countries have
      felt the need to use policy interest rates to defend the domestic currency,
      as opposed to stabilizing output ‡uctuations. Since bad (good) times
      are usually associated with capital out‡ows (in‡ows), central banks
      have historically responded by increasing (decreasing) policy rates thus
      magnifying busts (booms).35
       The monetary readiness index is the sum of two components, each nor-
       malized between 0 and 10. The index thus ranges between 0 (lowest
       monetary readiness) and 20 (highest monetary readiness). As in the
       case of the …scal readiness index, the monetary components are mea-
       sured over the eight quarters (or two calendar years) prior to a GDP
       crisis. The components are: (i) foreign reserves as percentage of GDP
       and (ii) current account de…cit as percentage of GDP. The rationale is
       as follows. A larger stock of international reserves o¤ers a bu¤er (or in-
       surance) in bad times which, by reducing the country’s vulnerability to
       sudden shifts in markets’sentiments, should lead to smaller out‡ows in
       bad times and hence less currency depreciation. This is, turn, should
  35
     The need to defend the domestic currency in bad times is best exempli…ed by IMF
advice during the 1997 Asian crisis. To quote Stanley Fischer himself (at the time the
IMF’s First Deputy Managing Director) from a 1998 lecture, “[i]n weighing [the question of
whether programs were too tough], it is important to recall that when they approached the
IMF, the reserves of Thailand and Korea were perilously low, and the Indonesian rupiah
was excessively depreciated. Thus, the …rst order of business was, and still is, to restore
con…dence in the currency. To achieve this, countries have to make it more attractive to
hold domestic currency, which, in turn, requires increasing interest rates temporarily, even
if higher interest costs complicate the situation of weak banks and corporations. This is a
key lesson of the tequila crisis in Latin America 1994-95, as well as from the more recent
experience of Brazil, the Czech Republic, Hong Kong and Russia, all of which have fended
o¤ attacks on their currencies in recent months with a timely and forceful tightening of
interest rates along with other supporting policy measures. Once con…dence is restored,
interest rates can return to more normal levels.”



                                            20
      allow the monetary authority to engage in countercyclical monetary
      policy as the need to defend the currency in bad times is not present.
      A similar argument could be used for the current account de…cit, to the
      extent that a larger current account de…cit has traditionally indicated
      to international credit markets that the risk of a debt crisis is higher
      which, in turn, should lead to a larger currency depreciation and hence
      less monetary space because of the need to defend the currency.

    Since both the …scal and the monetary readiness indices take a maximum
value of 20, the overall readiness index (which simply adds them up) can
take a maximum value of 40. Table 4 shows the …scal readiness index for
each of our eight countries for the pre- and post-1998 periods. With the
exception of Argentina and Uruguay, the other four countries (Brazil, Chile,
Mexico, and Peru) for which we have pre-and post-1998 data have improved
their …scal readiness index in the post-1998 period compared to before. On
average, the …scal readiness index has increased from 8.6 to 11.1. The best
prepared countries from a …scal point of view are Chile and Colombia.
    Table 4 also shows the same …gures for the monetary readiness index. In
this case, all six countries with pre- and post-1998 data have increased their
readiness. On average, the monetary readiness index increased from 8.6 in
the pre-1998 period to 10.4 in the post-1998 period.
    Finally, Table 4 also reports each of our eight countries’s overall readiness
index in the pre- and post-1998 periods. A couple of observations are worth
making: (i) for the six countries for which we have pre and post-1998 data,
all but Uruguay show higher readiness in the post-1998 period than before
and, in some instances, by a wide margin (the cases of Chile, Mexico, and
Peru stand out); and (ii) on average, the readiness index rose from 17.2 in
the pre-1998 period to 21.5 in the post-1998, with a corresponding reduction
in the standard deviation as well.
    In Figure 5, we correlate the …scal and monetary readiness indices with the
cyclicality of, respectively, …scal and monetary policy to assess whether they
may be good instruments. While in most cases the statistical signi…cance is
relatively weak (which is not surprising given that we are using at most 14
observations), in all cases the sign of the relationship is as expected. Using
these relationships, Figure 6 shows the relation between the instrumented
variable and duration and intensity. In the three cases –and in spite of the
small sample –the coe¢ cients have the expected sign and are signi…cant at
the 15 percent level for both duration and intensity. In sum, our evidence

                                       21
suggests a causal relationship from a more countercyclical …scal/monetary
policy response to lower duration/intensity of the crisis.36


7      Europe: the new Latin America?
The ongoing crisis in the Eurozone has brought to the table many themes
familiar to the Latin American experience in recent decades, such as debt
crises, debt restructuring, IMF involvement, and, most importantly for our
purposes, the cyclicality of …scal policy.37 38 Our purpose here is to look a
the current Eurozone crisis through the lenses that we used above to analyze
40 years of policy responses to crises in Latin America. Table 5 shows the
duration and intensity of the current crisis for 10 Eurozone countries.39 As
of the …rst quarter of 2013 (the last quarter for GDP in our sample), the
crisis is ongoing for 7 of the 10 countries and is at least 18 quarters old.
Table 5 also shows the intensity, with Greece having lost 24 percent of GDP
from the start of the crisis to the trough (last quarter in the sample). The
average intensity for the current Eurozone crises is 8.4 percent, which roughly
coincides with the average duration of crises in Latin America (8.6 percent,
from Table 1).
    Of course, due to the common currency, the Eurozone has a single mone-
tary policy conducted by the ECB, which has been clearly countercyclical, as
shown in Figure 7. The ECB also reduced reserve requirements on deposits
from 2 to 1 percent in January 2012.
    But …scal policy is, of course, another story altogether because it is carried
out at the national level. Table 5 shows the correlation between government
  36
     One may also argue that the external shocks hitting Latin America were more tem-
porary in the post-1998 period, which enabled countercyclical responses. This concern,
however, does not seem to be borne by the data because the inertia (as measured by the
coe¢ cient of an AR1 process) observed in the Federal funds rate and the commodity index
used in Section 5 is statistically the same in the pre and post 1998 periods.
  37
     See Cotarelli (2012) and Frankel (2012) on the debate of “austerity versus growth”
which, in our view, is better thought of as a debate on …scal procyclicality versus coun-
tercyclicality.
  38
     The reader is referred to Cavallo, Fernandez-Arias, and Powell (2014) for a much
broader discussion of the relevance of Latin American’s past crises for today’s situation in
Eurozone countries. We instead limit our focus to the role of procyclical/countercyclical
…scal policy.
  39
     The countries are Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Nether-
lands, Portugal, and Spain.


                                            22
spending and real GDP for each of our 10 Eurozone countries.40 We can see
that four countries (Greece, Ireland, Italy, and Portugal) have exhibited a
positive correlation (i.e., have been procyclical) with Greece, not surprisingly,
the most procyclical of all.41 To what extent is procyclical …scal policy
aggravating the duration and intensity of the crises? Figure 8 shows that
there is a positive and signi…cant relationship between …scal procyclicality
and duration (Panel A) and intensity (Panel B).
    But could Figure 8 re‡ect reverse causality? To address this concern –
and following what we did for Latin American countries above – we com-
pute the …scal readiness index for our 10 Eurozone countries (Table 5). We
should emphasize that since the global …nancial crisis originated in the in-
dustrial countries, the endogeneity concern discussed in Section 5 may be of
particularly relevance in this case. (Although, on the other hand, one could
argue that the epicenter was the United States and not the Eurozone.) This
concern might be compounded by the fact that policy responses may be cor-
related across European countries. Therefore, one should take the …ndings
for Europe with a grain of salt relative to the case of Latin America.
    In Figure 9, we then show a highly signi…cant correlation between the …s-
cal readiness index and …scal policy, as captured by the correlation between
the cyclical component of government spending and real GDP. This is tan-
tamount to saying that we have a valid instrument. Finally, in Figure 10 we
show a signi…cant relation between our instrument for …scal readiness and
the duration (Panel A) and intensity (Panel B) of crises. We thus conclude
that, indeed, procyclical …scal policy in some Eurozone countries seems to
have contributed to making the current crisis longer and more severe.
  40
     Given the short time span and, more importantly, the infrequent changes in tax rates
we are unable to construct meaningful correlations between the cyclical components of tax
policy and real GDP.
  41
     In the terminology used in Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013), these would be “back
to school” cases; that is, cases of “reverse graduation.” In that paper, we also show
that, historically, industrial countries have been countercyclical, so this represents a policy
shift. The reason behind this policy shift is not easy to ascertain but likely re‡ects the
presumption that long-term gains in terms of …scal reforms and policy credibility would
outweight the short-term costs of …scal austerity. But, as is well-known, these policy
choices (and their e¤ectiveness so far) continue to be highly controversial even in leading
Eurzone countries such as France, and a deeper analysis will need to await the passage of
time.




                                              23
8    Conclusions
This paper has focused on how the monetary/…scal policy response to crises
in Latin America has evolved over the last four decades. We have shown that
there are several countries (Chile and Brazil and, to some extent, Mexico)
that have graduated in terms of their policy response, in the sense that they
have switched from a procyclical to a countercyclical response. Further, such
countercyclical policy responses have been e¤ective in reducing the duration
and intensity of GDP-crises. On the other hand, other countries such as
Argentina, Uruguay, and Venezuela have continued to be procyclical.
    We then related our discussion to the current crises in the Eurozone and
show that, much in Latin American style, several Eurozone countries have
responded procyclically in terms of their …scal policy and thus increased the
duration and intensity of the underlying recession.


References
 [1] Alvarez, Cesar J. and Stephanie Hanson, “Venezuela’s oil-based econ-
     omy,”Council on Foreign Relations (2009).

 [2] Alvarez, Roberto, and Jose De Gregorio, “Why did Latin America and
     developing countries perform better in the global …nancial crisis than
     in the Asian crisis?”paper presented at the 14th Jacques Polak Annual
     Research Conference in honor of Stanley Fischer (IMF, 2014).

 [3] Auerbach, Alan, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Fiscal multipliers in reces-
     sion and expansion,”NBER Working Paper No. 17447 (2011).

 [4] Calomiris, Charles, “Lessons from the Tequila crisis for successful …nan-
     cial liberalization,”Journal of Banking and Finance (1999).

 [5] Calvo, Guillermo A., “Fractured liberalism: Argentina under Martinez
     de Hoz,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 34 (1986),
     pp. 511-533.

 [6] Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique Mendoza, “Mexico’s balance-of-
     payments crisis: A chronicle of a death foretold,” Journal of Interna-
     tional Economics, Vol. 41 (1996), pp. 235-264.


                                     24
 [7] Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart,
     “Capital in‡ows and real exchange rate appreciation in Latin America:
     The role of external factors,”IMF Sta¤ Papers, Vol. 40 (1993).
 [8] Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Vegh, “In‡ation stabilization and
     BOP crises in developing countries”in John Taylor and Michael Wood-
     ford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics (Volume C; North Holland,
     1999), pp. 1531-1614.
 [9] Cavallo, Eduardo, Eduardo Fernandez-Arias, and Andrew Powell, “Is
     the Eurozone on the mend?”IDB Working Paper Series No. 525 (2014).
[10] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “When
     is the government spending multiplier large?”Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, Vol. 119, pp. 78-121.
[11] Corbo, Vittorio, and Jaime de Melo, “Lessons from the Southern Cone
     policy reforms,”World Bank Research Observer, Vol. 2 (1987), pp. 111-
     142.
[12] Corbo, Vittorio and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, “The international crisis in
     Latin America,”Monetaria (2013), pp. 37-62.
[13] Corbo, Vittorio, Jaime de Melo, and James Tybout, “What went wrong
     with the recent reforms in the Southern Cone?”Economic Development
     and Cultural Change, Vol. 34 (1986), pp. 607-740.
[14] Cottarelli, Carlo, “Fiscal adjustment:   Too much of a good thing?”
     VoxEU.org (2012).
[15] De Carvaho, Fernando J. Cardim, and Francisco E. Pirez de Souza,
     “Brazil in the 2000’s: Financial regulation and macroeconomic stabil-
     ity,” unpublished manuscript (Universidad Federal de Rio de Janeiro,
     2011).
[16] De la Plaza, Luis and Sophie Sirtaine, “An analysis of the 2002
     Uruguayan banking crisis,”World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
     3780 (2005).
[17] Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F., “Latin American debt: I don’t think we are
     in Kansas anymore,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1984),
     pp. 335-403.

                                    25
[18] Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos F., “Good-bye …nancial repression, hello …nan-
     cial crash,”Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 19 (1985), pp. 1-24.

[19] Didier, Tatiana, Constantino Hevia, and Sergio Schmukler, “How re-
     silient and countercyclical were emerging economies to the global cri-
     sis?” Journal of International, Money and Finance, Vol. 31 (2012), pp.
     2052-2077.

[20] Dooley, Michael and Michael Hutchison, “Transmission of the U.S. sub-
     prime crisis to emerging markets: Evidence on the decoupling-recoupling
     hypothesis,” Journal of International, Money and Finance, Vol. 28
     (2009), 1331-1349.

[21] Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards, The macroeconomics of
     populism in Latin America (University of Chicago Press, 1991).

[22] Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, “Brazil: The …rst …nancial crisis of
     1999,”Southwest Economy (March/April 1999), pp. 13-14.

[23] Federico, Pablo, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, “Macropruden-
     tial policy over the business cycle”(World Bank, 2012).

[24] Fischer, Stanley, “Exchange rate versus money targets in disin‡ation,”
     Chapter 8 in Indexing, in‡ation, and economic policy (MIT Press, 1986).

[25] Fischer, Stanley, “The IMF after …fty years and the Mexican crisis,”
     unpublished speech (1995).

[26] Fischer, Stanley, “Applied economics in action: IMF programs,”Amer-
     ican Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings (1997), pp. 23-27.

[27] Fischer, Stanley, “The IMF and the Asian crisis,”UCLA Forum Funds
     Lecture (1998).

[28] Fischer, Stanley, “Exchange rate regimes: Is the bipolar view correct?”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15 (2001), pp. 3-24.

[29] Flood, Robert and Olivier Jeanne, “An interest rate defense of a …xed
     exchange rate?” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 66 (2005),
     pp. 471-484.



                                    26
[30] Forbes, Kristin J. and Michael W. Klein, “Pick you poison: The choices
     and consequences of policy responses to crises,”paper presented at the
     14th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference in honor of Stanley
     Fischer (IMF, 2014).

[31] Frankel, Je¤rey, “The procyclicalists: Fiscal austerity vs. stimulus,”
     VoxEU.org (2012)

[32] Frankel, Je¤rey, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, “On graduation
     from …scal procyclicality,”Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 100
     (January 2013), 32-47.

[33] Galiani, Sebastian, Daniel Heymann, and Mariano Tommasi, “Missed
     expectations: The Argentine convertibility,”William Davidson Working
     Paper No. 515 (University of Michigan, 2002).

[34] Hanson, James and Jaime de Melo, “The Uruguayan experience with
     liberalization and stabilization, 1974-1981,” Journal of Interamerican
     Studies and World A¤airs, Vol. 25 (1983), pp. 477-508.

[35] Ilzetzki, Ethan, and Carlos A. Vegh, “Procyclical …scal policy in devel-
     oping countries: Truth or …ction?” NBER Working Paper No. 14191
     (2008).

[36] Izquierdo, Alejandro, Randall Romero, and Ernesto Talvi, “Booms and
     busts in Latin America: The role of external factors,” IDB Working
     Paper No 631 (2008).

[37] Jaimovich, Dany, and Ugo Panizza (2007). “Procyclicality or Reverse
     Causality?” RES Working Papers 1029. Inter-American Development
     Bank, Research Department.

[38] Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen M. Reinhart, “On crises, contagion,
     and confusion,”Journal of International Economics, Vol. 51 (2000), pp.
     145-168.

[39] Lahiri, Amartya and Carlos A. Vegh, “Delaying the inevitable: Interest
     rate defense and BOP crises,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111
     (2003), pp. 404-24.



                                     27
[40] Marichal, Carlos, A century of debt crises in Latin America (Princeton
     University Press, 1989).
[41] Mussa, Michael, Argentina and the Fund: From triumph to tragedy
     (Institute for International Economics, 2002).
[42] Nakata, Taisuke, “Optimal …scal and monetary policy with occasion-
     ally binding zero bound constraints”FEDS Working Paper No. 2013-40
     (Federal Reserve Board, 2013).
[43] Ocampo, Jose Antonio, “The Latin American debt crisis in historical
     perspective,”unpublished manuscript (Columbia University, 2013).
[44] Ortiz, Alberto, Pablo Ottonello, Federico Sturzenegger, and Ernesto
     Talvi, “Monetary and …scal policies in a sudden stop: Is tighter
     brighter?” IDB Working Paper (2009).
[45] Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Jun I. Kim, and Mahvash S.
     Qureshi, Fiscal Space,”IMF Sta¤ Position Note SPN/10/11 (2010).
[46] Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth Rogo¤, This time is di¤erent: Eight
     centuries of …nancial folly, Princeton University Press (2009).
[47] Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh and Guillermo Vuletin. “Pro-
     cyclical and countercyclical …scal multipliers: Evidence from OECD
     countries.”Forthcoming in Journal of International Money and Finance
     (2014).
[48] Rigobon, Roberto, discussion on “When it rains it pours: Procyclical
     capital ‡ows and macroeconomic policies.” in NBER Macroeconomics
     Annual, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤, Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press (2004).
[49] Vegh, Carlos A., and Guillermo Vuletin, “How is tax policy conducted
     over the business cycle?” NBER Working Paper No. 17753 (2012).
     Forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
[50] Vegh, Carlos A., and Guillermo Vuletin, “Overcoming the fear of free
     falling: Monetary policy graduation in emerging markets,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 17753 (2013), forthcoming in The role of Central
     Banks in …nancial stability: How has it changed? (Federal Reserve
     Bank of Chicago).

                                    28
[51] Yakhin, Yossi, “Financial integration and cyclicality of monetary pol-
     icy in small open economies,”Discussion Paper No. 08-11 (Ben-Gurion
     University, 2008).


9     Appendices
9.1    Data de…nition and sources
Real GDP: Most data are from Global Financial Data, International Finan-
cial Statistics (IFS/IMF), OECD, Eurostat, and CEPAL. In some cases,
we used local sources to complement our data: Argentina (Central Bank of
Argentina), Brazil (Institute for Applied Economic Research), and Uruguay
(Central Bank of Uruguay).
    Interest rates: We take short-term interest rates as a proxy for the stance
of monetary policy. In some cases, we have data for overnight interbank
interest rates, such as the Federal Funds rate in the United States. In most
cases, however, we rely on discount rates due to their longer availability.
Source: Global Financial Data.
    Government spending: In some cases, we have data for …nal consumption
expenditure of general government. In most cases, however, we rely on total
government expenditure of general government. Sources: Global Financial
Data, IFS/IMF, OECD, and Eurostat.
    Taxes: For tax policy we use the cyclical component of a tax index con-
structed by Vegh and Vuletin (2014). This index is based on VAT, per-
sonal, and corporate tax rates as opposed to revenue-based measures such as
cyclically- adjusted revenues; see Vegh and Vuletin (2014) for details.
    Fiscal de…cit as percentage of GDP: WEO (IMF).
    Total (public plus private) external debt as percentage of GDP: From
Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2009).
    Foreign reserves as percentage of GDP: WDI (World Bank).
    Current account de…cit as percentage of GDP: WEO (IMF).




                                      29
9.2    Chronology of crises
Table A.1 presents a detailed characterization of each of our 34 crises, includ-
ing background information on the relative importance of domestic versus
external factors.




                                      30
Appendix 9.2 Chronology of crises in Latin America
Argentina
            Duration
                        Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                   Reinhart
             of GDP                                                                                                                                               GDP
                           crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                       and         Exchange
 Period       crisis                                                                          Background                                                          crisis
                         reduction from                                                                                                                                     Rogoff      rate regime
                (in                                                                                                                                               shape
                         start to trough)                                                                                                                                   crises
            quarters)
 1975:3-         6           -3.4 %         1973 oil shock - Rodrigazo. After more than ten years of steady growth, Argentina was strongly affected by            W-       currency,    floating
 1976:4                                     the 1973 world oil shock and protectionist responses in major export markets in Europe. Isabel Peron’s                shaped   inflation,
                                            government faced a rising fiscal deficit (which reached 14% of GDP) and several speculative attacks that led to                stock
                                            a 56% loss of foreign exchange reserves in spite of limited convertibility. In June 1975, Minister of Finance                  market
                                            Celestino Rodriguez implemented an adjustment package, which included a devaluation of more than 100%
                                            and exchange and wage controls.
 1977:4-       5             -7.4 %         Aftermath of 1973 oil shock - Rodrigazo.
 1978:4
 1981:1-       26            -13 %          Argentina’s debt crisis. During the early 1980s, Argentina was hit by the Latin American debt crisis (see text),      L-       debt,        floating
 1987:2                                     which led to bank runs and a dearth of international credit. As a result of a growing fiscal deficit and low          shaped   currency,
                                            external financing costs due to the “petro-dollars” of the 1970s, Argentina’s external debt doubled between                    inflation,
                                            1976 and 1979 (from 10 to 20 billion dollars). Rising international interest rates in 1979-1981, unsustainable                 banking,
                                            debt and current account dynamics, and the abandonment of the so-called tablita (an exchange-rate based                        stock
                                            inflation stabilization plan based on a pre-announced path of the nominal exchange rate) in February 1981 all                  market
                                            contributed to capital flight, a collapse of the financial system, higher inflation, and negative per-capita growth
                                            in 1981, 1982, and 1985.
 1988:2-       14           -15.9 %         Argentina’s hyperinflation. Argentina's inflation in the late 1980s was fueled by heavy external as well as           U-       debt,        floating
 1991:3                                     domestic borrowing, severe fiscal imbalances (which were mostly monetized), and the failure of previous               shaped   currency,
                                            stabilization plans (Austral and Primavera). Inflation in 1989 was about 1900% and the exchange rate rose                      inflation,
                                            from 24.3 Australes per dollar in early 1989 to 1950 at the end of the year. The hyperinflation also increased                 banking,
                                            social unrest as poverty rose from 25% in early 1989 to about 48% in October of the same year.                                 stock
                                                                                                                                                                           market
 1995:2-       4             -4.9 %         Tequila crisis (see text). The devaluation of the Mexican peso in December 20, 1994, triggered a sudden stop          V-       banking      currency
 1996:1                                     in Argentina (see text). Foreign currency deposits in domestic banks decreased by about 7 billion dollars             shaped                board
                                            (between December 20, 1994 and March 22, 1995. The resulting banking crisis led to the closure of 50 banks
                                            and 266 branches. Several measures were adopted to deal with heavy liquidity pressures in the financial system.
                                            The fall in economic activity reduced consumption as the government increased tax pressure and cut spending.
                                            The resulting lower current account deficit and improved fiscal position in turn made it easier to deal with the
                                            sharp fall in available external financing.
 1998:4-       25           -20.4 %         Debt default and end of Convertibility plan. With the peso pegged to the dollar in the context of the                 L-       debt,        floating and
 2004:4                                     Convertibility plan, Argentina fell into a severe recession in late 1998, triggered by a series of adverse external   shaped   currency,    crawling
                                            shocks, including low commodity prices and appreciation of the dollar -- which worsened the current account                    inflation,   band
                                            deficit -- the Russian crisis of 1998 (see text), and the Brazilian devaluation of January 1999 (see text). The                banking,
                                            lack of competitiveness (due to an overvalued peso) together with fiscal profligacy finally took their toll. The               stock
                                            increased perception of currency risk also generated a massive withdrawal of bank deposits. The ensuing full-                  market
                                            blown crisis led to a sovereign debt default in the last week of 2001 and the abandonment of the Convertibility
                                            plan in January 2002
 2009:1-       2              -2 %          Global financial crisis (see text)                                                                                    V-       debt         crawling
 2009:2                                                                                                                                                           shaped                band
Brazil
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                     Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                                 GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                         and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                           Background                                                           crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                       Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                                 shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                     crises
           quarters)
 1981:1-       16           -8.5 %         Brazil’s debt crisis. In the early 1980s, Brazil was hit by the Latin American debt crisis (see text), which            W-       debt,        floating
 1984:4                                    worsened Brazil’s balance of payments and external debt problems. In response, the government                           shaped   currency,
                                           implemented a series of measures aimed at reducing imports and increasing exports. The end of external                           inflation
                                           financing, following the 1982 Mexican default, increased pressures for macroeconomic adjustment, and led to
                                           currency depreciation and inflation.
 1987:3-      7             -3.7 %         Brazil’s hyperinflation. As a result of the debt problem and the monetization of large part of its fiscal deficit,               debt,        floating
 1989:1                                    Brazil’s annual inflation reached 225% in 1985. The government unleashed several attempts to bring inflation                     currency,
                                           under control through three “heterodox” inflation stabilization plans: the Cruzado Plan (1986), the Bresser                      inflation
                                           Plan (1987), and the Summer Plan (1989). All three programs, which were not accompanied by any serious
                                           fiscal reform, failed to permanently reduce inflation. Brazil then entered into a hyperinflationary phase, with
                                           annual inflation reaching about 2400% in 1990.
 1990:1-      14            -6.8 %         Plan Collor. The administration of Collor de Mello (1990-92) implemented a new stabilization plan to                             debt,        floating
 1993:2                                    control inflation (including a price freeze and removal of indexation) and reforms aimed at increasing                           currency,
                                           competition among firms, privatizing state-owned enterprises, and boosting productivity. Few of the new                          inflation,
                                           administration’s programs, however, were actually implemented due to lack of political support. It was not                       banking,
                                           until the Plan Real of 1994 that inflation started to fall.                                                                      stock
                                                                                                                                                                            market
 1995:3-      2             -1.7 %         Tequila crisis (see text). Shortly after achieving price stability with the Real Plan, Brazil was hit by the            V-       currency,    crawling
 1995:4                                    dearth of capital inflows triggered by the Tequila crisis (see text). Together with a widening current account          shaped   inflation,   band
                                           deficit, this forced the Central Bank to sharply raise interest rates to stop capital flight. High interest rates and            banking
                                           the loss of inflation revenues contributed to the banking crisis of 1995, which resulted in the closing of three
                                           of the ten largest banks and the failure of a large number of medium and small financial institutions.
 1998:4-      4             -1.5 %         Asian and Russian crises (see text). The lack of competitiveness (due to a long period of overvaluation) and            V-       currency     floating
 1999:3                                    persistent fiscal deficits increased the external debt. The Asian 1997 and Russian 1998 crises (see text) led to        shaped
                                           a capital account reversal that put pressure on the peg. In spite of a resolute defense of the currency by means
                                           of higher interest rates, the peg was abandoned in January 1999.
 2001:3-      2             -0.7 %         End of “dotcom” bubble in the United States and 2001 Argentinean crisis. Two external shocks, the                       V-       currency,    floating
 2001:4                                    bursting of the “dotcom” bubble in the United States (and accompanying recession in the United States and               shaped   stock
                                           Europe) and the recession in Argentina that preceded the December 2001 crisis triggered a brief recession in                     market
                                           Brazil.
 2008:4-      4             -5.4 %         Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                                     V-                    floating
 2009:3                                                                                                                                                            shaped
Chile
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                 Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                             GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                     and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                         Background                                                         crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                   Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                             shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                 crises
           quarters)
 1981:4-       24          -20.2 %         Chile’s debt crisis. The 1982 crisis in Chile was the worst since the 1930s. Chile’s reliance on external           L-       debt,        floating
 1987:3                                    markets and high foreign debt (which increased from 3.5 billion dollars in 1973 to 17 in 1982) made it              shaped   currency,
                                           extremely vulnerable to the deteriorating international environment that preceded the Latin American debt                    inflation,
                                           crisis (see text). In 1982, Chile was hit particularly hard as foreign loans dried up and the terms of trade                 banking,
                                           worsened. As a result, GDP fell sharply, unemployment reached 23.7%, and widespread social unrest took                       stock
                                           place. In June 1982, the government devalued the exchange rate by about 18% (putting an end to a fixed                       market
                                           exchange rate in place since June 1979), intervened five banks, and closed other three. In early 1983, the
                                           financial sector was nationalized as a way to avoid a major banking crisis, and a number of subsidy schemes
                                           favoring debtors were enacted.
 1998:4-      4             -3.9 %         Asian and Russian crises (see text). The global downturn triggered by the Asian and Russian crises reduced          V-                    crawling
 1999:3                                    demand for all commodities, with copper prices hitting a 12-year low. As a result, government revenues from         shaped                band
                                           copper (Chile’s main export) plunged to 450 million dollar in 1998 from 1.7 billion in 1997. Annual real
                                           GDP growth, which averaged 8% during 1991-1997, was halved in 1998 and the current account deficit
                                           increased significantly. The central bank adopted a tight monetary policy to keep the current account deficit
                                           in check.
 2008:4-      6             -2.7 %         Global financial crisis (see text)                                                                                  V-                    crawling
 2010:1                                                                                                                                                        shaped                band



Colombia
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                 Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                             GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                     and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                         Background                                                         crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                   Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                             shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                 crises
           quarters)
 1998:3-       15           -6.8 %         Asian and Russian crises (see text). Between the early 1990s and 1997 there was a rapid increase in the fiscal      V-       banking,     crawling
 2002:1                                    and current account deficits in Colombia, which were mainly financed with capital inflows. This led, in turn,       shaped   currency,    band
                                           to a sharp increase in both private and public external debt as well as an overvaluation of the peso. The fall in            stock
                                           global liquidity as a result of the Asian and Russian crises (see text) thus found Colombia in a very vulnerable             market
                                           position. In 1999, the country fell into its first recession since the Great Depression. The economy shrank by
                                           4.5% with unemployment reaching more than 20%. The peso was devalued several times and finally let float.
                                           Colombia also received from the IMF a USD 2.7 bn guarantee (extended funds facility), in exchange for a
                                           government commitment to budget discipline and structural reforms.
 2008:4-      4             -1.1 %         Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                                 V-                    crawling
 2009:3                                                                                                                                                        shaped                band
Mexico
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                 Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                             GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                     and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                         Background                                                         crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                   Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                             shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                 crises
           quarters)
 1982:2-       11           -4.3 %         Mexican’s debt crisis. Fueled by the oil booms of the 1970s, Mexican GDP increased by an annual rate of 7%          W-       debt,        floating
 1984:4                                    between 1973 and 1981. During the same period, central government spending increased by 11% annually and            shaped   currency,
                                           the resulting fiscal deficit was financed by “petro-dollars.” The GDP and spending booms came to a screeching                inflation,
                                           halt in the early 1980s with Volcker’s interest rate increases, the worldwide recession, and fall in the price of            banking,
                                           oil. At the same time, domestic commercial banks began to shorten repayment periods and increase lending                     stock
                                           rates. By mid-1982 Mexico found itself unable to service its spiraling external debt and defaulted on an 80                  market
                                           billion dollar debt. Other countries quickly followed suit. Ultimately, sixteen Latin American countries
                                           rescheduled their debts, as well as eleven emerging markets. As result, there was a sudden stop that plunged
                                           many Latin American countries into deep and long lasting recessions.
 1986:1-      12            -4.2 %         Aftermath of Mexican’s debt crisis.                                                                                          debt,        floating
 1988:4                                                                                                                                                                 currency,
                                                                                                                                                                        inflation
 1995:1-      9             -9.8 %         Tequila crisis (see text).                                                                                          V-       currency,    floating
 1997:1                                                                                                                                                        shaped   inflation,
                                                                                                                                                                        banking,
                                                                                                                                                                        stock
                                                                                                                                                                        market
 2001:2-      4             -2.7 %         US recession. The United States experienced an economic slowdown in the early 2000s, with the annual growth         V-                    floating
 2002:1                                    rate falling from about 4.3% in the second half of the 1990s to 1.1% in 2001. Mexico’s trade integration with       shaped
                                           the U.S. (at the time 82% of Mexican exports were destined to the U.S.) and the importance of remittances from
                                           the U.S. hurt Mexico’s economic growth in 2001-2002.
 2008:4-      8             -7.9 %         Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                                 V-       currency,    floating
 2010:3                                                                                                                                                        shaped   stock
                                                                                                                                                                        market
Peru
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                  Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                              GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                      and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                          Background                                                         crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                    Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                              shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                  crises
           quarters)
 1982:2-       16          -12.2 %         Peru’s debt crisis. During the second (non-consecutive) term of President Belaúnde Terry (1980-1985), the            W-       debt,        floating
 1986:1                                    country faced several serious economic problems: a fall in the price of metals (which represented about a third      shaped   currency,
                                           of Peru’s GDP), economic dislocations inherited from the military “junta” that left power in 1980, the                        inflation,
                                           deteriorating international environment that preceded the Latin American debt crisis, and several natural                     banking,
                                           disasters that devastated Peru’s economy. The end of external financing following the 1982 Mexican default                    stock
                                           increased pressures for macroeconomic adjustment, and led to currency depreciation and inflation. Inflation                   market
                                           increased from 59% in 1980, to 111% in 1983 and 163% in 1985.
 1988:1-      36           -34.4 %         Peru’s hyperinflation. Elected in 1985, President Alan Garcia promised economic reforms aimed at tackling            L-       debt,        Floating
 1996:4                                    high inflation, external imbalances, and the debt burden in the context of a heterodox economic program. In          shaped   currency,    (until 1993)
                                           particular, he imposed price controls and announced that debt service would be limited to 10% of export                       inflation,   and crawling
                                           earnings. While public spending was relatively contained, the primary fiscal deficit grew to 6.5 percent in 1987              banking,     band (from
                                           due to a reduction in VAT rates from 13.8% in 1984 to 6% in 1987 in an attempt to boost private consumption.                  stock        1994 to
                                           While the first two years of García's administration showed some signs of economic growth and reduced                         market       1996)
                                           inflation, the fiscal and external front problems, coupled with severe price distortions, led to a collapse of the
                                           economy with annual inflation reaching 400% in 1990. President Fujimori, who took over in 1990, enacted
                                           wide-ranging reforms that stopped inflation and eventually led to a resumption of economic growth.
 2000:3-      4             -3.3 %         Political instability. The second round of general elections that finished in June 2001 put an end to two years      V-                    crawling
 2001:2                                    of political uncertainty after Fujimori attempted to govern for a third term.                                        shaped                band
 2009:1-      2             -1.3 %         Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                                  V-                    crawling
 2009:2                                                                                                                                                         shaped                band



Uruguay
           Duration
                       Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                  Reinhart
            of GDP                                                                                                                                              GDP
                          crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                      and         Exchange
 Period      crisis                                                                          Background                                                         crisis
                        reduction from                                                                                                                                    Rogoff      rate regime
               (in                                                                                                                                              shape
                        start to trough)                                                                                                                                  crises
           quarters)
 1981:4-       23          -20.6 %         Uruguay’s debt crisis and end of “tablita.” In the early 1980s, Uruguay was hit by the Latin American debt           L-       debt,        floating
 1987:2                                    crisis (see text), which worsened Uruguay’s balance of payments and external debt problems. A large fiscal           shaped   currency,
                                           deficit coupled with a sudden loss of foreign reserves led to the abandonment of the so-called “tablita” in                   inflation,
                                           November 1982. The “tablita” (a pre-announced and declining path for the nominal interest rate) had been                      banking,
                                           implemented in November 1978 as a mechanism to gradually reduce inflation.                                                    stock
                                                                                                                                                                         market
 1999:1-      28            -22 %          Brazil’s devaluation and Argentina’s default. The Uruguayan economy was hit by the Brazilian devaluation             U-       currency,    crawling
 2005:4                                    in January 1999 (with Brazil accounting for about 30 percent of exports) and the Argentinean default in              shaped   banking,     band
                                           December 2001 (see text). The latter triggered a massive run on the domestic banking system. By the end of                    stock
                                           2002, the Uruguayan banking system had lost 46 percent of total deposits. International reserves at the Central               market
                                           Bank had fallen by 80 percent by the end of July, which prompted the authorities to allow the peso to float
                                           freely. In May 2003, the government completed a 5.4 billion dollar rescheduling of foreign-currency
                                           denominated debt.
 2009:1-      2              -2 %          Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                                  V-                    crawling
 2009:2                                                                                                                                                         shaped                band
Venezuela
            Duration
                         Intensity of GDP                                                                                                                                   Reinhart
             of GDP                                                                                                                                                GDP
                            crisis (GDP                                                                                                                                       and         Exchange
 Period       crisis                                                                            Background                                                         crisis
                          reduction from                                                                                                                                     Rogoff      rate regime
                (in                                                                                                                                                shape
                          start to trough)                                                                                                                                   crises
            quarters)
 1999:1-         4             -2.7 %         In 1999 the price of oil reached its lowest level in the last 22 years. By then, the production of oil represented   V-       inflation,   crawling
 1999:4                                       about one-third of Venezuela’s GDP, half of public revenues, and 75 percent of exports. This unfavorable             shaped   stock        band
                                              external environment, was coupled with a reduction in the production of oil (in agreement with OPEC), a                       market
                                              public spending contraction due to lack of fiscal financing, and the political uncertainty associated with the
                                              change of administration and the draft of a new constitution.
 2002:1-        10            -28.7 %         Failed military coup and strike in PDVSA. In 2002-2003, Venezuela’s economy contracted significantly as              U-       debt,        crawling
 2004:2                                       a result of a failed military coup to overthrow Chavez and a two-month strike by the state-run oil company           shaped   currency,    band
                                              PDVSA, which resulted in the dismissal of seventeen thousand PDVSA employees. The economy recovered                           inflation
                                              afterwards helped by rising oil prices (Alvarez and Hanson, 2009).
 2009:1-         11                -6.1 %     Global financial crisis (see text).                                                                             U-         currency,    peg
 2011:3                                                                                                                                                       shaped     inflation
Notes: Reinhart and Rogoff crises and exchange rate regime are taken from Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). The GDP crisis shape is a classification carried out by the authors and based on visual
inspection of the GDP profile during a GDP crisis. A V-shaped GDP crisis is one in which output declines sharply with a well-defined trough and vigorous recover. A U-shaped GDP crisis is longer
than a V-shaped one and has a less well-defined trough. A W-shaped GDP crisis shows a “down up down up” pattern. An L-shaped GDP crisis shows output declining very sharply and then taking a
long time (if ever) to return to its pre-crisis level.
     Table 1. Latin American GDP crises: Basic stylized facts and sample periods
                                                                                                                Intensity
                                                                                           Duration
              Country                  Sample period        Number        Frequency                         (GDP reduction
                                                                                         (in quarters)
                                                                                                          from start to trough)
Argentina                              1970:1 - 2013:1          7                0.49            12                     9.6
Brazil                                 1980:1 - 2013:1          7                0.40            7                      4.0
Chile                                  1980:1 - 2013:1          3                0.26            11                     8.9
Colombia                               1977:1 - 2013:1          2                0.13            10                     4.0
Mexico                                 1981:1 - 2013:1          5                0.35            9                      5.8
Peru                                   1979:1 - 2013:1          4                0.44            15                 12.8
Uruguay                                1979:1 - 2013:1          3                0.40            18                 14.8
Venezuela                              1998:1 - 2013:1          3                0.44            8                  12.5
Region (total × or average †)                                 34×            0.36 †          11 †                   8.6 †




    Table 2. Latin America GDP crises: Basic stylized facts, before and after 1998
                                                                                               Intensity
                                                                   Duration
                                     Frequency                                            (GDP reduction from
               Country                                           (in quarters)
                                                                                            start to trough)
                            Before 1998    After 1998     Before 1998    After 1998     Before 1998      After 1998
         Argentina              0.51          0.44            11             14              9              11
         Brazil                 0.57          0.18            10                 3           5               3
         Chile                  0.35          0.16            24                 5          20               3
         Colombia                0            0.31                           10                              4
         Mexico                 0.50          0.20            11                 6           6               5
         Peru                   0.72          0.10            26                 3          23               2
         Uruguay                0.32          0.49            23             15             21              12
         Venezuela                            0.44                               8                          13
         Region average         0.42          0.29           17.5                8          14              6.6




            Table 3. Latin America: Country cyclicality of fiscal and monetary
                     policies during GDP crises, before and after 1998
                         Cyclicality of spending policy     Cyclicality of tax policy   Cyclicality of monetary policy
            Country
                          Before 1998      After 1998      Before 1998 After 1998        Before 1998       After 1998
     Argentina               0.13             0.76             0.65          0.40           -0.55                -0.56
     Brazil                  0.64            -0.31             0.01          -0.30          -0.17                0.08
     Chile                   0.58            -0.23            -0.06          0.21           0.08                 0.65
     Colombia                                 0.15                           0.04                                0.35
     Mexico                  0.47            -0.50            -0.80          0.10           -0.62                -0.22
     Peru                    0.60             0.77            -0.63          0.20           0.11                 0.75
     Uruguay                 0.94             0.72            -0.77          -0.08          -0.52                -0.58
     Venezuela                                0.81                                                               -0.06
     Region average          0.56            0.27             -0.27          0.08           -0.28                0.05
Table 4. Latin America: Components of readiness index by country, before and after 1998
                               Fiscal readiness index          Monetary readiness index         Readiness index
           Country              (maximum value 20)               (maximum value 20)           (maximum value 40)

                          Before 1998           After 1998     Before 1998 After 1998     Before 1998       After 1998
       Argentina                10.0               7.1                7.2       12.4          17.3               19.5
       Brazil                   9.7               10.7                7.1        7.9          16.9               18.6
       Chile                    9.4               13.9             11.3         11.7          20.7               25.6
       Colombia                                   13.9                           8.2                             22.1
       Mexico                   5.1               12.7                6.3        7.6          11.4               20.2
       Peru                     5.3                8.8                9.9       11.9          15.2               20.7
       Uruguay                  12.1               8.6                9.7       10.2          21.8               18.8
       Venezuela                                  12.6                          13.7                             26.3
       Region average           8.6               11.1                8.6       10.4          17.2            21.5




                       Table 5. Eurozone GDP crisis: Basic stylized facts,
                        cyclicality of fiscal policies, and fiscal readiness
                                                              Intensity        Cyclicality of Fiscal readiness
                                         Duration
                     Country                               (GDP reduction       spending      index (maximum
                                       (in quarters)
                                                         from start to trough)    policy          value 20)
              Austria                       11                    6               -0.47              15.7
              Belgium                       8                     3               -0.77              15.1
              France                   19 (ongoing)               4               -0.29              14.3
              Germany                       10                    7               -0.90              15.3
              Greece                   19 (ongoing)              24               0.74               13.1
              Ireland                  20 (ongoing)              10               0.28               9.6
              Italy                    20 (ongoing)               9               0.12               14.9
              Nehterlands              18 (ongoing)               5               -0.76              14.1
              Portugal                 19 (ongoing)               9               0.42               13.7
              Spain                    18 (ongoing)               7               -0.40              16.4
              Region average               16.2                  8.4              -0.20           14.22
Figure 1. Latin America: Evolution of policy interest rates

      Panel A. Argentina, Mexico, Uruguay, Venezuela




           Panel B. Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru
Figure 2. Latin America: Cyclicality of fiscal and monetary policies and duration and intensity of
                                            GDP crises

      Panel A. Cyclicality of spending policy during   Panel B. Cyclicality of spending policy during
         GDP crises and duration of GDP crises            GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                      (in quarters)                        (GDP reduction from start to trough)




      Panel C. Cyclicality of taxation policy during   Panel D. Cyclicality of taxation policy during
         GDP crises and duration of GDP crises           GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                      (in quarters)                        (GDP reduction from start to trough)




      Panel E. Cyclicality of monetary policy during   Panel F. Cyclicality of monetary policy during
         GDP crises and duration of GDP crises            GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                       (in quarters)                       (GDP reduction from start to trough)
           Figure 3. Causality chart


                                 R1
External          GDP                   Policy
 shock            crisis               response




                  Duration              R2
                      &
                  Intensity
                                              Figure 4. LA synchronization of GDP crisis and external factors

                                                                       Panel A. Federal funds rate
                                                                                                                                                 16
                                        100                                        Share = 18.9*** + 3.9 *** x Fed funds rate
                                                                                   R² = 0.20
                                                                                                                                                 14
   Share of countries with GDP crisis


                                         80                                                                                                      12


                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                      Fed funds rate
                                         60

                                                                                                                                                 8


                                         40                                                                                                      6


                                                                                                                                                 4
                                         20
                                                                                                                                                 2


                                          0                                                                                                      0
                                              1982:1
                                              1983:1
                                              1984:1
                                              1985:1
                                              1986:1
                                              1987:1
                                              1988:1
                                              1989:1
                                              1990:1
                                              1991:1
                                              1992:1
                                              1993:1
                                              1994:1
                                              1995:1
                                              1996:1
                                              1997:1
                                              1998:1
                                              1999:1
                                              2000:1
                                              2001:1
                                              2002:1
                                              2003:1
                                              2004:1
                                              2005:1
                                              2006:1
                                              2007:1
                                              2008:1
                                              2009:1
                                              2010:1
                                              2011:1
                                              2012:1
                                              2013:1
                                                          Share of countries with GDP crisis                                Fed funds rate


                                                                       Panel B. Commodity index
                                                                                                                                             300
                                        100              Share = 61.9*** - 0.27 *** x commodity index
                                                         R² = 0.28

                                                                                                                                             250
   Share of countries with GDP crisis




                                         80

                                                                                                                                             200

                                         60                                                                                                           Commodity index
                                                                                                                                             150


                                         40
                                                                                                                                             100



                                         20
                                                                                                                                             50




                                          0                                                                                                  0
                                              1982:1
                                              1983:1
                                              1984:1
                                              1985:1
                                              1986:1
                                              1987:1
                                              1988:1
                                              1989:1
                                              1990:1
                                              1991:1
                                              1992:1
                                              1993:1
                                              1994:1
                                              1995:1
                                              1996:1
                                              1997:1
                                              1998:1
                                              1999:1
                                              2000:1
                                              2001:1
                                              2002:1
                                              2003:1
                                              2004:1
                                              2005:1
                                              2006:1
                                              2007:1
                                              2008:1
                                              2009:1
                                              2010:1
                                              2011:1
                                              2012:1
                                              2013:1




                                                         Share of countries with GDP crisis                             Commodity index

Note: If we include both determinants the R2 increase to 0.32. Moreover of we allowed them to interact the R2 increase to 0.42
             Figure 5. Latin America: Cyclicality of policies and readiness indices

Panel A. Cyclicality of spending policy                           Panel B. Cyclicality of taxation policy
      and fiscal readiness index                                        and fiscal readiness index




                                 Panel C. Cyclicality of monetary policy
                                     and monetary readiness index
          Figure 6. Latin America: Predicted cyclicality of fiscal and monetary policy
                           and duration and intensity of GDP crises

 Panel A. Predicted cyclicality of spending policy                          Panel B. Predicted cyclicality of spending policy
  during GDP crises and duration of GDP crises                               during GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                   (in quarters)                                                  (GDP reduction from start to trough)




  Panel C. Predicted cyclicality of taxation policy                         Panel D. Predicted cyclicality of taxation policy
   during GDP crises and duration of GDP crises                              during GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                   (in quarters)                                                  (GDP reduction from start to trough)




 Panel E. Predicted cyclicality of monetary policy                         Panel F. Predicted cyclicality of monetary policy
  during GDP crises and duration of GDP crises                              during GDP crises and intensity of GDP crises
                   (in quarters)                                                 (GDP reduction from start to trough)




Note: † means that the coefficient is different from zero at 15% significance.
                 Figure 7. Eurozone: Use of monetary and reserve requirement policies

                 7



                 6



                 5



                 4
      i and RR




                 3



                 2



                 1



                 0
                     1999:1


                              2000:1


                                       2001:1


                                                2002:1


                                                         2003:1


                                                                  2004:1


                                                                           2005:1


                                                                                    2006:1


                                                                                               2007:1


                                                                                                             2008:1


                                                                                                                      2009:1


                                                                                                                               2010:1


                                                                                                                                        2011:1


                                                                                                                                                 2012:1


                                                                                                                                                          2013:1
                                                                                i                       RR




   Note: Shaded area indicates GDP crisis for the majority of Euro countries analyzed.




Figure 8. Eurozone: Relationship between fiscal cyclicality and duration and intensity

Panel A. Cyclicality of spending policy during                                               Panel B. Cyclicality of spending policy during
   GDP crisis and duration of GDP crisis                                                        GDP crisis and intensity of GDP crisis
                (in quarters)                                                                    (GDP reduction from start to trough)
      Figure 9. Eurozone: Relationship between spending cyclicality and fiscal readiness index




                           Figure 10. Eurozone: Relationship between duration
                               and intensity and predicted spending policy

Panel A. Predicted cyclicality of spending policy during   Panel B. Predicted cyclicality of spending policy during
        GDP crisis and duration of GDP crisis              GDP crisis and intensity of GDP crisis (GDP reduction
                     (in quarters)                                          from start to trough)
