NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCING INNOVATION
William R. Kerr
Ramana Nanda
Working Paper 20676
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20676

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to wkerr@hbs.edu and rnanda@hbs.edu. This review is
prepared for the Annual Review of Financial Economics. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by William R. Kerr and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Financing Innovation
William R. Kerr and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 20676
November 2014
JEL No. G21,G24,L26,M13,O31,O32
ABSTRACT
We review the recent literature on the financing of innovation, inclusive of large companies and new
startups. This research strand has been very active over the past five years, generating important new
findings, questioning some long-held beliefs, and creating its own puzzles. Our review outlines the
growing body of work that documents a role for debt financing related to innovation. We highlight
the new literature on learning and experimentation across multi-stage innovation projects and how
this impacts optimal financing design. We further highlight the strong interaction between financing
choices for innovation and changing external conditions, especially reduced experimentation costs.

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

1. Introduction
There is growing consensus that well-functioning financial markets play a central role in driving
economic growth through their ability to spur technological innovation (King and Levine, 1993a,b;
Levine, 1997; Brown, Fazzari and Petersen, 2009; Hsu, Tian and Xu, 2014; Comin and Nanda, 2014). One
way that financial markets are believed to play this role is by allocating capital to firms with the greatest
potential to implement new processes and to commercialize new technologies. This idea, of capital
markets funding the most promising projects, harks back to at least Schumpeter’s (1934) notion of
“creative destruction” and has been actively studied over the last several decades in the context of
financing constraints for entrepreneurs (Scherer, 1984; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; Beck et al., 2008) and
the impact of institutional reforms that help to make financial markets more efficient (Jayaratne and
Strahan, 1996; Bertrand, Schoar and Thesmar, 2007; Black and Strahan, 2002; Cetorelli and Strahan,
2006; Kerr and Nanda, 2009).
Another channel through which financial markets might impact technological development, however, is
by financing innovation itself (Hall and Lerner, 2010). That is, while much of the academic literature in
finance has focused on the implementation and commercialization of promising ideas, there has been
far less focus on whether and how financial markets might actively shape the nature of R&D that is
undertaken, and how this may impact technological innovation and growth through the shaping of the
ideas that are developed across firms (Akcigit and Kerr, 2012).
In this chapter, we review a nascent but growing literature that has begun to address this gap in the role
that capital markets and financial intermediaries play in impacting firm-level innovation.1 In Section 2,
we elaborate on theoretical contributions regarding why financing R&D projects might be distinct from
financing other types of projects and the channels through which financial intermediaries and capital
markets can impact innovation. Section 3 discusses the empirical work on financing innovation in
mature firms, in particular the literature on how ownership and capital structure impact the amount and
nature of innovation undertaken by firms. Section 4 focuses on innovation in startups and the growing
literature on the effect that multi-stage financing has on innovation in young firms. Finally, Section 5
discusses the implications of this research and outlines promising areas of future work.
Our review skips over several important aspects of the phenomenon that Hall and Lerner (2010) cover in
substantial depth. These topics include an extensive depiction of how R&D differs from normal
investment, the tax considerations associated with R&D and the role of R&D tax credits in stimulating
innovation, the large literature on cash flow sensitivities for R&D and associated interpretations,
detailed depictions of the venture capital (VC) cycle, and others. We refer readers to this earlier review
for these complementary pieces. We instead concentrate on very salient discussion points in the current
1

We focus this review on the financing of innovation and thus skip many other important factors for innovation:
for example, the role of intellectual property (Williams, 2013), demand-side factors such as the size of the market
(Acemoglu and Linn, 2004), the supply of talented scientists and engineers (Kerr and Lincoln, 2010), and spillovers
across firms (Bloom, Schankerman and Van Reenen, 2013). Nicholas (2011) provides a recent review. In addition,
we leave out the literature on the impact of technological revolutions on financial markets (Pastor and Veronesi,
2009), which is related to asset pricing rather than the real effects of corporate financing choices.

literature, and we favor outlining recent papers (while still mentioning many classics).2 Our
understanding of the financing of innovation has grown a lot in five years, but our review highlights that
the recent literature challenges some long-standing wisdom and creates new puzzles, suggesting this
area of work will continue strongly for some time into the future.
Looking forward through this review, we highlight several recent themes for the financing of innovation
that cut across section boundaries. First, there is a growing body of work that documents a role for debt
financing related to innovation. While somewhat unexpected given the older literature and the
properties of debt/collateral, we describe how the settings in which debt is used for innovation are
reasonable and perhaps more prevalent than anticipated. In parallel, the recent literature emphasizes
some limits of equity markets for financing innovation, especially radical forms, due to short-term
pressures, imperfect monitoring, and similar. This recent work suggests that an important area for
continued research is to go back to the basics of banks and their connection to innovation.
Second, we highlight the new literature on “learning” across multi-stage financings, which has been a
very active area of research. Most of the early literature focuses on agency issues in financial contracts,
and a surge of research now considers the trade-offs associated with stimulating innovation when
agents are experimenting and adapting their work across periods. This line of research is very important
for developing greater insights into how financing can impact the forms of innovation (e.g., exploration
vs. exploitation) rather than just a generic R&D. We describe the variety of theoretical and empirical
results that are assembled, attempt to place some structure around the work, and also note the need
for future research to continue clarifying the critical dimensions and conflicts (e.g., the distinctions
between optimal financing for single innovations vs. blanket policies that must apply to many firms).
Finally, we highlight the strong interaction between financing choices for innovation and changing
external conditions. This, of course, has a long academic history dating back to depictions of the
differing external financing needs of industries, the impact that vibrant public equity markets can have
for innovation, etc. We draw out in this review the important impact that the falling cost of
experimentation can have on financing innovation (e.g., the rise of angel investments and accelerators,
greater use of multi-stage contracts). Recent research also describes the limits to this model for
financing innovation—for example, the financing or rollover risks that can occur with extensive capital
needs if one must return repeatedly to financing markets. We also describe the connection between
these financing conditions/models and the adjustment costs of innovation. Some models of innovation
and its financing smooth bumps as much as possible (e.g., to protect tacit knowledge within the firm),
while others engage in much more rapid adjustment. Looking forward, we anticipate future work being
able to articulate better where each framework applies and how they fit together.

2

Similarly, Lerner and Seru (2014) provide insights for finance scholars on the appropriate empirical use of patent
data, which we do not consider in this review.

2. Financing Innovation: Theory
In a frictionless world, where all positive NPV projects are financed, one should not expect the sources
of finance to impact the nature of innovation being conducted by a firm. At least four features of the
R&D process, however, introduce important frictions, and these frictions can lead to financing
constraints for firms aiming to undertake R&D, as well as impact how the sources of capital have a
bearing on the outcome of the innovation process.
First, the innovation process is inherently uncertain. Knight (1921) stresses that uncertainty is
fundamentally different from risk. Not only does one not know the probabilities associated with
outcomes, but even the forms of the potential outcomes are not clear. For example, looking forward
from today, at what rate, if at all, will electric cars replace traditional automobiles and how will the
supporting architecture for battery recharging be designed? What will be the impact of nascent
augmented reality techniques for how humans interact? Which, if any, of the several ideas to cure
cancer are most promising? From a financier’s perspective, this makes it significantly harder to evaluate
potential innovative projects that may require funding, particularly since often the only way to learn
about the potential of a particular approach is to invest in it. This raises significant possibilities of
financing constraints arising in the funding of innovation. In addition, the payoffs associated with making
an investment and the way it is structured (e.g., debt vs. equity) can have important effects on what is
financed and how financiers might shape the direction of R&D and innovation.
Second, the challenge of making investments in the face of extreme uncertainty is compounded by the
fact that the return from the innovation process is extremely skewed (e.g., Scherer and Harhoff, 2000).
In fact, there is some evidence that the distribution of profits from innovation may hold characteristics
of a Pareto distribution, where the variance does not exist or converge in large samples. Standard ways
of evaluating projects are therefore extremely difficult, and it often requires specialized intermediaries
to take on such investments, particularly those backing young, startup firms. These intermediaries make
judgments about whether to fund projects based on their own heuristics. Furthermore, their
backgrounds and incentives may lead them to interpret and act on information differently, leading
financiers to have a first-order effect on innovation (e.g., Kerr, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf, 2014).
Third, although often times neither the innovator nor the financier knows the true potential of the
project, the innovator may still know more about the project than the financier. It is often impossible to
accurately measure inputs into the innovation process (e.g., Holmstrom, 1989), and one cannot write
complete, state-contingent contracts when one does not even know what the output might be (e.g.,
Grossman and Hart, 1986; Hart and Moore, 1990; Aghion and Tirole, 1994). These conditions allow for
agency costs to arise in the financing of innovation that can be significantly greater than those present in
standard settings between financiers and entrepreneurs.
Finally, firms engaged in innovation have a high percentage of intangible assets, where knowledge is
embedded in the human capital of the firm’s employees. This key resource is lost if employees leave or
are laid off (e.g., Hall and Lerner, 2010). Firms therefore tend to smooth R&D spending over time, in

order to avoid having to lay off their research scientists and knowledge workers, leading R&D spending
at the firm-level to behave as if it has high adjustment costs (e.g., Hall, Griliches and Hausman, 1986).
These particular attributes of R&D have an important bearing on how the financial sector impacts
innovation that is undertaken by firms.

3. Finance and Innovation in Mature Firms: Capital Structure, Governance
and Agency costs
3.1 Financing constraints and innovation
Much of the early literature on finance and innovation sought to document the particular challenges
associated with financing R&D and to quantify the degree to which innovative firms faced financing
constraints (e.g., Brown, Martinsson and Petersen, 2012). An important paper in this field is Brown,
Fazzari and Petersen (2009), who provide evidence that young, high-tech, publicly-traded firms finance
their R&D investment almost entirely through internal cash flow and external equity markets. They
argue that “information problems, skewed and highly uncertain returns, and lack of collateral value
likely make debt a poor substitute for equity finance” (p. 152). Therefore, to the extent that these firms
face financing constraints, exogenous changes in the supply of external equity should have significant
effects on R&D. Brown, Fazzari and Petersen (2009) argue that the US experienced a finance-driven
cycle in R&D from 1994 to 2004, when privately financed R&D to GDP rose from 1.4% in 1994 to 1.9% in
2004 and was driven by the young, publicly-traded firms in seven high-tech industries that benefited
from the stock market boom in that period. They argue that their estimates can explain 75% of the
aggregate R&D boom and subsequent decline.
Acharya and Xu (2013) find evidence that is consistent with the importance of public equity markets to
finance innovation. They find that publicly-traded firms in industries that are more dependent on
external finance generate more patents that are of higher quality and novelty than privately-held firms,
but that this difference does not exist for firms in industries that are less dependent on external finance.
Nanda and Nicholas (2014) examine firms during the Great Depression as a way to understand the
effects of financing constraints on innovative activity. They are motivated by the fact that the large
productivity drop from 1929 to 1933 was contemporaneous with and followed by enormous
technological surges in industries like chemicals, television and radio, and the automobile (e.g., Raff and
Trajtenberg, 1997). In fact, Field (2003) shows that the 1930s was the most innovative decade of the
twentieth century. If finance is so central to innovation, how can it be reconciled that innovation
progressed so well in a period that experienced one of the largest shocks to the banking system, in
addition to disrupting the public debt and equity markets?
Nanda and Nicholas (2014) match historical patents to firms in this time period and thereby trace
innovation being undertaken in different counties. Since state-level regulations implied that bank
financing tended to be local at this time, their empirical work can exploit variation in the intensity of the

bank suspensions across counties to examine the effect it had on firm-level innovation. They find that
the sharp drop in the availability of external bank finance not only impacted the rate of innovation, but
changed the trajectory of innovation away from more experimental, radical innovations to incremental
and sustaining innovations. That is, they are able to trace the effect of the disruption in the availability
of capital to real effects in terms of innovation. These effects were sharp, but firms recovered quickly.
Importantly, it was only the firms in capital-intensive industries located in the worst-hit counties that
were adversely affected, which might explain why the overall effects were not as large.
An attractive feature of their setting is that they are able to look at the cumulative citations to
innovations undertaken in the 1930s over the period 1947-2008 and therefore examine the long-run
effects of this sharp disruption in the availability of external finance. A startling fact is that the
cumulative citations to firms innovating in the 1930s and located in counties with greater levels of bank
distress continue to be lower than those undertaken by firms located in counties facing less bank
distress. Although the effect on patenting rates and trajectory was short-lived, the consequences are
long standing, suggesting that financing constraints can have first-order and persistent effects on
cumulative innovation undertaken in the economy.

3.2 The (surprising) importance of bank finance in innovation
Although early research on capital structure and innovation pointed strongly against the role of banks
(and debt) in financing innovation, as discussed extensively in Hall and Lerner (2010), subsequent work
has been more nuanced. Similar to Nanda and Nicholas (2014), there seems to be growing evidence that
bank finance is an important source of capital, even for firms engaged in innovation. Moreover, changes
in the availability or cost of bank finance have been shown to impact both the rate and nature of
innovation by firms. There is also growing evidence that the public equity markets have their own forms
of agency costs and that resulting managerial myopia (e.g., Stein, 1988) can stifle innovation.
Looking first at bank financing, Mann (2014) shows that debt financing is not only common for
innovating firms, but that furthermore, patents are often used as collateral in such instances. He notes
that 16% of the aggregate stock of patents at the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has been
pledged as collateral at some point, and that companies with patent-backed debt have performed over
40% of USPTO patenting since 2003. He documents that the amount of credit is economically large and
seems to directly finance research. He also documents that lenders are frequently banks, but may also
be venture debt or other non-bank lenders. Similarly Hochberg, Serrano and Ziedonis (2014) find
patents are used as collateral for venture debt, and Chava, Chong and Nanda (2012) find firms with
significant patent activity and higher-quality patents receive cheaper bank loans than peers.
Robb and Robinson (2014) show that external bank finance is an important source of startup capital,
even for high-potential startups that might be engaged in innovation and who don’t have any collateral–
tangible or intangible–to pledge. Consistent with this, Chava et al. (2013) find that the US banking
deregulations over the 1980s had a measurable effect on innovation, particularly by small firms who
would have been more likely to be financially constrained. They find that innovation fell following the

intra-state banking deregulation, but went up following the inter-state deregulations. Interestingly, they
also find that the deregulations impacted the nature of innovation undertaken, in that the increases in
innovation following the inter-state deregulations were also associated with a greater variance in the
quality of the patents, as proxied by their subsequent citations. Thus the increased competition seems
to have facilitated a greater level of higher-risk innovations among smaller firms. Similarly, Cornaggia et
al. (2013) find that innovation by small private firms, who depend more on bank finance for capital than
publicly-traded firms, increased following the inter-state deregulations, while innovation fell among
publicly-traded firms. Cornaggia et al. (2013) argue that this latter effect is driven by an increased
negotiating ability of innovative targets, which are less likely to be acquired and instead continue on as
standalone firms due to the greater ability to access external finance.
This growing body of work suggests than an important and underexplored area is the ways in which
banks lend and monitor the financing of innovation. This is not only an important area to study, but it
has potentially deep implications for theory and extensive literature that suggests that the linkage
should be quite different.

3.3 Costs associated with being public: Managerial career concerns and other agency costs
There is growing evidence that agency costs associated with being a publicly-traded firm can adversely
impact the rate and trajectory of innovation. This deterioration is despite equity having several
properties that are attractive from a governance perspective (e.g., aligning the interests of investors and
innovators to take on risky projects) and sufficient market depth to alleviate financing constraints.
Bernstein (2014) provides an important contribution by documenting the causal effect of going public on
firm-level innovation. He exploits the fact that firms that file to go public are more likely to pull back
from their planned public offering if there are sharp declines in the public markets during their bookbuilding phase. He therefore uses NASDAQ fluctuations in the two months following an IPO filing as an
instrument for the final going-public decision. Using this identification strategy within his sample of
private firms filing to go public, Bernstein (2014) finds that the private-to-public transition does not
impact a firm’s rate of innovation, but it does reduce the novelty of innovations produced as proxied by
patent citations by 40%. Extensions suggest that this latter drop is due to a departure of productive
scientists engaged in innovation and by the shift in the type of R&D being undertaken by scientists who
remain in the publicly-traded firms. This fascinating result suggests that the governance associated with
the public markets has a causal effect on the nature of innovation undertaken within transitioning firms.
Bernstein argues that his findings are driven by the agency costs between shareholders and managers
that are introduced when firms go public. For example, Holmstrom (1982) develops a model where
managers have private benefit of control and need to decide whether or not to innovate. In his model,
innovation is highly uncertain and may go wrong for purely stochastic reasons, leading shareholders to
mistakenly attribute a failure to managerial skill, potentially costing the manager’s job. Managers are
therefore concerned about the impact of innovation on investors’ perception of their ability, leading
them to under-invest in innovation relative to the optimum. This is particularly true when a firm goes

public and faces a diverse shareholder base that has lower monitoring incentives. Similarly, Stein (1988)
develops a model of managerial myopia in which shareholders cannot properly evaluate investments in
long-term innovative projects due to asymmetric information, and therefore markets tend to
undervalue the stocks of companies engaged in such projects. In Stein’s model, this undervaluing of
innovative companies makes it easier for hostile acquirers to obtain control of the company. To protect
current shareholders against such expropriation, therefore, managers rationally invest less in innovative
projects that are difficult for the market to understand, and more in routine projects with quicker and
more-certain returns. This leads to a decline in innovation by publicly traded firms.
Bernstein’s work is related to other recent research that documents the extent to which these agency
costs are important among publicly-traded firms and how they impact innovation. For example, Aghion,
Van Reenen and Zingales (2013) look at the effect of institutional ownership on innovation. They find
that greater institutional ownership leads to greater innovation, and that the channel is consistent with
models of managerial career concerns (e.g., Edmans, 2009; Holmstrom, 1982), where increased
institutional ownership raises the incentives to monitor CEOs and thereby insulates them from being
fired for bad outcomes unrelated to their management decisions. They find, for example, that CEOs are
less likely to be fired in the face of profit downturns when institutional ownership is higher. Similarly,
Francis and Smith (1995) find a positive correlation between ownership concentration and R&D
expenditure, and Bushee (1998) finds that companies with greater institutional ownership are less likely
to cut R&D following poor earnings performance. He and Tian (2013) document that increased analyst
coverage leads to less innovation by publicly-traded firms, and argue that this is driven by the pressure
that CEOs face to meet short-term goals. Lerner, Sorensen and Stromberg (2011) show that patents by
portfolio firms of private equity investors are of higher quality and are more concentrated in the most
important areas of companies' innovative portfolios. They argue that the private equity investors boost
innovation and discipline among their portfolio companies by relieving managers of the short-term
pressure of displaced shareholders.
Empirical work looking at managerial myopia in the context of anti-takeover provisions along the Stein
(1988) model has also found that it has an effect on innovation, although the findings are more
contradictory. For example, Atanassov (2013) finds that innovation falls in states that pass anti-takeover
laws and argues that this is because the negative effects of managerial entrenchment when it is harder
to take over a worse-performing firm seem to outweigh any benefits associated with a fall in managerial
myopia. On the other hand, Chemmanur and Tian (2012) find that innovation is higher in firms with
more anti-takeover defenses. In addition, Fang, Tian and Tice (2013) argue that increased stock liquidity
hurts innovation, in part because firms face a greater threat of hostile takeovers. We discuss these
results further in Section 3.5 below.
To summarize, while the literature on capital structure and its effect on governance and agency costs is
somewhat contested, there are some broad themes that consistently emerge from this body of work.
First, bank finance appears important for innovation, but it is likely to be better suited to financing larger
and mature companies, where investment is less risky for banks due to the firm’s sufficient cash flow
from operations and collateral options from fixed assets and patents. This would be in line with Hall and
Lerner’s (2010) depiction of the lower cost of bank financing compared to financing out of retained

earnings. Second, while equity investors might be more willing to finance risky innovation, public equity
markets impose an important set of agency costs on managers that can impact the rate and nature of
innovation. Finally, the costs and benefits associated with being private vs. public are heterogeneous
across firms, and research to understand these tradeoffs is a promising area of future work. For
example, Ferreira, Manso and Silva (2014) argue that public firms may be best positioned to
commercialize innovations that benefit from greater depth and liquidity of the public capital markets,
but that private firms are better suited for novel and exploratory innovation.

3.4 Internal capital markets and employment contracts
While the majority of the finance literature on innovation in mature firms focuses on the tradeoffs
associated with different sources of external finance, there is also evidence that the capital budgeting
process and compensation structures within firms can have a meaningful effect on corporate
innovation.
Seru (2014) compares the innovation of firms that were targets in failed mergers to those where the
merger or acquisition was successful. Firms acquired in diversifying mergers tend to have fewer patents
and less-novel innovations going forward than firms that were failed targets of bids. Seru finds that this
effect is magnified when the acquiring conglomerate operates a more-active internal capital market and
argues that this is due to inventors becoming less productive after the merger.3
The change in productivity of inventors documented by Seru (2014) and Bernstein (2014) is important
evidence that the governance associated with external and internal capital markets follows through to
employment contracts within firms. Understanding the optimal contract to encourage innovation by
inventors is therefore an important element for promoting innovation.
Understanding optimal contracts in the face of principal-agent problems has a long tradition in
corporate finance and organizational economics, harking back to seminal principal-agent models, such
as Holmstrom (1989) and Aghion and Tirole (1994). For example, Holmstrom (1989) argues that optimal
contracts to stimulate innovation should rely on compensation schemes that are less sensitive to
performance due to the noisy metrics for assessing innovative outcomes. Aghion and Tirole (1994) argue
that the outcomes of innovation activities are unpredictable and, therefore, hard to contract ex ante. In
an incomplete contract framework, they derive the optimal allocation of control rights that motivates
innovation. These papers focus on measurability and contractibility aspects of the innovation activity.
The focus of these early models is on asymmetric information between the principal and the agent. The
agent does not learn about the distribution of payoffs through the innovation process. Moreover, the
agent takes an action in the first period and cannot change it later on. Therefore, these models do not
incorporate learning and hence experimentation, which are important features of innovation. An
3

The effect of organizational structure on the commercializing of innovations has been studied in the context of
spinoffs (e.g., Gompers, Lerner and Scharfstein, 2005) and in theoretical work looking at the compensation
contracts between the firm and the potential entrepreneur (e.g., Anton and Yao, 1995; Hellman, 2007).

important contribution on the optimal design of compensation contracts comes from Manso (2011),
who combines the ability to learn with asymmetric information in a principal-agent model to study
incentives and optimal contracts to stimulate innovation. Manso shows that the optimal incentive
scheme that motivates innovation can exhibit substantial tolerance for early failure and reward for longterm success. That is, since the principal wants the agent to explore, it may be optimal at times to
encourage the agent to take unconventional paths (even if they lead to failure), by committing not to
punish the agent for negative results in intermediate periods, but instead to focus on rewarding longterm success. Thus, committing ex ante to inefficient continuation ex post may be optimal to induce
exploration since the threat of termination may prevent the agent from exploring new untested
approaches. In the context of managerial compensation, the institution of tenure, stock options with
long vesting periods, and managerial entrenchment are all features of contracts that might stimulate
more exploratory innovations.
Indeed, Lerner and Wulf (2007) show that US corporations have been shifting compensation of the
heads of corporate R&D to align them better with the objectives of the firm and to provide long-term
incentives, such as stock options that are associated with more patents or greater novelty. Similarly,
Gonzales-Uribe and Xu (2014) show that firms whose CEOs have more years remaining on their contract
invest significantly more and are associated with higher-quality innovation than peer firms whose CEOs
have fewer years remaining on their contracts.

3.5 Legal and institutional environment and innovation
The Manso (2011) framework for tolerating early failure and rewarding long-term success has also been
studied in the context of institutions that might promote entrenchment or protect employees from
being fired. For example, it has been argued that anti-takeover laws might stimulate radical innovation
because they promote entrenchment, that lenient bankruptcy laws may promote more exploration, and
that laws that make it harder to fire employees may lead to more novel innovations.
However, both the theory and the empirical results here are more ambiguous, due to the confounding
effects of selection and treatment. Manso (2011) describes the optimal contract under different types of
project characteristics and hence, for example, would prescribe a different bankruptcy law depending
on whether the objective was exploration or exploitation (e.g., Ederer and Manso, 2011). Similarly, the
degree to which employment protection or anti-takeover provisions are helpful or harmful for
innovation depend on the nature of innovation that is being sought after.
In practice, however, innovation has many shades of grey between the binary exploration and
exploitation archetypes, and furthermore, it is impossible for policy makers to provide an ex ante
optimal law for each type of innovation being undertaken. The fact that policy makers can create a
blanket policy regardless of the nature of innovation being undertaken therefore leads to a trade-off
between the ex post treatment effect of the policy and the ex ante selection into the regime (Nanda and
Rhodes-Kropf, 2012). For example, Acharya and Subramanian (2009) find that employment protection
laws stimulate innovation by large firms, appealing to the Manso (2011) model. On the other hand,

Bozkaya and Kerr (2014) find that countries with more stringent employment protection laws are less
likely to attract VC investment, especially in volatile sectors that are associated with extremely radical
innovations. These results conform better to the theoretical predictions of Saint-Paul (1997, 2002) and
Samaniego (2006) who model how labor adjustment costs discourage specialization in industries that
require frequent labor adjustment, which the VC model particularly depends upon.
Similarly, Acharya et al. (2013) find that lenient bankruptcy laws promote innovation, suggestive of a
greater willingness to take on risky projects with stronger downside protection. However, Berkowitz and
White (2004) find that firms located in states with more-lenient bankruptcy laws are less likely to receive
credit in the first place because banks are not as willing to lend under the unfavorable regime. Cerqueiro
et al. (2014) find that this lower likelihood of receiving credit also translates into less innovation by firms
that are more dependent on bank finance. This is also similar to Mann (2014), who finds that stronger
creditor rights are associated with greater innovation by firms in his sample. Finally, as introduced
above, Chemmanur and Tian (2012) find evidence that anti-takeover provisions promote innovation,
while Atanassov (2013) finds that the negative effects of managerial entrenchment dominate the
potentially positive effects of promoting exploration. Chemmanur, Loutskina and Tian (2014) find that
corporate VC investors tend to back more novel startups, but that these startups also perform worse,
suggesting that novelty may come at an economic cost to the investor.
The evidence of these tradeoffs suggests that more work is warranted to understand the effect on
policy. For example, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2012) show how strategies to promote innovation by
building in ex post failure tolerance have the potential to reduce radical innovation because the inability
to terminate poorly performing projects leads principals to only start projects with relatively low option
value. As we describe further in the last section, our conclusion from the recent work is that more
thought needs to be placed into the frameworks that sit behind models and into understanding better
how empirical tests shed light on particular models.

4. Finance and Innovation in Startups
Although the majority of the literature on financing innovation focuses on mature firms, we outline next
theoretical and empirical work on the fundamental role of young, small firms in driving the most radical
innovations in the economy. We then outline several lines of empirical work that document the
important role that financial intermediaries and financial markets may play in the rate and trajectory of
innovation by startups.
The important role of innovation by small firms was documented as early as Acs and Audretsch (1987),
who looked at the introduction of new products, processes and services and found that a
disproportionate share of these came from small firms. Ewens and Fons-Rosen (2013) find that
individuals who transition from large companies to founding a startup change their patenting behavior
to focus on riskier, more innovative patents. Akcigit and Kerr (2012) similarly provide theoretical and
empirical evidence for the importance of small firms in exploration R&D, with larger firms focusing a

greater share of their effort on internal innovations that build the profit margins on existing products.
An important part of this model is that these differences between large and small firms can arise even
when firms have access to the same innovative capabilities, instead being due to differences in profitmaximizing investment choices governed by firm size.4 Nanda, Younge and Fleming (2015) show
substantial differences in the degree to which large incumbents in clean energy and startups engage in
exploration and exploitation, even in a relatively “new” industry.

4.1 Venture capital and startup innovation
The majority of empirical work on financing innovative startups considers VC investments. Hall and
Lerner (2010), Da Rin, Hellmann and Puri (2013), and Cumming and Johan (2009) provide
comprehensive reviews. An important early contribution in this field was by Kortum and Lerner (2000),
who documented the causal effect of VC on innovation using a policy shift that led to greater allocation
of pension fund capital to VC firms. Kortum and Lerner document that increases in venture capital
activity led to greater patenting rates and may have accounted for 8% of the industrial innovations
during their period of study. Subsequent work by Samila and Sorenson (2011) also quantifies how VC
investment encourages economic growth in local areas, and Kerr, Lerner and Schoar (2014) find that
startup patenting is boosted by investment from two angel investment groups when comparing justfunded deals to those missing the cutoff.
Bernstein, Giroud and Townsend (2014) show that one mechanism through which VC investors impact
startup innovation is through their role in monitoring, suggesting the important role of governance in
this context. This is consistent with the work of Lerner (1995), Gompers (1995), Hellman and Puri (2000;
2002) and Chemmanur, Krishnan and Nandy (2011) who document the important role that VC
investment approaches and contracts play in overcoming agency issues through staged financing,
monitoring, board representation, and replacing founders with professional CEOs in the case of
underperforming ventures (e.g., Wasserman, 2003).

4.2 Experimentation and learning in multi-stage financings5
Similar to the literature on mature firms, there is growing work within the VC literature on the role of
learning and the ways in which it interacts with potential agency issues. For example, Kerr, Nanda and
Rhodes-Kropf (2014) document the extreme difficulty, even for professional investors like VCs, to judge
the potential success of innovative startups at an early stage of their investment. Indeed, given the
extreme uncertainty associated with these investments ex ante, and the skewness in ex post returns
4

An extensive literature in management focuses on these issues, emphasizing the negative impact of established
routines and practices in large, bureaucratic organizations for exploratory work. Lerner (2012) provides a recent
review.
5
Parts of this section draw on Kerr, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014), who also document the trade-offs associated
with multi-stage financings.

where a few investments account for the vast majority of the VC portfolio returns, the experimentation
paradigm plays a central role in VC investors’ approach to the financing of innovative startups.
Bergemann and Hege (1998, 2005) consider staged VC financing as a series of real options with an
optimal stopping point, documenting how a number of features associated with VC contracts represent
responses to dynamic learning in the face of agency concerns. Their model is different from Manso’s
(2011) model in that there is no safe path to pursue in the event that the entrepreneur and investor
learn that the project is not viable. This seems more appropriate to the VC context, where firms are
commercializing technologies that are often “new to the world” rather than “new to the firm”, and
hence there is little they can do if there is no traction in terms of the project.6
The real options framework provides several other useful insights in the context of VC. For example,
Nanda, Younge and Fleming (2015) document the mismatch between VC and certain industries such as
clean energy, where the capital and investment timeframe that is required to learn about the viability of
a project is so high that innovative projects with great potential are not funded without the support of
government. Howell (2014) shows the important role that government subsidies can play in reducing
initial financing constraints in such cases.7
Moreover, Kerr, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) document how the falling cost of learning about
viability in the early stages of a technology can have a profound effect on experimentation by earlystage investors. While these changes are most obvious in the context of entrepreneurship in software
and consumer-facing internet startups, where cloud computing and object-oriented programming have
lowered the cost of starting businesses substantially, there have been dramatic falls in the cost
associated with simulation technologies, rapid prototyping and bio-informatics (gene-sequencing), also
leading to a surge in investor interest in funding innovation in these sectors.
Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2014) highlight that the fall in the cost of experimentation reduces
financing constraints for projects with the greatest option value, and thus the effects should be
particularly salient for young, inexperienced founders or for those projects where early indications of
prospects for the project can impact the trajectory of future investment significantly (e.g., investment in
nuclear startups following simulations of reactor cores). Indeed, the timing of the dramatic rise in
accelerators (starting in 2005) to help inexperienced entrepreneurs scale companies (e.g., Cohen and
Hochberg, 2014; Yu, 2014), first in software and more recently in hardware and genomics-based
startups, seems very consistent with the fact that the biggest beneficiaries of the falling cost in
experimentation have been young, inexperienced entrepreneurs.
6

In such cases, the agency issues facing investors are also different. For example, the entrepreneur may have a
bias for inefficient exploration with a project that has a negative intermediate signal, given that they have no
alternative path to pursue. For example, Guedj and Scharfstein (2004) find that drugs being commercialized by
biotech firms are more likely to pass Phase I clinical trials compared to pharmaceutical firms, but conditional on
reaching Phase II, are less likely to progress to Phase III.
7
Fabrizio (2007) documents at the role of federal government in financing major innovations. Lerner (1999)
studies the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) programs that dedicate millions of dollars each year to
funding the commercialization of innovations. We do not delve in this review into the extensive literature on
financing innovation in government and university labs.

Successful experimentation requires being able to abandon poorly performing investments, but also to
capitalize on experiments that reveal positive outcomes, and these upside scenarios can be as tricky as
termination decisions.8 One reason is that financing projects in stages requires that startups return to
the capital markets at regular intervals for more capital, making entrepreneurs and early-stage investors
vulnerable to swings in financial markets. At times, financial capital is freely available, while in other
instances it is hard to come by even for good projects. These financing constraints can be market-wide
or they can be specific to sectors due to the degree to which investors herd around certain hot
industries.
VC investors routinely refer to “financing risk” (similar to rollover risk) to describe how otherwise-sound
projects may not obtain capital for the next stage of experiment. Financing risk arises when a single
investor lacks the capital to fund a startup to being cash flow positive, and hence investors need to
coordinate across financing rounds with future investors. One way to protect against financing risk is to
go less frequently to the capital markets, taking larger chunks of money at each stage (thereby leading
to coordination between contemporaneous investors). This approach, however, reduces the value of
the abandonment options for VC firms. Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2010, 2013) argue that hot markets—
times when financing risk is low—allow projects with the highest real option values to be funded
because the continuation risk is lower. Empirically, these are times when VC-backed firms have the
highest failure rates, but conditional on being successful, these startups have higher-valued exits
compared to startups funded in less-active periods that are exiting at the same time.
Financing risk is most salient for projects that need to go back to the capital markets many times, and
thus the projects that are worst hit are often experimental new technologies. In fact, a possible
implication of this work is that the most innovative projects in the economy may need times of low
financing risk (“hot financial markets”) to drive their initial commercialization, a conclusion connected to
the role of stock markets in financing innovation (Brown, Fazzari and Petersen, 2009).9
Financing risk is representative of a broader class of continuation features that govern the degree to
which experimentation can be pursued. One example compares clean energy and biotech, as biotech
also requires substantial investment and very long horizons but is the beneficiary of substantially more
VC investment than clean energy. Biotech startups and the pharmaceutical industry are part of a vibrant
“market for ideas” (Gans, Hsu and Stern, 2002) that allows biotech companies to sell the results of their
experiments at milestones. That is, a biotech company can undertake a first experiment to show that a
project that originally seemed to have had a 0.1 percent chance of becoming a block-buster drug has in
fact a 5 percent chance. This experiment has generated substantial information value, and
pharmaceutical companies are willing to buy the remaining 1-in-20 opportunity for their drugdevelopment portfolios. This market works because the science used in the first experiment is
observable and verifiable, a patent system protects the startup from intellectual theft, and the longterm opportunity is more protected compared to clean energy innovations (which can face competition
8

Similarly, systems that facilitate high-value exits such as equity-market vs. bank-oriented financial systems (e.g.
Black and Gilson, 1998) might be particularly valuable for attracting startups engaged in innovation.
9
Similarly, Hochberg, Serrano and Ziedonis (2014) find that the credibility of VC commitments to provide another
round of financing to a startup plays an important role in their ability to attract venture debt.

from all alternative sources of energy, including opening up strategic oil reserves). Such a “market for
ideas” is much less developed for clean energy, and as a consequence entrepreneurs and investors who
are considering an experiment in this area face additional continuation risks (Nanda et al., 2015).

5. Conclusion
The nascent, but fast-growing literature on the financing of innovation has made large advances in
recent years. The literature has focused on several key themes. First, there is clear evidence that
financing constraints have the possibility to be considerable in the context of firms engaged in R&D and
innovation—with the ability to shape both the rate and the trajectory of innovation. Second, capital
structure plays a central role in the outcome of innovations. Bank finance is an important source of
finance, particularly for larger firms with tangible and intangible assets to pledge as collateral.
Alternatively, public markets provide deep pockets but pose a set of agency costs that might be
particularly harmful for firms engaged in exploration and novel innovations. Third, there is a growing
interest in the multi-stage financing of innovation, both in established firms and startups, and
understanding the optimal contracts and policies that might stimulate innovation.
As we move towards a consolidation of knowledge in this field of study, there are a number of promising
areas of further investigation, as well as best practices that might facilitate cross-study comparison of
magnitudes and a deeper understanding of trade-offs involved. The first relates to measurement of
innovation. The standard approach to measuring innovation has been to look at the volume of patenting
and at patent citations. While these metrics have been linked with economic value (e.g., Trajtenberg,
1990; Kogan et al., 2012), deeper analyses of patent- and non-patent based measures of innovation are
likely to yield significant insights into the effect of finance on innovation. For example, many recent
studies have picked up on exploration and exploitation themes. Most papers tend to use patent-based
measures of innovation to quantify these properties, but there is no clear standard of how to approach
this exercise. The number of forward citations to patents is the most common metric used, given the
believed role of experimentation and exploration for yielding outcomes in the tails of the distribution,
but other measures like the backwards self-citations of firms can provide insights as well (e.g., Akcigit
and Kerr, 2012). Similarly, studies need to report a battery of typical metrics like the originality and
generality of the patents, even where null results are found, so that papers can begin to speak a
common language. In addition, there may be significant value to looking beyond citation-based
measures of innovation and also examining innovation that is not based on patents themselves.
Second, as has been pointed out above, there are contradictory findings about the impact of capital
structure, laws and contract design on innovation. Indeed, the literature has uncovered as many
disagreements as agreements since Hall and Lerner (2010). Understanding optimal contracts and laws is
complicated by the fact that while it may be possible to derive the optimal contract in an individual case,
thinking about policies involves trade-offs in equilibrium. Studying these trade-offs and their net effects
seems to be a particularly promising area of research in this space. Likewise, empirical research too
often sets out on a shotgun search to find evidence for a recent finance-innovation theory, neglecting

that each theory is set within a framework of assumptions and abstractions, and thus care should be
exercised about choosing empirical settings to test theories.
Third, much of the research focuses on micro-level studies of innovation, and the development of a
better understanding of how the macroeconomic environment interacts with and is influenced by
financing choices facing firms is a particularly important area going forward. The scope of this review
does not allow us to document the literature in this regard (e.g., Cagetti and De Nardi, 2006; Aghion et
al., 2012), which is growing up in parallel to the micro-based studies described here. We hope that
future research bridges more systematically this span. For example, how much of aggregate TFP growth
or other macro-measures of innovation can we account for through the differences in financial systems
or financing choices? That is, while we might agree that finance has an impact on real outcomes such as
innovation, how large an impact is this?
Finally, and perhaps most speculatively, we think that the role of adjustment costs in innovation
deserves extra attention going forward. Much of the early work on corporate R&D describes important
adjustment costs that lead to smoothing of innovative efforts. This protects special firm assets and also
leads to particular financing needs. On the other hand, much of the recent work focuses on settings
where adjustments are very rapid (e.g., staged financing by VC firms). The agglomeration/clustering of
entrepreneurial finance and innovative firms reduces some adjustment costs (e.g., Carlino and Kerr,
2014), recent technological advances lower others, and this connects to industrial organization and
modularity of innovation (e.g., Fallick, Fleischman and Rebitzer, 2006). Both perspectives appear to hold
substantial merit, and Lerner (2012) describes the advantages and liabilities of the various models for
approaching innovation. Completing this review, we are left wondering whether a more comprehensive
framework can be developed here.

References
Acemoglu, D., & Linn, J. (2004). Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence from the pharmaceutical
industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 3, 1049-1090.
Acharya, V., Baghai, R.P., & Subramanian, K.V. (2013). Wrongful discharge laws and innovation.
Forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.
Acharya, V., & Subramanian, K.V. (2009). Bankruptcy codes and innovation. Review of Financial Studies,
22, 4949–4988.
Acharya, V. & Xu, Z. (2013). Financial dependence and innovation: The case of public versus private
firms. NBER Working Paper No. 19708
Acs, Z.J., & Audretsch, D.B. (1987). An empirical examination of small firm growth. Economics Letters, 25,
363-366.
Aghion, P., & Tirole, J. (1994). The management of innovation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4),
1185-1209.
Aghion, P., Van Reenen, J., & Zingales, L. (2013). Innovation and institutional ownership. American
Economic Review, 103(1), 277-304.
Aghion, P., Askenazy, P., Berman, N., Cette, G., & Eymard, L. (2012). Credit constraints and the cyclicality
of R&D investment: Evidence from France. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(5), 10011024.
Akcigit, U. & Kerr, W.R. (2012). Growth through heterogeneous innovations. NBER Working Paper No.
16443.
Anton, J.J., & Yao, D. (1995). Start-ups, spin-offs, and internal projects. Journal of Law, Economics &
Organization, 11(2), 362-378.
Atanassov, J. (2013). Do hostile takeovers stifle innovation? Evidence from antitakeover legislation and
corporate patenting. Journal of Finance, 68(3), 1097-1131.
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Laeven, L., & Levine, R. (2008). Finance, firm size, and growth. Journal of
Money Credit and Banking, 40, 1379-1405.
Bergemann, D., & Hege, U. (1998). Venture capital financing, moral hazard and learning. Journal of
Banking and Finance, 22(6-8), 703-735.
Bergemann, D., & Hege, U. (2005). The financing of innovation: Learning and stopping. RAND Journal of
Economics, 36(4), 719-752.
Berkowitz, J., & White, M. (2004). Bankruptcy and small firms’ access to credit. RAND Journal of
Economics, 35(1), 69-84.

Bernstein, S. (2014). Does going public affect innovation? Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Bernstein, S., Giroud, X., & Townsend, R. (2014). The impact of venture capital monitoring: Evidence
from a natural experiment. Working Paper.
Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., & Thesmar, D. (2007). Banking deregulation and industry structure: Evidence
from the 1985 French banking act. Journal of Finance, 62(2), 597-628.
Black, B.S., & Gilson, R.J. (1998). Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks versus stock
markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 47(3), 243-277.
Black, S., & Strahan, P. (2002). Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability. Journal of Finance, 57(6),
2807-2833.
Bloom, N., Schankerman, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2013). Identifying technology spillovers and product
market rivalry. Econometrica, 81(4), 1347-1393.
Bozkaya, A., & Kerr. W. (2014) Labor regulations and European venture capital. Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy, 23(4), 776-810.
Brown, J.R., Fazzari, S.M., & Petersen, B.C. (2009). Financing innovation and growth: Cash flow, external
equity, and the 1990s R&D boom. Journal of Finance, 64(1), 151-185.
Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G., & Petersen, B.C. (2012). Do financing constraints matter for R&D?. European
Economic Review, 56(8), 1512-1529.
Bushee, B.J. (1998). The influence of institutional investors on myopic R&D investment behavior.
Accounting Review, 73(3), 305-333.
Cagetti, M., & De Nardi, M. (2006). Entrepreneurship, frictions and wealth. Journal of Political Economy,
114(5), 835-870.
Carlino, G., & Kerr, W.R. (2014). Agglomeration and innovation. Harvard Business School Working Paper
No. 15-007.
Cerqueiro, G., Hegde, D., Penas, M.F., & Seamans, R. (2014). Debtor rights, credit supply, and
innovation. Working paper.
Cetorelli, N., & Strahan, P.E. (2006). Finance as a barrier to entry: bank competition and industry
structure in local U.S. markets. Journal of Finance, 61(1), 437–461.
Chava, S., Oettl, A., Subramanian, A., & Subramanian, K.V. (2013). Banking deregulation and innovation.
Journal of Financial Economics, 109(3), 759-774.
Chava, S., Chong, X., & Nanda, V. (2012). Funding innovation: The role of lender expertise and control
rights. Georgia Institute of Technology Working Paper.

Chemmanur, T., Krishnan, K., & Nandy, D.K. (2011). How does venture capital financing improve
efficiency in private firms? A look beneath the surface. Review of Financial Studies, 24(12), 4037-4090.
Chemmanur, T., Loutskina, E., & Tian, X. (2014). Corporate venture capital, value creation, and
innovation. Review of Financial Studies, 27(8), 2434-2473
Chemmanur, T., & Tian, X. (2012). Do anti-takeover provisions spur corporate innovation? AFA 2012
Chicago Meetings Paper.
Cohen, S., & Hochberg, Y. (2014). Accelerating startups: The seed accelerator phenomenon. Working
paper.
Comin, D., & Nanda, R. (2014). Financial development and technology diffusion. Working paper.
Cornaggia, J., Mao, Y., Tian, X., & Wolfe, B. (2013). Does banking competition affect innovation?.
Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Cumming, D., & Johan, S. (2009). Venture Capital and Private Equity Contracting: An International
Perspective, Elsevier Science Academic Press.
Da Rin, M., Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2013). A survey of venture capital research. In Handbook of the
Economics of Finance 2(A), eds. Constantinides, G., Harris, M., & Stulz, R., Amsterdam: North Holland.
Ederer, F., & Manso, G. (2011). Incentives for innovation: Bankruptcy, corporate governance, and
compensation systems. In Handbook of Law, Innovation, and Growth, Edward Elgar Publishing.
Edmans, A. (2009). Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia. Journal of Finance,
64(6), 2481-2513.
Ewens, M., & Fons-Rosen, C. (2013). The consequences of entrepreneurial firm founding on innovation.
Working paper.
Ewens, M., Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014). Entrepreneurship and the cost of experimentation.
Working paper.
Fabrizio, K., (2007). Financing innovation in the United States, 1870 to the present. In The Federal Role in
Financing Major Innovations: Information Technology During the Postwar Period, eds. Lamoreaux, N., &
Sokoloff, K., MIT Press.
Fallick, B., Fleischman, C.A., & Rebitzer, J.B. (2006). Job-hopping in Silicon Valley: Some evidence
concerning the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3),
472-481.
Fang, V. W., Tian, X., & Tice, S. (2013). Does stock liquidity enhance or impede firm innovation?. Journal
of Finance, 69(5), 2085-2125.

Ferreira, D., Manso, G., & Silva, A.C. (2014). Incentives to innovate and the decision to go public or
private. Review of Financial Studies, 27, 256-300.
Field, A. (2003). The most technologically progressive decade of the twentieth century. American
Economic Review, 93(4), 1399-1413.
Francis, J., & Smith, A. (1995). Agency costs and innovation some empirical evidence. Journal of
Accounting and Economics, 19(2), 383-409.
Gans, J. S., Hsu, D. H., & Stern, S. (2002). When does start-up innovation spur the gale of creative
destruction?. RAND Journal of Economics, 33(4), 571-586.
Gompers, P.A. (1995). Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital. Journal of
Finance, 50(5), 1461-1489.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J., & Scharfstein, D. (2005). Entrepreneurial spawning: Public corporations and the
genesis of new ventures, 1986 to 1999. Journal of Finance, 60(2), 577-614.
Gonzales-Uribe, J., & Xu, M. (2014). CEO investment horizon and innovation. Working paper.
Grossman, S.J., Hart, O.D. (1986). The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of vertical and lateral
integration. Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691-719
Guedj, I., & Scharfstein, D. (2004). Organizational scope and investment: Evidence from the drug
development strategies and performance of biopharmaceutical firms. NBER Working Paper No. 10933.
Hall, B., & Lerner, J. (2010). The financing of R&D and innovation. In Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation, eds. Hall, B., & Rosenberg. N., Netherlands: Elsevier, 609-639.
Hall, B.H., Griliches, Z., &. Hausman, J.A. (1986). Patents and R&D: Is there a lag?. International Economic
Review, 27(2), 265-283.
Hart, O., & Moore, J. (1990). Property rights and the nature of the firm. Journal of Political Economy, 98,
1119-1158.
He, J.J., & Tian, X. (2013). The dark side of analyst coverage: The case of innovation. Journal of Financial
Economics, 109(3), 856-878.
Hellmann, T. (2007). When do employees become entrepreneurs?. Management Science, 53(6), 919933.
Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2000). The interaction between product market and financing strategy: The
role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies, 13(4), 959-984.
Hellmann, T., & Puri, M. (2002). Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms: Empirical
evidence. Journal of Finance, 57(1), 169-197.

Hochberg, Y., Serrano, C., & Ziedonis, R. (2014). Patent collateral, investor commitment, and the market
for venture lending. NBER Working Paper No. 20587.
Holmstrom, B. (1982). Managerial incentive problems - A dynamic perspective. In Essays in Economics
and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck, Helsinki: Swedish School of Economics.
Holmstrom, B. (1989). Agency costs and innovation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 12(3),
305-327.
Howell, S. (2014). Financing constraints as barriers to innovation: Evidence from R&D grants to energy
startups. Working paper.
Hsu, P.H., Tian, X., & Xu, Y. (2014). Financial development and innovation: Cross-country evidence.
Journal of Financial Economics, 112(1), 116-135.
Jayaratne, J., & Strahan, P.E. (1996). The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3), 639-670.
Kerr, W.R., Lerner, J., & Schoar, A. (2014). The consequences of entrepreneurial finance: Evidence from
angel financings. Review of Financial Studies, 27(1), 20-55.
Kerr, W.R., & Lincoln, W.F. (2010). The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms and US ethnic
invention. Journal of Labor Economics, 28(3), 473-508.
Kerr, W.R., & Nanda, R. (2009). Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing constraints, and
entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, 94, 124-149.
Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2014). Entrepreneurship as experimentation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25-48.
King, R.G., & Levine, R. (1993a). Finance, entrepreneurship and growth: theory and evidence. Journal of
Monetary Economics, 32, 513-542.
King, R.G., & Levine, R. (1993b). Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108, 717-737.
Knight, F.H. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., & Stoffman, N. (2012). Technological innovation, resource
allocation, and growth. NBER Working Paper No. 17769.
Kortum, S., & Lerner, J. (2000). Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation. RAND Journal
of Economics, 31(4), 674-692.
Lerner, J. (1995). Venture capitalists and the oversight of private firms. Journal of Finance, 50(1), 301318.

Lerner, J. (1999). The government as venture capitalist: The long-run impact of the SBIR program.
Journal of Business, 72(3), 285-318.
Lerner, J. (2012). The Architecture of Innovation: The Economics of Creative Organizations. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Lerner, J., & Seru, A. (2014). The use and abuse of patent data. Working Paper.
Lerner, J., Sorensen, M., & Strömberg, P. (2011). Private equity and long‐run investment: The case of
innovation. Journal of Finance, 66(2), 445-477.
Lerner, J., & Wulf, J. (2007). Innovation and incentives: Evidence from corporate R&D. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 89(4), 634-644.
Levine, R. (1997). Financial development and economic growth: views and agenda. Journal of Economic
Literature, 688-726.
Mann, W. (2014). Creditor rights and innovation: Evidence from patent collateral. Working paper.
Manso, G. (2011). Motivating innovation. Journal of Finance, 66(5), 1823-1860.
Nanda, R., & Nicholas, T. (2014) Did bank distress stifle innovation during the Great Depression?. Journal
of Financial Economics, 114(2), 273-292.
Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2010). Financing risk and innovation. Harvard Business School Working
Paper No. 11-013.
Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2013). Investment cycles and startup innovation. Journal of Financial
Economics, 110(2), 403-418.
Nanda, R., & Rhodes-Kropf, M. (2012). Innovation and the financial guillotine. Harvard Business School
Working Paper No. 13-038.
Nanda, R., Younge, K., & Fleming, L. (2015). Innovation and entrepreneurship in renewable energy. In
The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and Innovation Policy, eds. Jaffe, A., and Jones, B., National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Nicholas, T. (2011). What drives innovation?. Antitrust Law Journal, 77(3), 787-809.
Pástor, Ľ., & Veronesi, P. (2009). Technological revolutions and stock prices. American Economic Review,
99(4), 1451-1483.
Raff, D.M., & Trajtenberg, M. (1996). Quality-adjusted prices for the American automobile industry:
1906-1940. In The Economics of New Goods, University of Chicago Press, 71-108.
Rajan, R.G. & Zingales, L. (1998). Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review, 88(3),
559-586.

Robb, A.M., & Robinson, D.T. (2012). The capital structure decisions of new firms. Review of Financial
Studies, 27(1), 153-179.
Saint-Paul, G. (1997). Is labour rigidity harming Europe's competitiveness? The effect of job protection
on the pattern of trade and welfare. European Economic Review, 41(3), 499-506.
Saint-Paul, G. (2002). Employment protection, international specialization, and innovation. European
Economic Review, 46(2), 375-395.
Samaniego, R.M. (2006). Employment protection and high-tech aversion. Review of Economic Dynamics,
9(2), 224-241.
Samila, S., & Sorenson, O. (2011). Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 338-349.
Scherer, F.M. (1984). Innovation and Growth: Schumpeterian Perspectives. Cambridge Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Scherer, F.M., & Harhoff, D. (2000). Technology policy for a world of skew-distributed outcomes.
Research Policy, 29(4–5), 559-566.
Schumpeter, J. (1934). The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit,
Interest and the Business Cycle. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Seru, A. (2014). Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity. Forthcoming,
Journal of Financial Economics.
Stein, J. (1988). Takeover threats and managerial myopia. Journal of Political Economy, 96, 61-80.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). A penny for your quotes: Patent citations and the value of innovations. Rand
Journal of Economics, 1, 172-187.
Wasserman, N. (2003). Founder-CEO succession and the paradox of entrepreneurial success.
Organization Science, 14, 2149-2172
Williams, H. (2013). Intellectual property rights and innovation: Evidence from the human genome.
Journal of Political Economy, 121(1), 1-27.
Yu, S. (2014). The impact of accelerators on high-technology ventures. Working paper.

