                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DOES UNCERTAINTY ABOUT MANAGEMENT AFFECT FIRMS’ COSTS OF
                             BORROWING?

                                           Yihui Pan
                                        Tracy Yue Wang
                                       Michael S. Weisbach

                                       Working Paper 20674
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20674


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2014




We would like to thank Shan Ge, Tyler Jensen, Abby Kim, Keeseon Nam, Xi Wu and Julian Zhang
for excellent research assistance. Participants in presentations at Fullerton, Minnesota, Ohio State,
and Utah, as well as Benjamin Bennett, Jeff Coles, Michael Cooper, Isil Erel, Steve Karolyi, Miriam
Schwartz-Ziv, Berk Sensoy, Anil Shivdasani, Léa Stern, Jun Yang and Lu Zhang provided very helpful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Uncertainty about Management Affect Firms’ Costs of Borrowing?
Yihui Pan, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 20674
November 2014
JEL No. G32,G34,M12,M51

                                              ABSTRACT

Uncertainty about management appears to affect firms’ cost of borrowing and financial policies. In
a sample of S&P 1500 firms between 1987 and 2010, CDS spreads, loan spreads and bond yield spreads
all decline over the first three years of CEO tenure, holding other macroeconomic, firm, and security
level factors constant. This decline occurs regardless of the reason for the prior CEO’s departure. Similar
but smaller declines occur following turnovers of CFOs. The spreads are more sensitive to CEO tenure
when the prior uncertainty about the CEO’s ability is likely to be higher: when he is not an heir apparent,
is an outsider, is younger, and when he does not have a prior relationship with the lender. The spread-
tenure sensitivity is also higher when the firm has a higher default risk and when the debt claim is
riskier. These patterns are consistent with the view that the decline in spreads in a manager’s first three
years of tenure reflects the resolution of uncertainty about management. Firms adjust their propensities
to issue external debt, precautionary cash holding, and reliance on internal funds in response to these
short-term increases in borrowing costs early in their CEOs’ tenure.


Yihui Pan                                            Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance                                Department of Finance
1655 Campus Center Drive                             Fisher College of Business
University of Utah                                   Ohio State University
Salt Lake City, UT 84112-9303                        2100 Neil Ave.
Yihui.Pan@business.utah.edu                          Columbus, OH 43210
                                                     and NBER
Tracy Yue Wang                                       weisbach.2@osu.edu
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
wangx684@umn.edu
1. Introduction

        A firm’s default risk reflects not only the likelihood that a firm will have bad luck, but also the risk

that the firm’s managerial decisions will lead the firm to default. Consequently, when evaluating a firm’s

risk, it is important to understand not only the value of the firm’s assets, but also the quality of the firm’s

management. Management risk occurs because the impact of management on firm value is uncertain, and

this uncertainty will affect the market’s perception of a firm’s risk. Practitioners have long understood the

importance of management risk, and regularly state that a firm’s management is an important factor in

evaluating a firm’s risk. 1 However, the academic literature has largely ignored the importance of

management in a firm’s risk. In this paper, we empirically assess the extent to which uncertainty about a

firm’s management team affects the market’s expectation of a firm’s default risk.

        We identify the effect of management uncertainty on the costs of borrowing using the idea that a

manager’s impact on firm value becomes known more precisely over his tenure. In a sample of S&P 1500

firms between 1987 and 2010, the existence of a new CEO leads to higher spreads on the firm’s CDS, bank

loans and public debt. The CDS spread, a measure of a firm’s expected default risk, is about 35 basis points

(22% relative to the sample mean) higher when a new CEO takes office than three years into his tenure

(after an extensive list of controls). Similarly, our estimates imply that the spread on a new loan is about 20

basis points higher, and the bond yield spread on a new bond issue is about 23 basis points higher, for a

firm led by a new CEO than for the same firm when the CEO is in his third year in office. The estimated

declines in borrowing costs over CEO tenure are not driven by turnovers occurring at times of high

uncertainty about the firm’s fundamentals: the spread difference over CEO tenure following various

subsamples of likely exogenous turnovers is comparable to that in the entire sample of turnovers. These

results suggest that uncertainty about the CEO contributes substantially to a firm’s cost of borrowing during

the early years of a CEO’s tenure.




1
  For example, both S&P and Moody’s list “management” as a key factor determining a corporate issuer’s long-term
risk. See, for example, http://www.standardandpoors.com/aboutcreditratings/RatingsManual_PrintGuide.html.
                                                       1
        The CEO, however, is not the only member of the management team that is relevant for decision-

making in the firm. Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) have a large role in financial decision-making, so

uncertainty about new CFOs could also affect the firm’s default risk and cost of borrowing. Our estimates

indicate that, similar to CEOs, spreads on new debt decline over the first three years of a CFO’s tenure, but

the magnitude of the decline is smaller than that following CEO turnovers, particularly if the CFO turnover

is not accompanied by a CEO turnover. The result suggests that uncertainty about CFOs does affect firms’

costs of borrowing, but not as much as uncertainty about CEOs.

        The effect of uncertainty about management quality on the firm’s cost of borrowing around

management turnovers is likely to vary cross-sectionally depending on the characteristics of the new

management and the debt itself. In particular, when the new CEO is not considered an “heir apparent” prior

to getting the position, when he comes from outside of the company, and when the new CEO is younger,

we expect the market to perceive relatively high uncertainty about the CEO’s ability or future actions.

Empirically, we find that the sensitivity of the firms’ spreads to the CEO’s tenure more than doubles in

these circumstances, relative to when the new CEO is an insider, is an heir apparent, or is older. For

example, the CDS spreads decline by 87 basis points in the first three years of tenure for outsider CEOs,

much larger than the 35 basis-point decline in the full sample.

        In addition, when the CEO has an existing relationship with a lender before he takes his current job,

the lender is likely to have less uncertainty about the CEO’s ability or choice of actions. Consistent with

this argument, we find that the sensitivity of interest rates to the CEO’s time in office is 39-57% lower for

loans in which the CEO has a prior relationship with the lender relative to those without, even if the CEO is

an outsider and the relationship occurred while the CEO was at his previous firm. Further, any additional

management-induced risk should have a larger impact on the default risk and the pricing of riskier debt

than of safer debt. Consistent with this prediction, we find that the firm’s spreads are more sensitive to

CEO tenure when the firm is more highly levered, for term loans and junior bonds. Overall, all the cross-




                                                      2
sectional evidence is consistent with the notion that the decline in spreads over tenure reflects the resolution

of uncertainty about management.

        If firms’ costs of borrowing increase at the beginning of a CEO’s tenure, then firms should change

their financial policies over time as a function of these changes in borrowing costs. If the higher risk at the

beginning of a CEO’s tenure reflects management-related uncertainty, then this increase is likely to be

idiosyncratic rather than systematic risk. Accordingly, firms should not adjust the cost of capital they use

for capital budgeting purposes because of management-related uncertainty. However, a short-term increase

in borrowing costs is likely to lead firms to change their cash management policies, and to be reluctant to

issue debt at times when they face higher spreads. Consistent with these predictions, we find that firms

have lower propensities to issue external debt, higher precautionary cash holdings, and less use of external

debt to finance acquisitions when their CEOs are newer in office.

        This paper contributes to several literatures. It suggests that management’s decisions and the

uncertainty about them have substantial value-related consequences. In a similar vein, Clayton, Hartzell

and Rosenberg (2005) and Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2014a) document that a firm’s stock return volatility

substantially increases around CEO turnovers, suggesting that uncertainty about management is an

important source of the firm’s overall uncertainty. Pan, Wang and Weisbach (2014a) further identifies how

much of the volatility is attributable to uncertainty about the management versus about the firm’s

fundamentals in a Bayesian learning framework. This paper builds on this earlier work, and quantifies the

implications of uncertainty about management on the pricing of the firm’s debt and the firm’s financial

policies.

            This paper also contributes to the literature on the pricing of corporate debt. It isolates a specific

source of risk that has been largely ignored in the academic literature but that practitioners are well aware

of. Our estimates suggest that management-related uncertainty has a significant impact on the pricing of the

firm’s debt. Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001) find that traditional credit risk factors and

liquidity measures fail to explain the bulk part of the credit spread changes and suggest firm-specific


                                                         3
factors omitted from their analysis are likely to be important. Our results suggest that uncertainty about

management is potentially one such factor and that a promising direction of research would be to

incorporate management risk into empirical models of credit spreads.

          The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 presents

evidence of a robust relation between the firm’s cost of borrowing and its CEO’s tenure. Section 4 presents

cross-sectional evidence to further support the argument that the dynamic of the firm’s borrowing cost over

CEO tenure reflects the resolution of uncertainty about the management. Section 5 examines the effects of

the managerial-related uncertainty and the corresponding higher cost of borrowing on the firm’s financial

policies, while Section 6 concludes.



2. Data

2.1. The Cost of Borrowing

          To measure a firm’s cost of borrowing, we use the cost of insuring against the firm’s default risk

(the CDS spread), the interest rate spread above the risk-free rate that the firm has to pay on its new loans,

and the promised yield on its bonds minus the yield of a Treasury bond of the same maturity.

2.1.1 CDS Spread

          The firm’s cost of debt is reflected in the premium that the bondholders are willing to pay to hedge

against the default risk. The spread on a firm’s CDS will reflect this premium: a higher CDS spread implies

that the underlying debt (and the issuer) is riskier, and thus more expensive for the firm to borrow.

          There are at least three advantages of using the CDS spread as a measure of the firm’s cost of debt

in our setting. First, as is documented by Blanco et al. (2005), the CDS and bond yield spreads are close to

each other over long intervals, while over short intervals, CDS spreads tend to respond more quickly to

changes in credit conditions. Second, the existence of CDS spreads does not depend on the firm’s decision

to issue new debt, so there are no selection concerns with CDS spreads as with loan or bond yield spreads.

Third, CDS spread data is available at the daily frequency. However, a disadvantage of CDS spreads over


                                                       4
loan spreads and bond yield spreads is that many firms do not have CDS available on their debt and the

CDS data are only available since 2001.

        Our CDS data are provided by MarkIt, a comprehensive data source that assembles a network of

industry-leading partners who contribute information for about 2,600 credit default swaps on a daily basis.

Based on the contributed quotes, MarkIt creates a daily composite quote for each CDS contract. We use the

five-year spreads because these contracts are the most liquid and constitute over 85 percent of the entire

CDS market. To maintain uniformity in contracts, we only keep CDS quotations for senior unsecured debt,

which makes up over 91% of the entire CDS sample in MarkIt, with a modified restructuring (MR) clause

and denominated in U.S. dollars. 2 The first section in Table 1, Panel A reports the CDS statistics at the

daily level over 946 CEOs’ first ten years of their tenure in 539 firms (the CEO sample is described in

Section 2.2). The average CDS spreads in our sample is 159 basis points (median 76).

2.1.2 Loan Spread Data

        We supplement the data on CDS spreads with data on bank loans and corporate bonds. We retrieve

the bank loan data during 1987-2012 from DealScan, which is maintained by Thomson Reuters’ Loan

Pricing Corporation (LPC). This database contains detailed information on loans (also referred to as a

facility or tranche) to U.S. corporations since 1987. 3 While DealScan provides comprehensive information

on loan contract terms, it does not provide much information on borrowers. We thus match the borrowers to

the firms in our sample using a procedure described in Chava and Roberts (2008). 4

        The second part of Panel A of Table 1 reports loan-level statistics for loans taken by our sample

CEOs during the first ten years of their tenure. The 3,693 CEOs (in 2,316 firms) initiated 17,076 loans with

non-missing loan spreads.



2
  The Modified Restructuring clause was introduced in the ISDA standard contract in 2001. This clause limits the
scope of opportunistic behavior by sellers in the event of restructuring agreement to deliverable obligations with
maturity of 30 months or less. This clause applies to the majority of quoted CDS for North American entities.
3
  The data are primarily gathered from SEC filings, and the rest from direct research by LPC through contacts with
borrowers, lenders, and the credit industry at large. Strahan (1999) provides a detailed description of the DealScan
database.
4
  http://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/ds/linkingtable/index.cfm
                                                         5
           To measure the price of bank debt, we use the All-in-Drawn Spread (AIS) that the borrower pays

over LIBOR at the loan origination date. 5 Following existing studies, we winsorize the spreads at the top

and the bottom 1% of the DealScan sample distribution. The mean of the loan spreads in our sample is 158

basis points, and the median is 125 basis points. We also report the summary statistics for other

components of the bank loan contracts, such as loan maturity, loan size, number of lenders, whether the

loan has performance pricing, whether the loan is secured, whether the borrowing company has a

speculative grade when the loan was initiated, and whether the loan is classified as “refinancing” by

DealScan. All variable definitions are reported in Appendix A.

2.1.3 Corporate Bond Yield Spread Data

           The corporate bond data are retrieved from the Mergent Fixed Investment Securities Database

(FISD), a comprehensive database of publicly-offered U.S. bonds since 1987. FISD provides details on

debt issues and the issuers. Our sample period is from 1987 to 2012. The third part of Panel A of Table 1

reports the statistics for bonds issued during the first ten years of CEO tenure. There are 8,525 public bonds

with available data on offering yield, issued by 2,135 CEOs (in 1,433 firms).

           To measure the price of public debt, we use the bond yield spread, which is the offering yield of a

corporate bond at issue minus the yield of the maturity-matched Treasury bond. We winsorize the spreads

at the top and the bottom 1% of the entire FISD sample distribution. When the maturity of the bond for

which the spread is calculated does not exactly match the maturity of the available government bonds, we

use linear interpolation to estimate the yield of the risk-free benchmark. The average bond yield spread in

our sample is 182 basis points, (median 121). Summary statistics for other bond characteristics, such as

bond maturity, offering size, whether the bond is subordinate, are also reported in Panel A of Table 1.

2.2. CEO Turnover and Tenure

           We construct a sample of CEOs from 1987 to 2010, since both the loan data and the bond data

begin in 1987. We use the information on job title, the year becoming CEO, and the CEO annual flag


5
    This measure adds to the borrowing spread any annual fees the firms pay to the lenders.
                                                            6
provided in ExecuComp to identify CEOs at the firm-year level, based on which we identify whether there

is a CEO turnover in a firm and year. 6 Panel B of Table 1 describes the distribution of turnovers over time

in the loan, bond, and CDS samples.

        For each CEO, the variable “Tenure” equals 0 for the fiscal year in which the CEO takes office,

and increases with each year the CEO is in office. The average CEO’s total time in office (see Appendix A

for definition) in our sample is 6.14 years and the median is 5 years. About 85% of the CEOs in our sample

are long-term CEOs with total time in office no less than three years. Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2014a)

document that the market’s learning about the CEO’s ability is most pronounced during the first three years

of the CEO’s tenure. For this reason, we focus on a CEO’s first three years in our main analysis.

        A challenge in drawing inferences in the CEO turnover setting is that the timing of CEO turnover

can coincide with firm performance because CEO are sometimes fired for performance-related reasons.

Following Pan, Wang, and Weisbach (2014a,b), we identify several subsamples of turnovers that are likely

to have occurred for non-performance related reasons. The first group consists of turnovers caused by

illness, death, or retirement of the departing CEOs. We combine CEO turnover announcements in Capital

IQ’s Key Developments and Factiva news search to identify a subsample of such turnovers. 7 To mitigate

the incidence of “suspicious” retirement announcements, we additionally require that the firm’s stock

performance in the year prior to the turnover be above the industry-year median for the turnover to be

classified as due to retirement. The second group consists of turnovers for which there is no change in the

top management team (the top four most highly paid non-CEO executives) in the year when the CEO is

changed, which are unlikely to be firings, since firings typically involve changes of other top managers in

addition to the CEO. Third, because forced turnovers tend to be preceded by high stock return volatility or

poor stock and accounting performances, we consider the group of turnovers that are preceded by both




6
  Although ExecuComp’s coverage starts in 1992, some of the CEOs in the database took office before 1992, leading
to some CEO turnovers from the late 1980s in our sample.
7
  We thank Edward Fee, Charles Hadlock, and Joshua Pierce for kindly providing us with the classification of illness,
death related, and outright forced turnovers for the sub-period 1990 to 2006 used in Fee, Hadlock and Pierce (2013).
                                                         7
good performance (both stock return and ROA above industry-year median) as well as low idiosyncratic

volatility (below industry-year median) to be unlikely to have been motivated by performance.

        Fourth and more specific to the context in this study, we identify a subsample of turnovers that

were not preceded by a significant run-up of default risk as reflected in the firms’ CDS spreads in the prior

two years. The idea is that if there is a run-up of default risk before turnover, then a decline following

turnover could reflect a reversion to usual levels. Specifically, for each firm with CDS data in our sample,

we estimate the time trend in CDS spreads during dates [-730, -30], with date 0 being the day when the new

CEO takes office. We include 185 turnovers with negative or insignificantly positive pre-turnover CDS

trend in this subsample.

        Finally, we use the Factiva news search to identify turnovers that appear to be overtly forced (e.g.,

Factiva reported that the CEO was forced to leave or left under pressure). Panel C of Table 1 reports the

number of turnovers in each subsample.

        The incoming CEO’s background is likely to be related to the amount of uncertainty about his

ability. We identify two dimensions about the CEO’s background that are potentially related to such

uncertainty: the CEO’s age and his succession origin. The average age of the incoming CEO at the time of

turnover in our sample is 51. We thus classify new CEOs who are younger than 50 at the time of turnover

as “Young CEOs”. Using information on the time of a CEO “joining company” from ExecuComp,

supplemented by the data on “starting job” from Boardex, we classify CEOs who have been with the firm

for less than three years when becoming CEO as “Outsider CEOs”, and others as insider CEOs. We also

follow Naveen (2006) and classify “Heir-Apparent CEOs” in our sample as executives with the title

“president” or “chief operating officer (COO)” prior to becoming CEO. Panel C of Table 1 reports the

number of turnovers that involve young CEOs, outsider CEOs, and heir-apparent CEOs.

2.3. Other Variables

        To control for other factors that potentially affect the loan, bond, or CDS spreads, we include a set

of firm characteristics and credit market conditions in our empirical specifications. For credit market


                                                     8
conditions, we control for three variables: “Credit Spread” is the difference between the yields of AAA and

BAA corporate bonds; “Term Spread” is the difference between the yields of 10-year Treasury bonds and

2-year Treasury bonds; “VIX” is CBOE volatility index, which shows the market’s expectation of 30-day

volatility. Table 1, Panel D reports summary statistics for the three variables.

        We obtain firm-specific variables from Compustat and winsorize them at the top and the bottom

1% of the distribution. The average firm in our sample has book assets of about $1.4 billion, 24% book

leverage, a market-to-book equity ratio of 2.9, an asset tangibility ratio of 0.28, and cash flow volatility of

0.56, ROA of 11%, and dividend payout ratio of 0.22. Appendix A presents detailed definitions of all

variables.



3. Managerial Uncertainty and Cost of Borrowing

3.1. Default Risk over CEO Tenure

        To evaluate whether uncertainty about a new CEO’s ability and policies affects the market’s

expectation of a firm’s default risk, we first examine the way in which firms’ CDS spreads change over

CEO tenure. Since the CDS spreads provide a market-based assessment of the likelihood that the firm will

default on its debt at any point in time, the way they vary over a CEO’s tenure measures the change in

default risk over this period.

        Figure 1 plots the average CDS spread at the key event months associated with the evolution of the

uncertainty about a new CEO. Panel A is constructed using the 112 CEO turnovers of firms with available

CDS data, and for which the departure announcements of the outgoing CEOs occurred in a different month

from the appointment announcements of the new CEOs and the inauguration of the new CEOs. Although a

small sample, these turnovers allow us to examine exactly how CDS spreads respond to each key event. In

the month of the departure announcement, the CDS spread increases by almost 57 basis points over the

average spread in the prior three months, reflecting the increase in the uncertainty about the management.

The spread subsequently decreases by about 15 basis points when the new CEO is announced, indicating


                                                       9
that part of the uncertainty about the management is resolved. This decrease suggests that the overall

pattern is unlikely to be driven by turnovers occurring at times of high risk, since it is unlikely that

fundamentals change noticeably between the departure announcement and the appointment announcement.

The spread decreases only slightly by the time that the new CEO takes office, and then declines by another

26 basis points in the first three years of the new CEO’s tenure, suggesting that the uncertainty about the

CEO declines further during this period of time.

        However, not all turnovers have clearly identifiable dates for all the key events, and these events

sometimes occur sufficiently close to each other in time that it is impossible to identify the effect of each

one. For example, Panel B plots the path of CDS spread for the 87 turnovers with departure, appointment,

and inauguration all occurring in the same month. In this case, we observe an inverse V: the CDS spread

increases in the turnover month and then declines over the first three years of the new CEO’s tenure. Both

panels suggest that there is a non-trivial decline in CDS spreads after a new CEO takes office. Hence our

analysis focuses on post-turnover changes in spreads. While the pre-turnover information flows occur

differently at different firms and it is difficult to tell in a consistent way exactly when information about the

departure of the outgoing CEO and the new CEO’s identity reaches the market, following turnover it is

straightforward to measure the way a firm’s managerial-related risk changes over time.

        To estimate the way in which CDS spreads are affected by the resolution of uncertainty about the

CEO in the first few years of his tenure, we estimate the following equation:

                      CDS _ Spreadtij = f (Tenuretij ) + α ij + λt + Controlsti + ε tij (1)

The variable “ Tenuretij ” is CEO-j’s time in office in firm-i at time t. To capture the predicted convexity in

the tenure-spread relation, we use a piecewise-linear (spline) specification that allows the relation to change

over time. The variable α ij is the firm-CEO fixed effect for firm i and CEO j; its inclusion implies that we

identify the effect of managerial uncertainty from the time-series variation in CDS spreads within a

particular firm-CEO pair. This approach, therefore, controls for any time-invariant differences cross firm-



                                                       10
CEO pairs. The variable λt is the calendar year fixed effect, which controls for market-wide factors that

affect firm-level default risk. Time-varying controls include the debt recovery rate as reported by data

distributors, firm-specific financial variables, as well as measures of credit market conditions such as the

aggregate credit spread, term spread, and the VIX index.

        Table 2 reports estimates of this equation. Column (1) presents the spline regression estimates for

all CEOs in our sample, regardless of how long they stayed in office, from year 0 to year 10. These

estimates indicate that a firm’s CDS spread declines by 0.032 basis points for each day in the CEO’s first

three years in office. Over the first 1095 calendar days (three years), the total decline amounts to 35 basis

points, a 46% decline relative to the sample median CDS spread of 76 basis points (22% relative to the

sample mean of 159). The speed of decline in the CDS spread is slower but still statistically significant

during the CEO’s second three years, and becomes statistically insignificant and small in magnitude after

six years.

        In Column (2) we focus only on the first three years of CEO tenure for CEOs who stay in office for

at least three years, and we use a linear specification of tenure. In this specification, we exclude short-term

CEOs (e.g., interim CEOs, turnaround specialists, and CEOs that departed very quickly), so that our

estimates will not be affected by the unbalanced nature of the panel. We find that the firm’s CDS spread

declines by 0.031 basis points per day during this time period. 8 These results suggest that firms’ default

risk is higher when there is a new CEO, and declines over time as the CEO’s quality, as well as the policies

he is likely to pursue, becomes known over time. The fact that the magnitude of the decline in CDS spread

during the first three years is very similar between Column (1) and Column (2) implies that including or

excluding CEOs with less than three years’ of tenure does not affect our inference. 9

        However, an alternative interpretation of the declining default risk over CEO tenure is that CEO

changes tend to occur at times of relatively high uncertainty, leading to heightened default risk around CEO

8
  In unreported robustness tests, we use the monthly average CDS spreads instead of the daily data. The results are
essentially the same as those reported in Table 2, with CDS spreads declining by about 1.1 basis points per month
during the CEO’s first three years.
9
  We obtain similar results including or excluding short-term CEOs throughout the paper.
                                                        11
changes. Firms tend to fire CEOs at times when they are doing poorly, which are likely to be times when

uncertainty about the firms’ prospects is also high and their debt is riskier.

        To isolate the way that uncertainty about the incoming CEO varies over time and its effect on a

firm’s risk, we wish to consider cases of “normal” turnovers, in which the CEO turnover is unrelated to

performance. These cases are unlikely to occur with greater frequency at times of unusual firm risk. In

subsection 2.2 we describe a number of subsamples of turnovers that are unlikely to have been forced. Pan,

Wang, and Weisbach (2014a) document that the decline in firm volatility following turnovers in each of

these subsamples is approximately the same magnitude as in the overall sample, suggesting that the overall

decline in volatility is not driven by the endogenous timing of turnovers. We perform a similar exercise for

CDS spreads in Table 3 to evaluate the extent to which the decline in CDS spreads over tenure occurs

because of turnovers occurring when volatility tends to be unusually high.

        The results in Table 3 indicate that the decline of the firm’s cost of borrowing over CEO tenure

occurs regardless of the factors leading to the CEO turnover. Furthermore, the estimated magnitude of

decline in CDS spread is very similar across various subsamples of likely exogenous turnovers (Columns 1-

5), as well as the subsample of turnovers that is classified as neither exogenous nor forced (Column 6). In

each specification the estimates suggest that there is a significant decline of CDS spread over CEO tenure.

In contrast, for the outright forced turnover sample (Column 7), the estimated decline in CDS spread is

about 0.132 basis point per day, which is about four times as large as the estimate for the rest of the

turnovers. Since outright forced turnovers tend to follow poor firm performance and high volatility, this

high estimated decline could reflect relatively high uncertainty at the time of the turnover about both the

firm’s fundamentals and the new CEO.

3.2. CEO Tenure and Interest Rates on Firms’ Debt

3.2.1. Loan Spreads over CEO Tenure

        If uncertainty about the new CEO affects the firm’s default risk as measured by CDS spreads, then

it should affect the interest rates that the firm pays on its debt. To test this hypothesis, we estimate the way


                                                       12
that the spreads on loans firms take out vary over CEO tenure, using the specification in Equation 1 with

CDS spreads replaced with the “all in drawn” spreads on the loans. When we estimate this equation, we

add a number of controls for loan characteristics. In particular, we include the loan size, maturity, number

of lenders, dummies indicating if the loan uses performance pricing, loan purpose, and tranche types.

        These estimates are reported in Panel A of Table 4. Column (1) documents that loan spreads

decrease with CEO tenure. The speed of decrease declines over time, with the fastest decline occurring in

the first three years (6.5 basis points per year, and about 20 basis points in the first three years). Column (2)

reports the estimated decrease in loan spread over the CEO’s first three years in office for the subsample of

CEOs who stay in office for at least three years. Column (3) contains estimates using the subsample of

likely non-performance driven turnovers (the union of rows (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1), and find that

following these turnovers, the loan spread a firm pays declines by 5.1 basis points per year. 10 These

estimates using the spreads firms pay on loans are consistent with those reported above for CDS spreads

and suggest that the expected default rate on a firm’s debt declines over its CEO’s tenure. This finding is

consistent with the view that uncertainty about management is an important component of a firm’s risk, and

that this component is priced in the firm’s debt contracts.

        One difference between the results using CDS spreads and loan spreads is that we observe a firm’s

CDS spread every day but observe its loan spreads only when a firm initiates one. Therefore, it is possible

that the regressions could be subject to some selection bias, since presumably firms will be less likely to

take out a loan at any point in time if interest rates are too high. This concern does not apply to the analysis

using CDS spread; nonetheless, the results using CDS spreads are consistent with those using the loan

spreads. Further, since we include firm fixed effects in our specification, this concern is to some extent




10
   Unlike with the CDS data, which provides daily data on spreads, with the loan data, we only observe spreads when
a loan is initiated, and consequently only one spread per loan. Because of the relatively small number of observations
with loan data, we pool the different subsamples of likely non-performance related turnovers together for the
estimation in Column (3).
                                                         13
mitigated because the estimates essentially compare the interest rates on different loans over CEO tenure

within the same firm. 11

           A way to assess the importance of this potential selection bias is to consider the set of firms for

which the loan represents a refinance, rather than a new capital raising. Presumably, if a firm is refinancing

its loans, it has much less discretion and has to accept whatever interest rate is available at that time. To

assess whether a particular loan represents new capital to the firm or a refinance, we rely on DealScan’s

classification (the variable “Refinancing Indicator”). The equation estimated on only the refinancing is

presented in Column (4) of Panel A of Table 4. These estimates from the subsample of refinanced loans

are similar to those estimated on the entire sample, and indicate that there is a statistically significant

decrease in loan spread of 5.2 basis points in each of the first three years of CEO tenure.

           Besides the loan spread, we also observe information on other non-price terms of the loan contracts

such as the loan maturity, loan size, number of lenders, and whether the loan is secured or not. If

uncertainty about the management affects debt contracting, then these dimensions of the contracts could be

affected as well. In Panel B of Table 4, we examine the relation between these non-price terms of the debt

contracts and CEO tenure. The main difference in non-price terms over CEO tenure is that bank loans

originated earlier tend to have significantly shorter maturities than those originated later.

3.2.2. Bond Yield Spread over CEO Tenure

           The major alternative corporate debt instrument to a bank loan is a corporate bond. Thus, we also

test the hypothesis that the expected default rates and hence promised yields on the firms’ issuances of

corporate bonds decline with the tenure of a firm’s CEO. To do so, we estimate equations similar to those

for bank loans using the promised yield on a firm’s corporate bonds as our dependent variable.

           Panel C of Table 4 presents estimates of this equation. These estimates indicate that CEO tenure

has a similar effect on the firm’s promised bond yields as it does on CDS spreads and loan spreads. Column

(1) presents the spline specification using the entire sample and finds that bond yields decline in a convex


11
     More than 60% of the sample firms took multiple loans in the first three years of their CEOs’ tenure.
                                                            14
manner over the CEO’s tenure. Column (2) restricts the sample to the first three years of tenure for CEOs

who remain on the job that entire period, and we find a negative effect of tenure on spreads. Finally,

Column (3) further restricts the sample to those CEOs following the likely “non-performance related”

turnovers (the union of rows (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1) and again finds a negative relation between

tenure and spreads. The coefficients on tenure range between 7.5 and 9.6 basis points per year, so they

imply that over the three-year period, yield spreads decline between 23 and 29 basis points.

3.3. Uncertainty about Management Teams: The Role of the CFO

        The analysis to this point has focused on the way that the uncertainty about new CEOs’ abilities

and policies affects firms’ default risks. The underlying assumption is that the CEO plays an important

decision-making role in the firm, so that when the person occupying this position changes, policies change.

However, the CEO is only one member of the management team. Presumably, when top managers other

than the CEO change, there is also an increase in uncertainty about future policies, albeit a smaller one than

when the CEO changes.

        One manager who is especially likely to influence financial policies is the Chief Financial Officer

(CFO). We examine whether a change of CFO has a similar effect on the rates firms pay on their debt than

a change of the CEO. We focus on the CFO rather than other members of the top management team for two

reasons:   first, US firms almost always have one and only one individual with that title, so it is

straightforward to identify changes in the individual holding that position, and second, the focus of the

responsibilities of CFO is around the financial policies of firms so it is likely that a change in CFO could

lead to a change in these policies.

        We collect CFO turnover data from corporate news announcements in the Capital IQ database from

2001 to 2009. 12 We exclude transitory CFOs who stayed in the job for less than 3 years. This process leads

to a sample of 1,857 CFO turnovers in 1,136 firms during the 2001-2009 period, summarized in Panel A of



12
  We do not use ExecuComp to identify CFO turnovers because there is no reliable indicator for CFOs in the pre-
2007 data and there is no information on the time that a new CFO takes office. For the firm-years between 2007 and
2009, we have verified that the two data sources are consistent in 86% of observations.
                                                       15
Table 5. Outsider succession is more common in the CFO sample (37%) than in the CEO sample (28%),

consistent with data reported by Mian (2001). We construct a variable that measures the time elapsed (in

terms of years or days) since the new CFO takes office; the average CFO spends four years in office and

the median is 3.4 years.

        In Panel B of Table 5, we estimate the relation between the firm’s CDS spread and the CFO’s time

in office, using the same specification as in Table 3 for CEOs. Column (1) contains estimates implying that

the CDS spread declines by 0.027 basis points per day during the first three years of a new CFO’s tenure,

and the decline is statistically significantly different from zero. During the subsequent 3 years, the decline

is just 0.004 basis points per day, which is not statistically significantly different from zero. Column (2)

restricts the sample to the first 3 years of a CFO’s tenure, and finds a similar decline in CDS spreads of

0.022 basis points per day.

        One concern is that many CFO turnovers coincide with CEO turnovers; these cases are likely to

reflect uncertainty about both managers, and possibly others as well if there is a large change in the top

management team. In this situation, the decline in CDS spreads over CFO tenure could reflect the declining

uncertainty about the CEO rather than the CFO. For this reason, we reestimate this equation on the

subsample of CFO turnovers into those for which there was not a CEO change within a year before or after

the time of the CFO change (Column (3), 722 turnovers), as well as the subsample of CFO changes

accompanied by a CEO change within this two-year period (Column (4), 311 turnovers).

        In each subsample, the firm’s CDS spread significantly declines, but the magnitude of the decline

is much smaller in Column (4) using the subsample of CFO changes without CEO changes (-0.017) than in

Column (3), estimated for the subsample in which there is both a CEO change and a CFO change at the

same time (-0.059). The difference between the two estimates is statistically significant at 1% level. For

further comparison, when there is a CEO change without a CFO or other top management change, the

estimate is -0.035, which is between these two estimates (see Table 3, Column (3)), and is significantly

more negative than -0.017.      These results are consistent with the view that uncertainty about top


                                                     16
management affects a firm’s default risk. Since the CEO is the most important officer, uncertainty about

him affects firms the most, but uncertainty about the CFO matters as well. Not surprisingly, when both

officers change at the same time, the decline is largest, most likely because these cases are associated with

the greatest managerial uncertainty. 13

        As with the CEO turnovers, another possible explanation for the spread/tenure relation is that poor

performance can lead to both the turnover and the higher expected default rates. For this reason, we

consider the subsample of 43 CFO turnovers that are not accompanied by CEO turnovers and are due to the

death, illness, or retirement of the departing CFOs when the firm is performing well. The results using this

subsample are presented in Column (5) of Table 5. The results indicate that in this subsample, we still

observe a significant CDS spread decline over the CFO’s first three years of tenure. The magnitude of the

decline (0.021 basis points per day) is close to the full sample estimate (0.022 basis points per day).

Consequently, it does not appear that the observed decline in default risk over the first 3 years of a CFO’s

tenure occurs because of the management changes occurring at times of high uncertainty; instead, the

results suggest that uncertainty about his ability or future actions generates incremental default risk.

        In Panel C of Table 5, we examine the relation between the firm’s loan or bond yield spreads and

the CFO’s tenure. We find that the loan spread tends to decline by 5.2 basis points per year and the bond

yield spread tends to decline by 5.7 basis points per year in the CFO’s first three years in office. These

declines are statistically significant, but, similar to the pattern from CDS spreads, smaller than those

reported in Table 4 following CEO turnovers.

        Overall, the results in Tables 2-5 suggest that there is a substantial, statistically significant decrease

in the firm’s cost of debt financing over the CEO’s and the CFO’s tenure, reflected by the firm’s CDS

spread, the spreads on its bank loans, and the yield on its corporate bonds. The decrease is fastest in the

chief executives’ first three years in office. This decline does not appear to come from the timing of

executive turnovers at periods when uncertainty is high. Like for other sources of uncertainty about the firm,

13
  This finding is consistent with the findings in Bennedsen et al. (2013) based on managers’ hospitalization records
that CEOs are more important to firm value than other top executives.
                                                        17
when management’s ability or policies are unknown, the market responds by raising expected default

premiums on the firm’s debt.



4. Cross-Sectional Differences in Declines of Default Risk over Tenure

        If the increase in spreads following management changes reflects uncertainty about the ability and

policies of the new management, then when this uncertainty is higher, there should be a larger increase in

spreads around the time of the turnover, and a larger subsequent decline as the uncertainty becomes

resolved. Thus, cross-sectional variation in the sensitivity of spreads to executive tenure provides a way to

confirm that the decline in spreads over CEO tenure indeed reflects the resolution of managerial uncertainty.

4.1. CEO Background and Prior Uncertainty about the CEO

        New CEOs differ in the prior uncertainty about their abilities to add value to their firms. For

example, the existence of an “heir apparent” usually indicates a well-anticipated succession with an

incoming CEO of known talents and a continuation of the prior CEO’s policies, so the appointment of an

heir-apparent CEO should be associated with relatively low uncertainty. Similarly, we expect an outsider

CEO to have higher prior uncertainty than an insider CEO because of the unknown quality of the match

between the outsider and the new firm. In addition, younger CEOs generally have shorter track records and

less visibility than older CEOs, so the market will likely have less time to observe them and have a more

diffuse prior about their abilities. Learning models such as Pastor and Veronesi (2003) predict that learning

should be faster when prior uncertainty about ability is higher (see Hermalin and Weisbach (2014) for more

discussion). A consequence of a faster learning speed is that the perceived default risk should decline at a

higher rate when there is more prior uncertainty about the CEO’s ability.

        In Panel A of Table 6, we estimate the way that the sensitivity of CDS spreads to tenure varies with

these measures of ex ante uncertainty about the incoming CEO. Column (1) includes a term interacting

tenure with a dummy variable indicating that the new CEO is an “heir-apparent”. The incremental effect of

tenure on the firm’s CDS spread for such an heir apparent CEO, measured by the sum of the coefficients on


                                                     18
tenure and tenure interacted with the heir apparent dummy, is close to zero (-0.002 = -0.040 + 0.038). This

result suggests that when the new CEO is an heir-apparent, then the decline in CDS spread over the CEO’s

first three years is minimal. In contrast, when the incoming CEO is not an heir apparent, spreads decline

significantly with tenure.

        Column (2) presents estimates of a similar equation including a term interacting tenure with a

dummy equal to one if the incoming CEO is an outsider. The effect of tenure on CDS spread for outsider

CEOs ( - 0.079) is substantially and significantly larger than that for insider CEOs. Similarly, Column (3)

presents estimates including an interaction term for young (under 50 years old) CEOs. The results indicate

that the coefficient for young CEOs is statistically significantly larger than for older CEOs. All these results

suggest that the firm’s CDS spread is more sensitive to CEO tenure when there is higher prior uncertainty

about the CEO.

        A potentially important distinction between CEO and CFO is that a CFO’s skills, such as

experience with financial reporting, tax, and making accounting judgments, are typically more general and

transferrable across firms and industries than a CEO’s skills. 14 The generality of CFOs’ skills could be one

reason why we observe more outsider successions for CFOs than for CEOs. In addition, it suggests that the

difference between the prior uncertainty of an insider CFO and that of an outsider CFO should be smaller

than between an insider CEO and an outsider CEO. Indeed, in Column (4) of Table 6, Panel A, we find that

the CDS spread to tenure sensitivity is not significantly different between insider CFOs and outsider CFOs,

suggesting that the prior uncertainty about an outsider CFO is not significantly higher than that about an

insider CFO.

4.2. Prior Relationships with Lenders

        We have presumed to this point that all suppliers of debt capital have access to the same

information about the firm’s management, so that all have the same assessment of the CEO or CFO’s


14
   Ralph Bender, CFO of the Manship Media Group, for example, suggests that a successful CFO should be a
technical generalist, rather than specializing in one area: “The key to being a successful CFO is not so much knowing
everything, but knowing a little bit about a lot of things, trying to stay abreast of these things.” (see Lamoreaux
(2009))
                                                         19
ability or policies at each point in time. This analysis ignores the possibility that some lenders have better

information about the CEO and the firm than others; this possibility underlies the literature on relationship

banking, which suggests that a long-term relationship between firms and lenders reduces asymmetric

information and consequently the spreads that firms pay on loans. 15 If part of the asymmetric information

that contributes to the spread differences between relationship and non-relationship based loans is about the

management of the borrowing firm, then the existence of a personal relationship between the manager and

the lender should reduce this information asymmetry. Consistent with this idea, Karolyi (2014) finds that

the existence of such a personal relationship between a firm’s management and a lender does in fact lower

spreads. To the extent that such a personal relationship lowers the amount of prior uncertainty about the

new management from the perspective of a lender, it should reduce the sensitivity of loan spreads to the

manager’s time in office.

         To test this prediction, we rely on DealScan data, together with information on executive

movements from ExecuComp, from which we can measure whether a CEO worked for a firm that

previously took a loan from a particular lender. We construct an indicator variable “Prior CEO-Lender

Relationship”, which equals one if the lead bank(s) of the current new loan was a lead bank in a loan of the

CEO’s employer in the five years before he became the CEO of the current firm, and zero otherwise. We

expect such a prior relationship to reduce the lender’s initial uncertainty about the new CEO’s ability,

leading to a lower sensitivity of spreads to the new CEO’s tenure. The interpretation of this variable

depends on whether a CEO was an internal or external hire; for internal hires the prior relationship would

exist whenever the current firm had taken a loan with the lender, while with an external hire, it would exist

if his prior firm had taken the loan. Table 1 Panel C reports the summary statistics of this variable.

         We estimate the way in which the effect of tenure on loan spreads varies with previous lending

relationships in Column (1) of Panel B of Table 6, focusing on the first three years of a CEO’s tenure. The



15
  This literature was started by Rajan (1992)’s analysis. Petersen and Rajan (1994, 1995), Berger and Udell (1995),
Schenone (2010), Bharath et al. (2007, 2011), and Karolyi (2014) all document that relationship-based loans have
lower spreads than otherwise identical loans in which there is not a prior relationship between the firm and its lender.
                                                          20
estimated direct effect of CEO tenure on loan spread is -9.901 and is statistically significant, while the

interaction effect between CEO tenure and Prior CEO-Lender Relationship is 5.643 and also is statistically

significant. These estimates imply that when there is no prior relationship, the spread declines by about 10

basis points per year of CEO tenure. However, the existence of a prior relationship between the new CEO

and the lead bank(s) reduces the spread-tenure sensitivity by about 57% (=5.643/9.901).

        The estimates using our full sample pool CEOs who were internal hires together with those who

were external hires. For each case, the prior lending relationship likely resolves some uncertainty perceived

by the lenders. However, when the new CEO is an internal hire, a prior relationship with the lender(s)

reduces uncertainty about both the current firm and the CEO, while when the new CEO is an external hire,

a prior relationship reduces only uncertainty about the CEO. To isolate the extent to which the personal

relationship with the lender leads to lower uncertainty perceived by the lender about the management, we

re-estimate this equation on the subsample of CEOs who were hired from outside the firm.

        Column (2) reports the estimates for the subsample of outsider CEOs. The direct effect of tenure is

much larger in absolute magnitude here than in Column (1) (-17.716 vs. -9.901), because there is larger

uncertainty about outsider CEOs. The interaction effect is 6.855, which implies that if the new outsider

CEO has worked with the lender before joining the current company, then the loan spread is 39%

(=6.855/17.716) less sensitive to the new CEO’s time in office. Thus, a personal relationship between a

CEO and a lender, even if it occurs prior to the CEO joining his current firm, leads to less uncertainty on

the part of a lender, and consequently lower sensitivity of spreads to CEO tenure.

        In Columns (3) and (4), we repeat this exercise for CFOs. Similar to the estimates for CEOs, the

existence of a prior relationship between the CFO and the lender(s) significantly reduces the sensitivity of

the firm’s loan spreads to the CFO’s time in office by 32% for the full sample of CFOs (=2.790/8.725) and

30% for outsider CFOs (=2.852/9.550). The magnitude of this sensitivity for CFOs is smaller than for

CEOs, consistent with the view that uncertainty about CEOs is more important than about CFOs because

their decisions have a larger impact on firm value.


                                                      21
        Overall, the results in Panels A and B of Table 6 suggest that the loan-spread-tenure relation is

affected by the amount of prior uncertainty about the new CEO, which is consistent with the argument that

the declining interest rate over CEO tenure is driven by the decrease in the amount of uncertainty about the

new management over time.

4.3. The Risk of the Debt Claim

        We have argued that the decline in CDS spreads, as well as loan spreads and bond yields, over

CEO tenure, occurs because of the reduction in uncertainty associated with a new CEO. As this uncertainty

becomes resolved over time, management-related risk declines, lowering the market’s expectation of firms’

default risk. Another cross-sectional prediction is that the effect of this additional management uncertainty

should be larger when the debt is riskier. Intuitively, since a risky corporate bond is a portfolio of a risk-

free bond and a short position in a put option on the firm’s assets, the riskiness of the debt claim is related

to the moneyness of the put option. When the claim is riskier, the probability of the put option being in the

money before it expires is higher, and the option value is more sensitive to an increase in volatility of the

firm’s assets due to the change of CEO. This intuition implies that the interest rate that the firm pays on

debt should be more sensitive to CEO tenure for speculative grade issuers than for investment grade issuers,

for highly levered issuers than for moderately levered issuers, and for subordinated debt than for senior

debt.

        We evaluate these predictions in Panel C of Table 6. In Column 1, we re-estimate the CDS

equation from Table 2, Column 2, but also include interaction terms between tenure and a dummy variable

indicating whether the firm has a speculative credit rating (below BBB-) at the time of the turnover, and

between tenure and a dummy variable that equals 1 if the firm’s leverage ratio is in the top quartile (above

36%) at the time of turnover. The coefficient on the interaction with Speculative Grade variable is close to

zero and insignificant, but the coefficient on the interaction with high leverage is negative, large in

magnitude, and significantly different from zero. The sensitivity of CDS spread to CEO tenure in highly

leveraged firms more than doubles that in moderately leveraged firms.


                                                      22
         In Columns 2 and 3, we estimate a similar equation for the sample of loans and bonds respectively.

In addition, for the loan equation, we compare term loans and line of credit, as term loans are riskier for the

banks than line of credit. For the bond equation, we compare subordinated bonds and senior bonds, as

subordinated bonds are riskier for bond holders. 16 , 17 Column (2) documents that the loan spreads are

significantly more sensitive to CEO tenure for highly leveraged firms and for term loans. Column (3)

shows that the bond yield spreads are significantly more sensitive to CEO tenure when firms are highly

leveraged and bonds are more junior. These results suggest that tenure-spread sensitivities are higher when

debt is riskier.

         In summary, the cross-sectional evidence about the relation between the firm’s cost of debt

financing and its CEO’s time in office is consistent with the view that reduction in uncertainty about

management drives the decline in default risk and the firm’s cost of debt over CEO tenure. The cost of debt

appears to be more sensitive to CEO tenure when there is higher prior uncertainty about the CEO’s ability,

when there is no prior relationship between the new CEO and the lender, and when the debt claim is riskier.



5. Implications of Management Uncertainty for Financial Policies

         When a new CEO takes office, the uncertainty about his ability and policies affects the total risk of

the firm and therefore the interest it must pay on its debt. The additional risk due to uncertainty about the

management is likely to be idiosyncratic rather than systematic since there is no reason why the talents of

the incoming CEO is likely to co-vary with the overall state of the economy. Thus, its effect on the firm’s

cost of capital will depend on the level of investors’ diversification, which is unobservable to an outsider.

However, regardless of investors’ diversification, this idiosyncratic risk is likely to affect firms’ financing


16
   Almost all of the loans in our sample are senior, so we cannot consider the effect of seniority using the loan sample.
17
   The other differences in the specifications between the columns come from the features of the different markets. For
firms with a traded CDS, we have daily values for the CDS, so we estimate our equation using daily data. With daily
data, we choose to include firm-CEO fixed effects, so the direct effects of speculative grade and high leverage cannot
be estimated since these firm characteristics are measured at the time of each turnover. Using the loan and bond data,
we only have one observation for each time a firm takes out a loan or issues a bond, so we measure tenure in years and
use firm fixed effects rather than firm-CEO fixed effects, and the direct effects of firm characteristics such as
speculative grade and high leverage can be estimated because a firm may have multiple turnovers.
                                                          23
policies. In particular, the temporary increase in promised interest rates could potentially lead firms to

refrain from taking loans or issuing bonds at times when uncertainty about the management is high. In

addition, the additional cost of borrowing following CEO changes is likely to lead firms to have a higher

precautionary savings. Finally, in the years immediately following a CEO turnover, firms should rely more

on internal than external funds to finance their investments.

5.1. Propensity to Use External Debt and Precautionary Savings

           We first consider the way firms’ propensities to issue external debt and their cash policies vary

over their CEOs’ first three years in office. In Panel A of Table 7, we estimate the probability of the firm

issuing bonds or initiating loans as a function of its CEO’s tenure, using the same firm-level controls as in

prior specifications. Column (1) presents estimates of the spline specification, which allows the likelihood

of using external debt to be different in different stages of the CEO’s career. These estimates indicate that

the firm’s propensity to issue external debt significantly increases during the first three years of the CEO’s

tenure, and remains constant during the remainder of the CEO’s tenure. Column (2) estimates this relation

using only the first three years of tenure for CEOs who stay in office for at least 3 years; these

specifications imply that the likelihood of issuing external debt increases by about 1.3 percentage points per

year.

           In Panel B, we do a similar exercise for firms’ cash holdings (cash and short-term marketable

securities normalized by the book value of assets). 18 In addition to the controls employed in prior

specifications, we also control for uses of cash: actual investment expenditures (capital expenditures,

acquisitions, change in net working capital), debt obligations (measured by leverage ratios), and dividend

payouts. The estimated cash-tenure sensitivity therefore reflects the impact of CEO tenure on the firm’s

cash holdings, netting out the current uses of cash, so it should capture the impact of management

uncertainty on precautionary savings.




18
     We obtain similar results if we exclude marketable securities when calculating cash holdings.
                                                            24
        The estimates in Column (1) indicate that cash holdings are highest when the firm has a new CEO,

significantly decreases in the CEO’s first three years, and then becomes insensitive to CEO tenure after

three years. Column (2) suggests that the cash to assets ratio decreases by about 0.4 percentage points per

year, totaling 1.2 percentage point over the first three years of CEO tenure. Given that the median cash to

assets ratio in our sample is 7%, a one-percentage-point decline in cash ratio represents a 17% decline, a

nontrivial drop. Column (3) documents that there is a similar decline of cash holding over CEO tenure

following turnovers that are not likely to be performance-motivated (turnovers that satisfy any of the

criteria in rows (2)-(5) of Table 1, Panel C). Similar to the decline in the cost of borrowing, the estimated

decline in cash over the first three years of tenure does not appear to be a consequence of the endogenous

timing of turnovers.

        If the decline in cash holdings over the first three years of CEO tenure occurs because of

uncertainty about the new CEO, then this sensitivity should vary with the amount of uncertainty there is

about the new CEO. Panel C of Table 7 presents tests of this hypothesis. The results suggest that when the

prior uncertainty about the CEO is relatively high, i.e., the new CEO is young, not an heir apparent, or is an

outsider, cash holdings are more sensitive to CEO tenure. The coefficients on the interaction between

tenure and “Young” (Column 1) and “Outsider” (Column 3) are negative and significant, increasing the

effect of tenure on cash ratios. In contrast, the coefficient on “Heir Apparent” interacted with tenure is .004

and exactly offsets the coefficient of tenure (-.004), so the effect of tenure on cash ratios equals zero when

the successor is an heir apparent and negative if he is not an heir apparent. These results are consistent with

the view that the additional cash holdings at the beginning of a CEO’s tenure reflect precautionary savings

due to the additional uncertainty and cost of raising debt capital during this period.

5.2. Evidence from Acquisition Financing

        If firms face a higher cost of debt financing during CEOs’ first few years of tenure, then all other

things equal, firms should be less likely to use debt to finance its investments during this period. To

examine this hypothesis, we consider the way that firms finance large acquisitions. We focus on


                                                      25
acquisitions because they are large, observable investments, and we can measure the way in which they are

financed. We construct a sample of acquisitions with disclosed transaction value above $1 million from the

SDC Platinum Database. 19 Using information from SDC on the means of payment (cash or stock), we

calculate the average percentage of deal value financed by stock and by cash for each CEO tenure year (0,

1, 2, 3). The cash financing part can come from either internally generated cash or external debt financing

through a loan. We measure the extent to which acquirers raise external cash by matching the acquisitions

with the data on loans and bonds used above. For the loan sample, we use DealScan’s information on the

purposes of loans, including “acquisition line” and “takeover”, and estimate from this information the

amount of loan that is used for the acquisition. Thus, we calculate the average ratio of loan values for

acquisition purposes to deal value in each tenure year, and interpret it as the percentage of deal value

financed by loans.

        Table 8 tabulates the results. Two patterns are evident. First, the split between stock financing and

cash financing (14% vs. 86%) is fairly stable over the early CEO tenure years. Second, the percentage of

deal value financed by loans increases substantially over time. It equals 5.7% in year 0, and then almost

doubles in years 1 and 2, and increases further to 14.8% in year 3. The difference in the percentage

financed by loans from year 0 to year 1 is statistically significant at 5% level, while the percentage financed

by stock (or cash) is not significantly different across these years.

        One potential concern is that part of the cash used for an acquisition can come from another form

of external debt, bond issuance, for which firms do not disclose the uses of the proceeds. To address this

concern, we single out firms that engage in acquisitions but do not have any bond issuance in the same

fiscal years as the acquisitions. We find very similar results as those reported in Table 8. The split between

stock and cash (15% vs. 85%) is relatively stable over the first three years of CEO tenure, and the

percentage financed by loans still significantly increases over time (5.2%, 9.3%, and 13.4% in the first

three years, respectively).

19
  We exclude leveraged buyouts, exchange offers, repurchases, spinoffs, minority stake purchases, recapitalizations,
self-tenders, and privatizations.
                                                        26
        Firms increase the likelihood that they issue external debt, decrease their cash holdings, and

increase their use of external funds to finance investment during their CEOs’ early years of tenure. These

effects likely reflect management adjusting its financial policies because of the changing cost of using

external debt during the early years of a CEO’s tenure.



6. Conclusion

        A central feature of financial markets is that the interest rate a firm pays on debt increases with the

market’s perception of the firm’s risk. This risk occurs because of factors that affect the value of the firm’s

underlying assets, and also because of uncertainty about how these assets will be managed. The literature

on debt pricing typically does not distinguish between these types of risks. However, all risks, including

those generated by uncertainty about management, should affect the likelihood of default. Consequently, a

rational market should incorporate managerial-generated uncertainty into its assessment of a firm’s risk

when pricing its securities. Holding constant a firm’s fundamental risks, when there is more uncertainty

about a management team’s abilities or its future choices of actions, creditors should increase the interest

rates they charge the firm.

        Uncertainty about management is likely to be highest when there is a new management team and

should decrease over time as management’s ability becomes known more precisely. Our empirical analysis

suggests that CDS spreads on a firm’s debt, loan spreads at origination, and the bond yield spreads at

issuance are all significantly higher when the firm’s CEO and/or the CFO are new in office than when they

have been in office for three years. This pattern persists regardless of the reason for the management

turnover. The sensitivity of the borrowing cost to CEO tenure also becomes more pronounced when the

prior uncertainty about the manager is higher: if the CEO is not an heir-apparent, is an outsider, is younger,

or has no prior relationship with the lender(s). These results strongly suggest that uncertainty about

management does affect firms’ costs of borrowing.




                                                      27
        Management-related risk is almost definitionally idiosyncratic and unrelated to firms’ exposure to

systematic risk. Therefore, although management risk will increase the likelihood of default and therefore

the promised interest rates on debt, it should not affect expected returns on debt (or equity), or firms’

capital budgeting decisions if investors are well-diversified. The extent to which these assumptions hold in

practice is likely to be an interesting topic of future research, especially given that investment appears to

vary systematically over the CEO cycle (Pan et al. 2014b), and also that idiosyncratic risk appears to affect

expected equity returns (Ang et al. 2006).

        If a firm’s cost of borrowing is likely to decline over time as a firm’s management becomes better-

known to the market, firms’ financial policies should take account of this expected change in their cost of

borrowing. Empirically, we find that firms do adjust their financial policies as a response to decreasing

management-related costs of borrowing over time. In particular, firms tend to have a lower propensity to

issue debt, to hold more precautionary savings, and to rely more on internal funds for investments when

their CEOs are new in office, relative to the level for the same firms three years later when the CEOs are

more well-known to the market.

        Overall, our study suggests that uncertainty about management affects firms’ costs of borrowing

and consequently their financial policies. Such an observation has consequences for management as well as

for financial markets. It emphasizes the importance of transparency in managerial policies and

communicating them to the marketplace, since predictability of managerial strategies appears to lower

future financing costs. In addition, it suggests that existing models of debt pricing are incomplete to the

extent that they ignore management risk. More generally, the paper’s results suggest that risk should not be

viewed monolithically: a firm’s risk comes from many sources, including both the fundamentals of its

business and its choice of management team.




                                                     28
                                                 References


Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, “The Cross-Section of Volatility and Expected
Returns,” Journal of Finance, 61, 259-299.

Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2013, “Estimating the Value of the
Boss: Evidence from CEO Hospitalization Events,” Working Paper.

Berger, Allen N. and Gregory F. Udell, 1995, “Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm
finance,” Journal of Business, 68, 351-381.

Blanco, R., S. Brennan and I.W. Marsh, 2005, “An Empirical Analysis of the Dynamic Relationship
between Investment-Grade Bonds and Credit Default Swaps,” Journal of Finance, 60 (5), 2255-2281.

Bharath, Sreedhar, Sandeep Dahiya, Anthony Saunders and Anand Srinivasan, 2007, “So What do I Get?
The Bank’s View of Lending Relationship,” Journal of Financial Economics, 85(2), 368-419.

Bharath, Sreedhar, Sandeep Dahiya, Anthony Saunders and Anand Srinivasan, 2011, “Lending
Relationships and Loan Contract Terms,” Review of Financial Studies, 24(4), 1141-1203.

Chava, Sudheer and Michael Roberts, 2008, “How does Financing Impact Investment? The Role of Debt
Covenants,” Journal of Finance, 63, 2085 – 2121.

Clayton, Matthew, Jay Hartzell and Joshua Rosenberg, 2005, “The Impact of CEO Turnover on Equity
Volatility,” The Journal of Business, 78 (5), 1779-1808.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Robert S. Goldstein, and J. Spencer Martin, 2001, “The Determinants of Credit
Spread Changes,” The Journal of Finance, 56, 2177-2207.

Fee, C. Edward, Charles J. Hadlock, and Joshua R. Pierce, 2013, “Managers Who Lack Style: Evidence
from Exogenous CEO Changes,” Review of Financial Studies, 26 (3), 567-601.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 2014, “Understanding Corporate Governance through
Learning Models of Managerial Competence,” Working Paper.

Karolyi, Stephen A., 2014, “Personal Lending Relationships,” Working Paper.

Lamoreaux, Matthew G., 2009, “CFO 101, Five Prerequisites,” Journal of Accountancy, 208(3), 3-5.

Mian, Shehzad, 2001, “On the Choice and Replacement of Chief Financial Officers,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 60, 143-175.

Naveen, Lalitha, 2006. “Organizational Complexity and Succession Planning”, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 41(3), 661-683.

Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2014a, “Learning about CEO Ability and Stock
Return Volatility,” Working Paper.

Pan, Yihui, Tracy Yue Wang, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2014b, “CEO Investment Cycles,” Working Paper.
                                                  29
Pastor, Lubos and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, “Stock Valuation and Learning about Profitability,” Journal of
Finance, 58, 1749-1789.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1994, “The Benefits of Firm-Creditor Relationships: Evidence
from small business data,” Journal of Finance, 49, 3-37.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1995, “The Effect of Credit Market Competition on Lending
Relationships", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 407-443.

Rajan, Raghuram, 1992, “Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice between Informed and Arm's-length
debt,” Journal of Finance, 47(4), 1367-1400.

Schenone, Carola, 2010, “Lending Relationships and Information Rents: Do Banks Exploit their
Information Advantage?” Review of Financial Studies, 23(3), 1149-1199.

Strahan, Philip, 1999, “Borrower risk and the price and nonprice terms of bank loans,” Working Paper.




                                                   30
                                 Appendix A: Variable Definitions

Loan spread (in basis point)      All-in-Drawn Spread (AIS) over LIBOR at the origination date,
                                  from the current pricing file. Winsorized at 1% in the Deal
                                  Scan/Compustat merged data base.
Loan maturity (in months)         A calculation of how long (in months) the facility will be active
                                  from signing date to expiration date, from the facility file.
Loan size (in $ millions)         The amount of the facility, from the facility data set.
Secured                           An indicator variable if the loan is secured, from the facility file.
Number of lenders                 Total number of lenders in a loan, from the lender file.
Performance Pricing               A loan feature that ties the interest rate of the loan to an indicator
                                  (e.g., leverage, interest coverage ratio) of the firm’s performance,
                                  from the performance pricing file.
Loan Type                         Type of the loan (facility)
Loan Purpose                      Purpose of the loan (facility)
Lead Bank                         Following Bharath et al. (2007), we focus on lead bank(s) in the
                                  syndicate in relationship lending. Any lender characterized as “lead
                                  arranger”, “lead bank”, “lead manager”, or have an allocation of
                                  more than 90% of the total committed amount to the facility is
                                  characterized as a lead bank. Any bank that is described as
                                  “participant” is not a leading bank.
Prior CEO (CFO)-Lender            A binary variable that equals 1 if the lead bank(s) of the current
Relationship                      new loan was a lead bank in a loan of the CEO’s employer in the
                                  five years before he became the CEO of the current firm, and zero
                                  otherwise.
Dummy (Loan Initiation or Bond    An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm takes at least one loan
Issuance)                         or issued one bond in the fiscal year.
Yield spread (in basis point)     Offering yield spread. The difference between the issue's
                                  offering yield and the yield of the benchmark treasury bond,
                                  calculated only for fixed coupon bond (about 78% of the mergent
                                  sample).
Bond size (in $ millions)         Offering amount, the par value of debt initially issued (in $
                                  millions)
Bond maturity (in months)         Maturity date – offering date (in months).
Subordinated                      An indicator variable that equals 1 if the bond is junior, junior
                                  subordinate, subordinate, senior subordinate, and 0 otherwise
                                  (senior or senior secured).
CDS Spread (in basis point)       The amount paid by the Protection Buyer to the Protection Seller,
                                  typically denominated in basis points and paid quarterly. We use
                                  the five-year spreads because these contracts are the most liquid and
                                  constitute over 85 percent of the entire CDS market. To maintain
                                  uniformity in contracts, we only keep CDS quotations for senior
                                  unsecured debt with a modified restructuring (MR) clause and
                                  denominated in U.S. dollars.
Recovery Rate (in percentage)     Reported by data contributors. Most pricing methodologies estimate
                                  recovery rates in a very simplistic way: a percentage is assigned to
                                  the seniority of the debt of a company. For investment grade
                                  issuers, recovery is generally assumed to be 40% (as the probability
                                  of default is low, the recovery rate is at best an estimate). For
                                  distressed issuers however, where the probability of default is
                                                 31
                                 higher, recovery tends to be more precisely defined.
Credit Spread (in basis point)   The difference between AAA corporate bond yield and BAA
                                 corporate bond yield (data source: Federal Reserve Board of
                                 Governors) measured in the month prior to loan initiation.
Term Spread (in basis point)     The difference between the 10-year Treasury yield and the 2-year
                                 Treasury yield (data source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors)
                                 measured in the month prior to loan initiation.
VIX (in percentage)              CBOE volatility index, which shows the market's expectation of 30-
                                 day volatility. It is constructed using the implied volatilities of a
                                 wide range of S&P 500 index options. This volatility is meant to be
                                 forward looking and is calculated from both calls and puts.
Log(Assets)                      Logarithm of the total book assets
Leverage                         (Long-term debt + debt in current liabilities)/total assets
M/B                              Market value of equity (closing price at the fiscal year end times
                                 shares outstanding) divided by book value of equity
Q                                (Market value of equity + the book value of total debt)/book value
                                 of total assets
ROA                              Earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation scaled by the total
                                 book assets
Tangibility                      Net property, plant and equipment/total assets
CF Volatility                    Residual volatility of the AR(1) process of ROE, following Pastor
                                 and Veronesi (2003)
Payout Ratio                     (Dividend/Earnings) per share
Cash Ratio                       Cash and short-term marketable securities scaled by
                                 (contemporaneous) book assets
Capx                             Capital expenditure scaled by total book assets, with missing or
                                 negative Capx set to 0.
Acquisition                      Value of acquisitions scaled by total book assets. Acquisitions
                                 include completed deals covered in SDC with the deal form of
                                 “Acquisitions of Assets”, “Acquisitions of certain Assets”, “Acq.
                                 Maj. Int.”, “Acq. Part. Int.”, “Acq. Rem. Int.”, “Acquisition” or
                                 “Merger” (as the acquirer”).
Change in NWC                    Change in net working capital without cash, scaled by total assets
Speculative Grade                An indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm has a rating below
                                 BBB-, and 0 otherwise (investment grade)
Highly Levered                   An indicator variable that equals 1 if leverage is greater than 36%
                                 (corresponds to the 75% of the leverage distribution, as well as the
                                 mean of the speculative grade firms).
Total time in office             Equals to 0 if the CEO (or CFO) came into office and left office in
                                 the same year; 1 if he left the year after he became CEO (or CFO);
                                 etc.
Long-term CEO                    CEOs with at least 3 years in office in total (i.e., total time in office
                                 no less than 2 years)
Outsider CEO                     An indicator that equals 1 if the CEO is hired from outside (i.e, with
                                 the firm for less than three year when becoming CEO)
Heir-apparent CEO                An indicator variable that equals 1 if the new CEO was an heir
                                 apparent. An executive with the title “president” or “chief operating
                                 officer (COO)” or both who is distinct from the CEO and the
                                 chairman is designated as the “heir apparent”

                                                32
Young CEO                            An indicator variable that equal to 1 if the CEO who was younger
                                     than 50 when taking office.
Turnovers Due to Health or Illness   Include cases where a) news searches revealed that the CEO
                                     departure was related to a health condition or death (from Fee et al.
                                     2013), or b) turnover reason provided in Execucomp is “deceased”.
Turnovers Due to Retirement of       This sample includes turnovers cases where a) news searches
Departing CEO                        revealed that the CEO departure was related to a health condition or
                                     death (from Fee et al. 2013), b) turnover reason provided in
                                     Execucomp is “deceased”, c) departing CEOs older than 65 years.
                                     We exclude the “suspicious” retirements by focusing on retirements
                                     at good performance. This means that the cumulative monthly
                                     industry-adjusted stock return during the 12-months before the new
                                     CEO’s inauguration month (see the variable definition for Cum.
                                     Industry-adj. Return month[-12,-1] below) is greater than 0.
No Management Shakeup                CEO turnovers not accompanied by management (top-4 highest
                                     paid non-CEO executives) changes during the turnover year and the
                                     year after turnover
Cum. ind.-adj. return month[-12,-    Cumulative industry (Fama-French 49)-adjusted return during the
1]                                   12 months before the inauguration month
Median monthly IVOL month[-          The median of the monthly industry (Fama-French 49)-adjusted
12,-1]                               idiosyncratic volatility during the 12 months before the
                                     inauguration month
Good pre-turnover performance        Turnovers that satisfy the following three conditions: 1) the median
(Pre-turnover Ind-adj. IVOL<=0 &     of the monthly industry-adjusted idiosyncratic volatility during the
stock return>=0 & ROA>=0)            12-months before the inauguration month (see the variable
                                     definition for Median Monthly IVOL month[-12,-1] above) is less
                                     or equal to 0. 2) the cumulative monthly industry-adjusted stock
                                     return during the 12-months before the inauguration month (see the
                                     variable definition for Cum. Industry-adj. Return month[-12,-1]
                                     above) is no less than 0, 3) the ind-adj. ROA in the fiscal year prior
                                     to the inauguration month is no less than 0.
                                     ROA is defined as the earnings before interest, tax, and depreciation
                                     scaled by the beginning of fiscal year total book assets.
No Pre-turnover run-up in CDS        To capture the change in the CDS spread before turnover, we run
spread                               firm-CEO specific regressions of daily CDS spread on event days [-
                                     730, -30], with day 0 being the day when the CEO takes office. We
                                     require at least 250 trading day data on CDS spread. Turnovers with
                                     non-positive (or insignificant) tenure-time slope are classified as not
                                     preceded by an increase in the CDS spread.
Outright Forced                      Outright forced turnovers include the “overtly forced” group from
                                     Fee et al. (2013) with cases for which news searches indicated that
                                     the CEO was forced to leave or left under pressure.




                                                    33
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                   Panel A: Loan, Bond, and CDS Attributes
This table reports the summary statistics of loan, bond, and CDS attributes during the first 10 years of CEO tenure.
Loan level and bond level variables, such as the loan spread and yield spread, are calculated when loans are initiated
or when bonds are issued for the sample period that we have loan or bond data (1987 – 2012). The CDS variables are
measured at the daily frequency for the sample period that we have CDS data (2001 – 2012).
Variables                                   N            sd          mean            p25         p50         p75
CDS Spread                              955,103       229.24        159.12          38.53       75.66       174.67
Recovery Rate                           950,007         3.09         39.61          39.43         40          40
Loan Spread                              17,076       126.89        157.93            50         125         225
Loan Maturity                            16,478        26.74         44.28            20          48          60
log(Loan Size)                           17,075         1.45          5.30           4.53        5.37        6.21
Number of lenders                        17,063         9.71          9.97             3           7          14
Performance Pricing                      17,076         0.50          0.45             0           0           1
Refinancing                              12,450         0.38          0.82             1           1           1
Secured                                  10,568         0.49          0.60             0           1           1
Prior CEO-lender Relationship            11,039         0.48          0.35             0           0           1
Speculative Grade                        11,259         0.49          0.39             0           0           1
Yield Spread                              8,525       194.77        182.49          62.94      121.27        233
Bond Maturity                             8,520       125.62        144.24            61         120         144
log(Bond Size)                            8,525         1.74          5.43           5.01        5.70        6.21
Subordinated                              8,525         0.37          0.16             0           0           0

                                             Panel B: CEO Turnovers
This table reports the distribution of CEO turnovers over time for CEOs in three samples. Information on CEO
turnover is obtained from Execucomp for the sample period 1987-2010. Although Execucomp’s coverage starts in
1992, some of the CEOs in the database took office before 1992, leading to some CEO turnovers from the late 1980s
being in our sample. The CDS data is available only from 2001. Therefore, the turnovers in the CDS sample from
early periods tend to be later years of a long-term CEO’s tenure and are scarce.
Became CEO           # of turnovers in the loan       # of turnovers in the bond        # of turnovers in the CDS
Year                          Sample                           Sample                            Sample
1987 - 1991                     532                              344
1992 - 1996                     834                              454                                103
1997 - 2001                     988                              580                                288
2002 - 2006                     892                              461                                303
2007 - 2012                     568                              348                                263
Total                           3,814                            2,187                              957

                                               CEO Time in Office
This table reports the distribution of CEO’s total time in office (in years) for CEOs in the union of the above three
samples.
                                                   Obs         Mean      25th percentile Median 75th percentile
CEO Total Time in Office (in years)               4,294         6.14            3             5              9


                                                          34
                            Panel C: CEO Turnover Types and CEO Characteristics
This table reports the number of various CEO turnovers based on turnover reason (see appendix for more details),
succession origin, and CEO age at turnover, for the CEO sample in Panel B.

                                                                    # of Turnovers
                        Health/Death                                      119
                        Health/Death/Retirement at good performance       242
                        No Mgt Shakeup                                    495
                        Good pre-turnover performance                     728
                        No Pre-turnover run-up in CDS spread              185
                        Not classified                                   2,296
                        Outright Forced                                   246
                        Heir-apparent CEO                                 512
                        Outsider CEO                                     1,194
                        Young CEO                                        1,651


                                    Panel D: Firm and macro-level Attributes
This table reports the summary statistics of firm attributes (yearly, 1987-2012) for all Execucomp firms that had
turnovers between 1987 and 2012, as well as the credit market conditions (daily, 1987-2012 for credit and term spread,
1990-2012 for VIX).


              Variables               N         sd         mean         p25         p50        p75
              Log(Assets)          35,260      1.94        7.27        5.96        7.21       8.53
              Leverage             34,503      0.22        0.24        0.06        0.21       0.36
              M/B                  34,119      4.30        2.90        1.33        2.04       3.34
              ROA                  33,962      0.16        0.11        0.07        0.12       0.18
              Tangibility          33,349      0.24        0.28        0.08        0.20       0.42
              CF Volatility        30,563      0.96        0.56        0.25        0.29       0.42
              Payout Ratio         35,528      0.45        0.22        0.00        0.00       0.31
              Cash Ratio           35,168      0.18        0.14        0.02        0.07       0.20
              Capx                 35,192      0.06        0.05        0.01        0.04       0.07
              Acquisition          35,192      0.07        0.02        0.00        0.00       0.00
              Change in NWC        34,526      0.07        0.00        0.00        0.00       0.00
              Credit Spread         6,533      40.37       98.15         72          90        113
              Term Spread           6,505      90.95      109.75         26         103        190
              VIX                   5,794      8.13        20.45       14.73       18.87      23.96




                                                         35
                             Table 2: The Effect of CEO Tenure on CDS spread

This table reports the changes in CDS spread over CEO tenure. The sample period is 2001-2012. CEO tenure is
measured by days since the CEO takes office. Column (1) reports the results using a piecewise linear specification for
all CEOs (no matter how long they stayed in office) from year 0 to year 10. Column (2) reports the results for the first
three years of CEOs who stay in office for at least three years. All the control variables are measured
contemporaneous to the CDS spreads. The definitions of all variables are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm-year level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                           (1)            (2)
                                                    Years [0,10] Years [0,2]
                                                              CDS Spread
                             Tenure (years 0-2)       -0.032***
                                                        (0.011)
                             Tenure (years 3-5)          -0.015
                                                        (0.011)
                             Tenure (years 6-10)         -0.002
                                                        (0.011)
                             Tenure (in days)                         -0.031**
                                                                       (0.015)
                             Recovery Rate           -12.817*** -10.784***
                                                        (1.225)        (1.416)
                             Credit Spread             0.478***      0.443***
                                                        (0.039)        (0.066)
                             Term Spread                 -0.020         -0.050
                                                        (0.029)        (0.043)
                             VIX                       2.098***      2.443***
                                                        (0.134)        (0.259)
                             Log(Assets)             -44.778***         42.382
                                                       (12.259)       (30.398)
                             Leverage                209.408***         76.313
                                                       (46.637)       (61.511)
                             M/B                         -6.977         13.347
                                                        (6.049)        (8.938)
                             ROA                    -487.058*** -509.336***
                                                       (74.297)      (118.529)
                             Tangibility                 36.790          4.283
                                                       (77.583)      (111.459)
                             CF Volatility            16.036***          4.654
                                                        (4.381)        (7.087)
                             Payout Ratio            -23.384***         -6.306
                                                        (5.167)        (5.110)
                             Firm-CEO and Year F.E.         x              x
                             Observations               770,255        270,124
                             Adjusted R-squared           0.758          0.833



                                                          36
    Table 3: Tenure- CDS Spread Relations Following Likely Non-performance Driven Turnovers

This table reports the changes in CDS spread over the first three years of CEO tenure for various turnover subsamples
that are likely to be non-performance driven, outright forced, as well as those not classified. We control for the same
set of CDS, firm or, macro level variables as in Table 2, but do not report the coefficients for brevity. All CEOs in our
sample stay in office for at least three years. The definitions of turnover types are in Appendix A. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm-year level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                 (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)                  (7)          (8)
                                              CDS Spread, Years [0,2], Long-term CEOs
                            Health/
                                                         Good
                            Death/                                    No pre-
               Health/                    No mgt         pre-                       Union          Not        Outright
                            Ret. at                                  turnover
               Death                      shakeup      turnover                     (2)-(5)     classified     forced
                             good                                     run-up
                                                         perf.
                             perf.

Tenure        -0.037*       -0.042*       -0.035*       -0.029*      -0.043*       -0.026**      -0.058*      -0.132**
(in Days)     (0.020)       (0.022)       (0.019)       (0.016)      (0.022)        (0.013)      (0.030)       (0.050)
Firm-
CEO and
year F.E.         x            x             x            x              x            x             x             x
Obs.            5,928        14,541       38,566       119,125        84,777       164,501       79,759        25,864
Adj. R2         0.871        0.876         0.787        0.780          0.814        0.762         0.832         0.910




                                                          37
                                 Table 4: Borrowing Rates over CEO Tenure

                                                Panel A: Loan Spread

This table reports the changes in loan spread over CEO tenure. Column (1) uses piecewise linear regressions, for all
the CEOs from year 0 (turnover year) to year 10. Columns (2) to (4) report the results for the first three years of long-
term (in office for at least three years) CEOs’ tenure. Further, Column (3) reports the results for 961 likely non-
performance driven turnovers only (union of the four types of turnovers in columns (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1 in
the loan sample). Column (4) reports the results for loans that are classified as “refinancing” by DealScan. Lagged
firm-level control variables, such as firm size, leverage, M/B, ROA, Tangibility, Payout ratio, are included in all the
regressions, but omitted in the table for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the loan level. ***, **, * denote
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                  Years [0,10]                       Years [0,2], Long-term CEOs
                                      (1)                (2)                      (3)                          (4)
                                                                        Likely non-performance
                                                                           driven turnovers               Refinancing
Tenure (years 0-2)                  -6.495***
                                      (1.520)
Tenure (years 3-5)                    -0.972
                                      (0.914)
Tenure (years 6-10)                   -0.282
                                      (0.732)
Tenure (in years)                                    -6.266***                   -5.136**                   -5.161**
                                                       (1.872)                    (2.495)                    (2.419)
Credit Spread                       0.358***          0.296***                   0.443***                    0.325**
                                     (0.053)           (0.093)                    (0.133)                    (0.136)
Term Spread                         0.163***           0.122*                    0.209***                     0.098
                                     (0.031)           (0.062)                    (0.081)                    (0.081)
log(Debt Maturity)                  -6.309**           -4.113                     -4.437                    -13.706*
                                     (2.745)           (4.960)                    (5.979)                    (7.109)
log(Debt Size)                     -12.011***       -11.591***                 -10.553***                  -9.743***
                                     (1.118)           (1.983)                    (2.950)                    (2.666)
Performance Pricing                -16.740***       -24.234***                  -15.688**                 -27.964***
                                     (2.101)           (4.161)                    (6.151)                    (5.682)
Tranche Type and Loan
Purpose                                  x               x                          x                           x
Firm-level Controls                      x               x                          x                           x
Firm and Year F.E.                       x               x                          x                           x
Observations                          12,850           4,887                      2,140                       3,063
Adjusted R-squared                     0.690           0.716                      0.747                       0.751




                                                          38
                            Panel B: Non-Price Terms of Loan Contract over Tenure

This table reports the changes in other components of the loan contract during the first three years after CEO turnovers,
including loan maturity, loan size, number of lenders, and whether the loan is secured. All CEOs in our sample stay in
office for at least three years. The loan sample in this table does not condition on the availability of information on
loan spread. The definitions of all variables are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the loan level. ***, **,
* denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                  (1)                      (2)                     (3)                        (4)
                           log(Loan Maturity)         log(Loan Size)         Number of Lenders              Secured

Tenure (in years)                 0.015*                    0.002                   -0.304                   0.011
                                 (0.008)                  (0.020)                   (0.241)                 (0.011)
Credit Spread                     -0.001                  -0.002*                   -0.011                   0.000
                                 (0.000)                  (0.001)                   (0.010)                 (0.000)
Term Spread                      -0.001*                   -0.001                   -0.001                   0.000
                                 (0.000)                  (0.001)                   (0.007)                 (0.000)
Log(Assets)                        0.010                 0.512***                  2.774***               -0.113***
                                 (0.022)                  (0.037)                   (0.492)                 (0.022)
Leverage                          -0.106                   -0.075                    2.432                 0.214**
                                 (0.082)                  (0.164)                   (1.806)                 (0.089)
M/B                                0.000                   0.007*                   -0.016                   0.001
                                 (0.002)                  (0.004)                   (0.048)                 (0.002)
ROA                              0.337**                 1.090***                    2.667                -0.750***
                                 (0.172)                  (0.336)                   (4.029)                 (0.180)
Tangibility                       -0.130                    0.099                    5.403                  -0.087
                                 (0.139)                  (0.282)                   (4.464)                 (0.192)
CF Volatility                     -0.001                   -0.005                    0.152                  -0.003
                                 (0.010)                  (0.018)                   (0.209)                 (0.008)
Payout Ratio                      0.037*                    0.053                  1.373***                 -0.022
                                 (0.021)                  (0.038)                   (0.448)                 (0.025)
Performance                     0.096***                 0.286***                  4.271***               -0.069***
Pricing                          (0.022)                  (0.043)                   (0.483)                 (0.023)
Tranche Type and
Loan Purpose                        x                         x                        x                       x
Firm and Year F.E.                  x                         x                        x                       x
Observations                      4,887                     5,054                    5,048                   3,078
Adj. R2                           0.744                     0.671                    0.301                   0.679




                                                           39
                                  Panel C: Bond Yield Spreads over CEO Tenure

This table reports the changes in the bond yield spread over CEO tenure. Column (1) uses piecewise linear regressions,
for all the CEOs from year 0 (turnover year) to year 10. Columns (2) to (3) report the results for the first three years of
long-term CEOs’ tenure. Further, Column (3) reports the results for 439 exogenous turnovers only (union of the four
types of turnovers in columns (2)-(5) in Panel C of Table 1 in the bond sample). We control macro-level credit
conditions, bond characterics, and lagged firm-level characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***,
**, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                            Years [0,10]                    Years [0,2]
                                                (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                                                           Likely non-performance
                                                                              driven turnovers
                   Tenure (years 0-2)         -7.519**
                                               (3.677)
                   Tenure (years 3-5)          -3.107
                                               (2.754)
                   Tenure (years 6-10)          1.205
                                               (2.139)
                   Tenure (in years)              -9.600**                          -7.465*
                                                    (4.845)                          (3.849)
                   Credit Spread        1.107***  1.335***                         1.265***
                                          (0.103)   (0.154)                          (0.203)
                   Term Spread             0.110     0.116                            0.118
                                          (0.072)   (0.149)                          (0.198)
                   Log(Assets)         -21.810***  -17.309                            8.522
                                          (7.695)  (13.565)                         (20.698)
                   Leverage             87.250***   53.402                        383.626***
                                         (29.424)  (69.133)                        (137.537)
                   M/B                   -4.096*   -10.792                           -0.317
                                          (2.414)   (7.810)                         (10.666)
                   ROA                -290.524*** -59.060                           147.586
                                         (70.329) (120.535)                        (161.223)
                   Tangibility           -64.012   -11.882                           43.747
                                         (44.336)  (85.046)                        (110.818)
                   CF Volatility           3.806     7.954                           -2.833
                                          (4.135)   (7.578)                          (6.082)
                   Payout              -24.195***  -17.793                          -10.949
                                          (6.802)  (12.451)                         (23.168)
                   log(Debt Maturity)     -9.553    -7.735                            9.119
                                          (6.939)   (9.238)                          (8.079)
                   log(Debt Size)         -4.710   -18.150                          -15.261
                                          (8.635)  (16.074)                         (15.605)
                   Firm and Year F.E.        x         x                                x
                   Observations            5,921     2,326                            1,207
                   Adjusted R-squared      0.531     0.593                            0.599




                                                           40
                             Table 5: CFO Turnovers and Cost of Debt Financing

The CFO turnover data is assembled based on the news announcements from 2001 to 2009 in Capital IQ database.
Panel A reports the summary statistics of CFO turnover, tenure, and total time in office (in years) for CFOs whose
employers took loans or issued bonds or are in the CDS sample during their first 10 years of tenure. “CFO Turnovers
with long-term successors” include CFO successions with incoming CFOs that stay in office for at least 3 years. “CFO
Turnovers (with long-term successors) not accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12 months” also include long-
term CFOs only. Further, in this sample, there is no CEO turnover in the 12 months before or the 12 months after a
CFO turnover. “Outsider CFO Succession (with long-term successors)” means that the new long-term CFO comes
from outside the company. Panel B reports changes in a firm’s CDS spread during its CFO’s tenure. The CFO tenure
is measured by the number of days since the CFO takes office. Column (1) reports the results using a piecewise linear
specification for all CFOs from year 0 to year 10. Columns (2) to (5) report the results for the first three years of long-
term CFOs. Panel C reports changes in a firm’s loan/bond spread during the first three years of its long-term CFO’s
tenure. In both Panels B and C, we include the usual set of controls as in Tables 2A and 3A, but for brevity we do not
report the coefficient estimates of some of those variables. All variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors
are clustered at the firm-year level in Panel A, at the loan level in the loan regression in Panel B, and at the firm level
in the bond regression in Panel B. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                        Panel A: Summary Statistics of CFO Turnover and CFO Tenure

                                                                                                          # of turnovers
                                                                                                            2001-2009
CFO Turnovers                                                                                                 1,857
CFO Turnovers with long-term successors                                                                       1,033
CFO Turnovers (with long-term successors) not accompanied by CEO turnovers within
                                                                                                                722
+/-12 months
CFO Turnovers (with long-term successors) accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12
                                                                                                                311
months
CFO turnovers (with long-term successors) due to death/health/retirement at good
                                                                                                                 68
performance
CFO turnovers (with long-term successors) due to death/health/retirement at good
                                                                                                                 43
performance, and not accompanied by CEO turnovers within +/-12 months
Outsider CFO succession (with long-term successors)                                                             380




                                                 CFO Time in Office

                                                          Obs     Mean 25th percentile Median 75th percentile
CFO Total Time in Office (in years)                      1,857     3.96          1.58            3.42           5.83




                                                           41
                           Panel B: Uncertainty about CFO and CDS Spread

                      (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)
               Years [0, 10]                        Years [0,2], Long-term CFOs
                                                                        Not
                                                  Accompanied                          Health/death/
                                                                   accompanied
                                                    by CEO                             retirement at
                                                                      by CEO
                                                   turnovers                          good perf., not
                                                                     turnovers
                                                  within +/-12                       accompanied by
                                                                    within +/-12
                                                    months                            CEO turnovers
                                                                      months
                                                  CDS Spread
CFO Tenure        -0.027***
(years 0-2)         (0.009)
CFO Tenure          -0.004
(years 3-5)         (0.009)
CFO Tenure          -0.009
(years 6-10)        (0.012)
Tenure                               -0.022**        -0.059**          -0.017*           -0.021*
(in days)                             (0.011)         (0.029)          (0.009)           (0.011)
Controls               x                 x               x                x                 x
Firm-CFO and
Year F.E.             x                 x                x               x                  x
Observations       611,823           288,831          107,909         180,922            12,116
Adj. R2             0.820             0.847            0.843           0.840              0.923



                  Panel C: Cost of Debt during First Three Years of a CFO’s Tenure

                                                      (1)         (2)
                                                 Loan Spread Bond Spread
                   Tenure (in years)               -5.204*     -5.676*
                                                   (2.706)     (2.901)
                   Credit Spread                  0.447***    1.088***
                                                   (0.110)     (0.157)
                   Term Spread                    0.304***    0.490***
                                                   (0.100)     (0.181)
                   log(Debt Maturity)               10.638     -25.228
                                                   (8.158)    (19.445)
                   log(Debt Size)                   -5.175     -19.322
                                                   (3.385)    (14.929)
                   Performance Pricing           -22.047***
                                                   (6.621)
                   Firm-level Controls                 x           x
                   Tranche Type and Loan Purpose       x
                   Firm and Year F.E.                  x           x
                   Observations                      2,390      1,313
                   Adjusted R-squared                0.732      0.534
                                                42
                    Table 6: Cross-Sectional Differences in the Spread-Tenure Relation

                   Panel A: Differences in Prior Uncertainty about the New CEO (or CFO)

This table reports the effect of prior uncertainty about the new CEO (or new CFO) on changes in CDS spread during
the first three years of the CEO’s (or CFO’s) tenure. All CEOs or CFOs in our sample stay in office for at least three
years. “Heir-apparent CEO” indicates that the CEO was the heir-apparent before becoming the CEO. “Outsider CEO
(CFO)” indicates that the CEO (CFO) comes from outside the company. “Young CEO” is a CEO who is less than 50
years old when taking office. All variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-year
level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                      (1)                (2)          (3)                     (4)
                                                                           CDS Spread
Tenure (in days)                                  -0.040**            -0.011        -0.019                 -0.023**
                                                   (0.016)            (0.016)       (0.017)                 (0.011)
Tenure*Heir-apparent CEO                          0.038***
                                                   (0.013)
Tenure*Outsider CEO                                                  -0.079***
                                                                       (0.019)
Tenure*Young CEO                                                                        -0.031**
                                                                                         (0.014)
Tenure*Outsider CFO                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                                             (0.019)
Recovery Rate                                     -10.922***        -10.425***         -11.382***         -13.041***
                                                     (1.464)           (1.475)            (1.512)            (1.684)
Credit Spread                                      0.447***          0.460***           0.449***           46.579***
                                                     (0.067)           (0.068)            (0.068)            (6.077)
Term Spread                                          -0.048            -0.051             -0.044             -7.637*
                                                     (0.044)           (0.044)            (0.045)            (4.547)
VIX                                                2.362***          2.381***           2.395***            2.312***
                                                     (0.263)           (0.271)            (0.268)            (0.231)
Log(Assets)                                          18.709            13.808             35.176             -22.288
                                                    (29.133)          (29.271)           (30.918)           (23.211)
Leverage                                             97.590            70.097             62.883            142.305*
                                                    (62.022)          (61.478)           (61.235)           (81.475)
M/B                                                  11.223             4.612            17.106*              -0.456
                                                     (9.224)           (9.609)            (9.429)            (1.009)
ROA                                              -492.586***       -490.520***        -524.634***        -522.663***
                                                   (119.798)         (123.376)          (117.712)          (121.474)
Tangibility                                          51.508            28.684             27.600            205.937*
                                                   (105.597)         (103.968)          (122.724)          (115.476)
CF Volatility                                         3.822             3.854              3.854           28.344***
                                                     (7.210)           (7.349)            (6.984)            (6.408)
Payout Ratio                                         -6.759           -8.479*             -6.364              -6.804
                                                     (5.088)           (4.946)            (5.202)            (5.245)
Firm-CEO (CFO) and Year F.E.                            x                 x                  x                   x
Observations                                        260,297           252,500            253,091             288,831
Adjusted R-squared                                    0.833             0.835              0.835               0.847



                                                            43
            Panel B: The Effect of a Prior Relationship with a Lender on Spread-Tenure Relations

This table reports the effect of relationship lending on changes in loan spreads during the first three year of CEO’s or
CFO’s tenure. All CEOs and CFOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years. “Prior CEO (or CFO)-lender
Relationship” is a dummy variable indicating the existence of a prior lending relationship between the CEO (or CFO)
and any of the lead banks in the syndicate when taking office. We collect data on public firms the CEO worked for
during his career path to identify the CEO-lender relationship variable. We collect data on both public and private
firms the CFO worked for during his career path, to identify the CFO-lender relationship variable. All variable
definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the loan level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                        (1)                 (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                   Full sample          Outsider        Full sample         Outsider
                                                     CEOs                  CEOs             CFOs             CFOs
                                                                               Loan Spread
Tenure (in years)                                    -9.901***         -17.716***         -8.725*             -9.550*
                                                       (3.019)            (5.338)          (4.464)            (4.860)
Tenure (in years)*Prior CEO (CFO)-                      5.643*            6.855*           2.790*              2.852*
Lender Relationship                                    (2.952)           ((3.518)          (1.447)            (1.459)
Prior CEO (CFO)-Lender Relationship                    -11.878            -9.067          -10.685              -7.630
                                                       (8.139)           (20.535)          (9.060)           (16.380)
Credit Spread                                         0.343***            0.368*         0.444***            0.524***
                                                       (0.107)            (0.207)          (0.111)            (0.165)
Term Spread                                            0.169**             0.224         0.301***             0.444**
                                                       (0.073)            (0.168)          (0.101)            (0.174)
Log(Assets)                                           -10.617*            -6.249           -0.924               2.755
                                                       (5.528)            (9.153)         (12.594)           (22.806)
Leverage                                             93.736***           84.908*           62.953               0.811
                                                      (20.533)           (44.521)         (41.470)           (61.842)
M/B                                                      0.540             0.881          -1.478*              -0.519
                                                       (0.535)            (0.772)          (0.820)            (1.006)
ROA                                                -238.228***        -218.209***       -307.629**           -219.927
                                                      (41.279)           (76.650)        (131.372)          (240.148)
Tangibility                                            -30.248            11.348          -33.350             -21.229
                                                      (31.489)           (69.590)         (65.311)          (122.190)
CF Volatility                                            0.357            -0.568           7.247*               6.167
                                                       (2.459)            (3.606)          (3.838)            (5.043)
Payout Ratio                                             4.620            13.987            4.965              12.716
                                                       (5.678)           (11.402)         (11.481)           (18.398)
log(Debt Maturity)                                      -2.243             0.980           10.904               7.879
                                                       (5.764)            (9.707)          (8.180)           (13.517)
log(Debt Size)                                      -10.828***         -14.284***          -5.183              -5.038
                                                       (2.177)            (3.936)          (3.397)            (5.074)
Performance Pricing                                 -24.917***         -23.211***       -22.294***          -28.696**
                                                       (4.951)            (8.795)          (6.732)           (12.019)
Tranche Type and Loan Purpose                              x                 x                x                   x
Firm and Year F.E.                                         x                 x                x                   x
Observations                                             3,965             1,511            2,394               1,034
Adjusted R-squared                                       0.707             0.699            0.732               0.715


                                                          44
                        Panel C: Risk of the Debt Claim and the Spread-Tenure Relation

This table contrasts the changes in the CDS spread, loan spread or bond yield spread over the first three years of the
CEO’s tenure for riskier debt claims and less risky debt claims. All CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least three
years. “Speculative Grade” indicates a firm with credit rating below BBB- in the turnover year. “Highly Levered”
indicates borrowers with leverage ratio in the top quartile (0.36) in the turnover year. “Subordinated” indicates junior
bonds. “Term Loan” indicates (all types of) term loans. We include the usual set of firm, loan, or bond level controls,
but for brevity we do not report the coefficient estimates of those variables. All variable definitions are in Appendix A.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm-year level in Column (1), at the loan level in Column (2), and at the firm level
in Column (3). ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                           (1)         (2)          (3)
                                                        CDS Spread Loan Spread Yield Spread

                Tenure (in days)                           -0.025*
                                                           (0.013)
                Tenure (in days)*Speculative                -0.015
                                                           (0.020)
                Tenure (in days)*Highly Levered            -0.033*
                                                           (0.018)
                Tenure (in years)                                           -0.487           -4.176*
                                                                            (2.185)          (2.414)
                Tenure (in years)*Speculative                               -4.817            5.998
                                                                            (4.995)          (7.352)
                Tenure (in years)*Highly Levered                           -5.348*           -5.551*
                                                                            (2.729)          (2.846)
                Tenure (in years)*Term Loan                               -10.377**
                                                                            (4.897)
                Tenure (in years)*Subordinated                                               -6.921*
                                                                                             (3.508)
                Speculative                                              106.351***        105.611***
                                                                          (10.311)          (34.117)
                Highly Levered                                            18.612**         51.654***
                                                                           (7.759)          (19.318)
                Term Loan                                                 47.475**
                                                                          (22.959)
                Subordinated                                                                  6.275
                                                                                             (24.144)
                Firm level controls                             x              x                x
                Loan or bond level controls                                    x                x
                Firm-CEO and Year F.E.                          x
                Firm and Year F.E.                                             x                x
                Observations                               248,186           3,452            2,246
                Adjusted R-squared                          0.832            0.771            0.611




                                                           45
                     Table 7: Propensity to Use External Debt and Precautionary Savings

                         Panel A: Probability of Using External Debt over CEO Tenure

This table reports the probability of loan initiation or bond issuance over CEO tenure. The dependent variables are
indicator variables that equal to 1 if the firm issued bond(s) or took loan(s) in year t, and 0 otherwise. The firm level
controls are measured in year (t-1). Columns (1) reports the results using a piecewise linear specification for all CEOs
from year 0 to year 10. Column (2) reports the results for the first three years of CEOs who stay in office for at least
three years. All variable definitions are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, *
denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                Dummy(Loan Initiation or Bond Issuance)
                                                    (1)                   (2)
                                                Years [0,10] Years [0,2] Long-term CEOs

                       Year (0-2)                 0.010**
                                                  (0.005)
                       Year (3-5)                  -0.004
                                                  (0.004)
                       Year (6-10)                  0.002
                                                  (0.003)
                       Tenure (in years)                                    0.013**
                                                                            (0.006)
                       Log(Assets)                  0.013*                   0.027*
                                                   (0.008)                  (0.014)
                       Leverage                     0.048*                    0.009
                                                   (0.029)                  (0.050)
                       M/B                        0.008***                    0.010
                                                   (0.003)                  (0.006)
                       ROA                         0.082**                    0.060
                                                   (0.037)                  (0.066)
                       Tangibility                  -0.019                   -0.072
                                                   (0.059)                  (0.102)
                       CF Volatility                -0.003                   -0.001
                                                   (0.004)                  (0.007)
                       Payout Ratio                  0.002                    0.016
                                                   (0.010)                  (0.017)
                       Firm and Year F.E.              x                        x
                       Observations                 23,129                    9,020
                       Adjusted R-squared            0.191                    0.203




                                                          46
                                       Panel B: Cash Ratio over CEO Tenure

This table reports the change in cash ratio over CEO tenure. The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and cash
equivalent to book assets in year t. The firm level controls are also measured in year t. Columns (1) reports the results
using a piecewise linear specification for all CEOs from year 0 to year 10. Columns (2) and (3) report the results for
the first three years of CEOs who stay in office for at least three years. The likely non-performance driven turnover
sample includes turnovers that satisfy any of the criteria in rows (2)-(5) of Panel C of Table 1. All variable definitions
are in Appendix A. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

                                                                      Cash Ratio
                                                 (1)            (2)                  (3)
                                                                           Likely non-performance
                                                                              driven turnovers
                    Year (0, 1, 2)           -0.003***
                                               (0.001)
                    Year (3, 4, 5)             -0.000
                                               (0.001)
                    Year (6, 7, 8, 9, 10)       0.001
                                               (0.001)
                    Tenure (in years)                      -0.004***                -0.003**
                                                             (0.001)                 (0.001)
                    Log(Assets)        -0.025***           -0.024***               -0.023***
                                         (0.003)             (0.005)                 (0.005)
                    Q                   0.007***            0.008***                 -0.004*
                                         (0.001)             (0.002)                 (0.002)
                    ROA                    0.016              0.039                    0.009
                                         (0.025)             (0.028)                 (0.042)
                    CF Volatility        0.003**              0.002                    0.002
                                         (0.001)             (0.002)                 (0.004)
                    Tangibility        -0.351***           -0.349***               -0.350***
                                         (0.020)             (0.030)                 (0.044)
                    Leverage           -0.110***           -0.121***               -0.089***
                                         (0.013)             (0.024)                 (0.031)
                    Capx               -0.121***           -0.183***               -0.227***
                                         (0.023)             (0.043)                 (0.060)
                    Acquisition        -0.078***           -0.087***               -0.084***
                                         (0.012)             (0.020)                 (0.033)
                    Change in NWC      -0.089***           -0.108***                  -0.049
                                         (0.015)             (0.027)                 (0.046)
                    Payout Ratio           0.001              0.002                 -0.006**
                                         (0.002)             (0.002)                 (0.003)
                    Firm and Year F.E.       x                  x                        x
                    Observations          28,508             10,642                    4,486
                    Adjusted R-squared     0.775              0.799                    0.843




                                                           47
                       Panel C: Uncertainty about the CEO and Cash-Tenure Sensitivity

This table reports the effect of prior uncertainty about the new CEO on the cash-tenure sensitivity over time during the
first three years of the CEO’s tenure. The dependent variable is the ratio of cash and cash equivalent to book assets in
year t. All CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least three years. “Heir-apparent CEO” indicates that the CEO was
the heir-apparent before becoming the CEO. “Outsider CEO” indicates that the CEO comes from outside the company.
“Young CEO” is a CEO who is less than 50 years old when taking office. All variable definitions are in Appendix A.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, * denote significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)
                                                                                      Cash Ratio
Tenure (in years)                                                    -0.002**         -0.004***          -0.002**
                                                                      (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Tenure (in years)*Young CEO                                          -0.005**
                                                                      (0.002)
Young CEO                                                              0.006
                                                                      (0.005)
Tenure (in years)*Heir-apparent CEO                                                     0.004**
                                                                                        (0.002)
Heir-apparent CEO                                                                       -0.010*
                                                                                        (0.006)
Tenure (in years)*Outsider CEO                                                                           -0.004**
                                                                                                          (0.002)
Outsider CEO                                                                                               0.002
                                                                                                          (0.006)
Log(Assets)                                                         -0.024***         -0.024***         -0.024***
                                                                      (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.005)
ROA                                                                    0.035             0.039             0.035
                                                                      (0.032)           (0.028)           (0.032)
Leverage                                                            -0.122***         -0.121***         -0.121***
                                                                      (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.024)
Tangibility                                                         -0.349***         -0.350***         -0.351***
                                                                      (0.030)           (0.030)           (0.030)
CF Volatility                                                          0.002             0.002             0.002
                                                                      (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Q                                                                    0.009***          0.009***          0.009***
                                                                      (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Payout Ratio                                                           0.002             0.002             0.002
                                                                      (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Capx                                                                -0.185***         -0.182***         -0.181***
                                                                      (0.043)           (0.043)           (0.043)
Acquisition                                                         -0.086***         -0.087***         -0.086***
                                                                      (0.020)           (0.020)           (0.020)
Change in NWC                                                       -0.106***         -0.108***         -0.106***
                                                                      (0.028)           (0.027)           (0.028)
Firm and Year F.E.                                                       x                 x                 x
Observations                                                          10,447            10,642            10,494
Adjusted R-squared                                                     0.795             0.799             0.796


                                                          48
                                Table 8: Acquisition Financing over CEO Tenure

This table reports the sources of acquisition funding in years 0 to 3. All CEOs in our sample stay in office for at least
three years. To calculate the percentage of acquisitions funded by various sources, we first calculate firm-year level
total transaction values of acquisitions. Acquisitions include completed deals covered in the SDC database, either
acquisition of assets or equity interests. For each sample firm, we include both domestic and international acquisitions
with disclosed transaction values above $1 million over the sample period. We exclude leveraged buyouts, exchange
offers, repurchases, spinoffs, minority stake purchases, recapitalizations, self-tenders, and privatizations. Then, we
calculate the firm-year level transaction value funded by stock and cash, and calculate the firm-year level % of
acquisitions funded by stock and by cash, respectively. Finally, we calculate the firm-year level amount of loans, for
which the deal purpose is specified as either “Takeover” or “Acquisition Lines”, and calculate the firm-year level % of
acquisitions funded by loans. We then tabulate the number of observations and the cross-sectional average of %
funded by stock, by cash, and by loans, in each of the tenure years, with year 0 being the turnover year.

                                 Year 0                     Year 1               Year 2                  Year 3
                              Obs.    Mean           Obs.        Mean         Obs.    Mean            Obs.    Mean

% funded by stock              658        0.137       810        0.149        810        0.149        780        0.131
% funded by cash               658        0.863       810        0.851        810        0.851        780        0.869
  ---% funded by loan          658        0.057       810        0.112        810        0.112        780        0.148




                                                            49
               Figure 1: Average CDS Spreads at Key Events Related to CEO Turnovers

The figures plot the average CDS spreads (measured in basis points) in each event period. In Panel A, the sequence of
events starts from the 3 months before the departure announcement of the old CEO’s, to the departure month, to the
appointment announcement month of the new CEO, to the inauguration month, and then 36 months after the
inauguration. The CDS spread for “within 3 months before departure” is the average CDS spread in month [-3,-1]
before the departure announcement month. The turnover sample includes 112 CEO turnovers since 2001, for which
the departure announcement, appointment announcement, and the inauguration occurred in different month. Panel B
plots the CDS spread path for the 87 turnovers since 2001, for which the departure announcement and inauguration
occurred in the same month.

                                                       Panel A
                                              Average CDS Spread
               160

               150

               140

               130

               120

               110

               100
                      Months [-3,-1]    Departure      Appointment    Inauguration    36 Months
                                         Month           Month           Month           after
                                                                                     Inauguration



                                                      Panel B
                                              Average CDS Spread

               160

               150

               140

               130

               120

               110

               100
                           Months [-3,-1]           Inauguration Month        36 Months after
                                                                               Inauguration




                                                         50
