                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       HOUSEHOLD FINANCE OVER THE LIFE-CYCLE:
                         WHAT DOES EDUCATION CONTRIBUTE?

                                             Russell Cooper
                                             Guozhong Zhu

                                         Working Paper 20684
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20684


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




We are grateful to the NSF for financial support. Participants at seminars at Pennsylvania State University,
SUFE and SED 2014 provided helpful questions and comments. Thanks to David Lander and Qi Wu
for detailed comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Russell Cooper and Guozhong Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Household Finance over the Life-Cycle: What does Education Contribute?
Russell Cooper and Guozhong Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 20684
November 2014
JEL No. E21,G11

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies household financial choices: why are these decisions dependent on the education
level of the household? A life-cycle model is constructed to understand a rich set of facts about decisions
of households with different levels of educational attainment regarding stock market participation,
the stock share in wealth, the stock adjustment rate and the wealth-income ratio. Model parameters,
including preferences, the cost of stock market participation and portfolio adjustment costs, are estimated
to match the financial decisions of different education groups. Based on the estimated model, education
affects household finance mainly through increased average income. The estimation also finds evidence
that higher educational attainment is associated with a lower stock market entry cost and a larger discount
factor. Education specific differences in income risks, medical expenses, mortality risks and the life-cycle
pattern of income explain relatively little of the observed differences in household financial choices.


Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com

Guozhong Zhu
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing, China
gzhu@gsm.pku.edu.cn
                             Household Finance over the Life-Cycle:
                                  What does Education Contribute?∗

                                         Russell Cooper†and Guozhong Zhu‡

                                                    November 10, 2014



                                                            Abstract

          This paper studies household financial choices: why are these decisions dependent on the education level of
      the household? A life-cycle model is constructed to understand a rich set of facts about decisions of households
      with different levels of educational attainment regarding stock market participation, the stock share in wealth,
      the stock adjustment rate and the wealth-income ratio. Model parameters, including preferences, the cost of
      stock market participation and portfolio adjustment costs, are estimated to match the financial decisions of
      different education groups. Based on the estimated model, education affects household finance mainly through
      increased average income. The estimation also finds evidence that higher educational attainment is associated
      with a lower stock market entry cost and a larger discount factor. Education specific differences in income risks,
      medical expenses, mortality risks and the life-cycle pattern of income explain relatively little of the observed
      differences in household financial choices.



1     Motivation
Empirical studies have consistently revealed the importance of education for household financial decisions. Asset
market participation decision, stock adjustment rate, savings rate and portfolio choice are frequently linked to
educational attainment.
    For example, Campbell (2006) presents evidence on the determinants of public equity market participation
and portfolio composition. His regressions indicate that both income and education have a significant influence
on household financial choices. Using changes in compulsory schooling laws as instruments, Cole, Paulson, and
Shastry (2014) shows empirically that education causes higher investment income and equity ownership.
    But what is the underlying impact of education on financial decisions? Are different household decisions a
consequence of education specific observables such as income processes, health risks and mortality rates, and/or
   ∗ We are grateful to the NSF for financial support. Participants at seminars at Pennsylvania State University, SUFE and SED 2014

provided helpful questions and comments. Thanks to David Lander and Qi Wu for detailed comments and suggestions.
   † Department of Economics, the Pennsylvania State University and NBER, russellcoop@gmail.com
   ‡ Department of Applied Economics, Guanghua School of Management, Peking University, gzhu@gsm.pku.edu.cn




                                                                1
                                                                                                               1    MOTIVATION


unobservable types of heterogeneity that are correlated with educational attainment, such as risk aversion and
cognitive abilities? Addressing these questions is the purpose of this paper.1
    The analysis is built upon empirical evidence linking education and household financial choices including: asset
market participation, the share of risky assets in household portfolios, the frequency of portfolio adjustment and
wealth-income ratios. While a few studies have focused on one or more of these components of household financial
decisions, one contribution of the paper is to understand these choices jointly.2 This is important not just as
means of generating a more complete picture of these choices but in allowing us to identify the sources of these
differences. For example, a household considering asset market participation will recognize the subsequent costs of
portfolio adjustment which is evidenced by the low stock adjustment rate. The factors, such as attitudes towards
risk, that determine the share of assets in a household portfolio will also influence wealth accumulation and the
stock market participation decision of the household. Another example is that, with fixed portfolio adjustment
cost, higher wealth levels may lead to a higher stock share as wealthy households bear a lower cost (per unit) of
adjustment. This stock share decision interacts with the participation decision, creating identification problems
when participation is not modeled explicitly.
    Our approach to determining the dependence of financial choices on education starts with the specification
and estimation of a life-cycle model of household financial choices. Regression analysis, as in Campbell (2006),
reveals how household finance depends on education and income in a static way. Our framework allows us to study
the dynamic effects of education specific traits. For example, the model shows the important role of permanent
income over the life-cycle, rather than realized income at a point in time. The life-cycle framework, rather than
the infinitely lived agent model, is needed to examine the affects of post-retirement income and stochastic medical
expenses on pre-retirement financial decisions.
    Most of the existing quantitative studies on household portfolio choice is based on calibrated parameters,
including important papers such as Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005), Gomes and Michaelides (2005), Gomes
and Michaelides (2008) and Wachter and Yogo (2010).3 By contrast, estimation is an integral part of our analysis.
Based on the estimated model parameters, we are able to quantify the channels of influence between education
and household financial decisions. Further, we would not be able to analyze the link between education and the
parameters of household preferences and adjustment costs without estimating the parameters. The estimation uses
a simulated method of moments approach, where the moments reflect the key household financial decisions by
education group. These moments are selected to identify key parameters.
    More specifically, the analysis puts households into four groups according to the educational attainment of
house-heads.4 From the Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF), the average stock market participation rate and the
financial wealth to income ratio increase sharply with education. Stock share also increases with education status,
   1 Cole, Paulson, and Shastry (2014) offers some informal discussions about why education leads to different financial decisions. We

formally answer the above questions based on an estimated structural model.
   2 For example, Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995) study why more educated households save more. Achury, Hubar, and Koulova-

tianos (2012) and Wachter and Yogo (2010) study the relation between education (or wealth) and stock share in wealth.
   3 Structural estimation is employed in Alan (2006) and Bonaparte, Cooper, and Zhu (2012). But the former studies participation

only and the latter stock share only, neither looks at education differences.
   4 To be clear, the model does not explain education. Rather it looks at the household financial choices given education.




                                                                  2
                                                                                                                 1   MOTIVATION


but not as sharply. From the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), stock (portfolio) adjustment rates are
higher for more educated households.
    Parameter estimates come from using the structural model to match the life-cycle profiles of stock market
participation rates, stock share in wealth, stock adjustment rates and wealth-income ratios of the four education
groups.5 The coefficients from regressing these household financial variables on, inter alia, age and age-squared and
education dummies generates moments that are very informative about costs and risk preferences. By matching
these moments, we estimate costs associated with stock market participation and adjustment along with preference
parameters. In addition, by allowing heterogeneity in preferences and costs across education groups, the estimation
results enable us to study the roles played by risk aversion, patience and other unobservables.
    The recent literature provides insights that costs associated with stock market participation, eg. Vissing-
Jorgensen (2002b), Alan (2006), Gomes and Michaelides (2005), and costs of stock transactions, eg. Bonaparte,
Cooper, and Zhu (2012), are important. We consider both types of costs, assuming both are fixed rather than
proportional to income or wealth. In the presence of these costs, our model is able to match the increase of
participation, adjustment rate, portfolio share and wealth-income ratio with education. Further, our structural
estimation allows us the test to what extent these costs are education specific.
    In the absence of costs, predictions based on common representations of risk preferences tend to contradict the
data. For example, standard household portfolio models typically predict that every household should participate
in the stock market, and that the stock share in total financial wealth should be high, e.g. Heaton and Lucas (1997).
As another example, constant absolute risk aversion preferences predict that a household’s optimal investment in
risky assets is roughly a fixed amount independent of total wealth, which implies that the more educated should
have a lower share of stocks in financial wealth.
    As pointed out by Campbell (2006), a fundamental issue that confronts the household finance literature is
how to specify the household utility function. We carry out the estimation using three specifications: constant
absolute risk aversion (CARA), constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) and recursive utility (EZW) taken from
Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990). Our estimation results indicate that recursive utility brings the model and
data moments closer together than do the CARA and CRRA representations. Apart from understanding the link
between education and financial choices, the finding in support of the recursive utility specification in an estimated
model is of independent interest. This result based on estimating the competing models, complements existing
simulation based exercises that have documented the contribution of this specification of utility.
    A critical input into the household optimization problem is the education specific stochastic processes for
income, medical expenses and mortality. Education impacts both the permanent and transitory components of
labor income. Based on the PSID, more educated households have higher levels of deterministic income, and smaller
transitory income shocks before retirement. According to data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), after
retirement, the more educated have higher out-of-pocket medical expenses relative to their income, and are subject
to lower mortality risks.
  5 The estimation of parameters from life-cycle profiles is a main feature distinguishing this paper from our earlier study, Cooper and

Zhu (2013).



                                                                   3
                                                                                                               2   DATA FACTS


    In answer to the central question of our paper, the main observable factor that links household financial decisions
to education is the dependence of the mean level of income on education.6 Other factors, such as income volatility
and differences in both medical expenses and mortality risk do not play a large role in explaining the variation of
household financial decisions across education groups.
    We also allow preferences, the stock market entry cost and the portfolio adjustment cost to differ across education
groups. Point estimates show that, compared to less educated households, more educated households (i) face lower
stock market entry cost, and (ii) discount the future less. Other differences in parameters are not significant and
have little power in explaining differences across education groups.



2     Data Facts
We present two types of data facts. The first are the processes characterizing exogenous labor income, out-of-pocket
medical expenses during retirement and mortality risks faced by households. These processes, taken as exogenous,
influence the extent to which households accumulate precautionary savings balances and how they structure their
portfolios.7
    The second set of facts concerns household financial choices: asset market participation, stock share in portfolios,
the frequency of stock adjustment and wealth-income ratio. These dimensions of household financial choices reflect
both the aforementioned processes that households face as well as the costs of participation and adjustment.
The life-cycle patterns of these choices become the moments to match in the estimation of household preference
parameters and adjustment costs.
    Consistent with the motivation of the paper, the exogenous processes for income, mortality and medical expenses
as well as the moments summarizing household choices are presented by education group. A key point of the paper
is to go beyond these education specific observable facts to understand why education matters.


2.1     Heterogeneity of Exogenous Processes
Households are broken into four groups by (highest) educational attainment of the household head. Specifically
they have years of schooling less than 12 years, equal to 12 years, over 12 but less than or equal to 16 and over 16
years respectively. Household income is defined as the sum of labor income and transfers. The data are from the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (1989-2007). The Appendix provides detailed information on sample selection
criteria and the decomposition method.
    6 Wachter and Yogo (2010) relate the rise of stock share with educational attainment to a luxury goods assumption, underlying

which is the higher income of the more educated. Similarly, Achury, Hubar, and Koulovatianos (2012) link income level to stock share
through subsistence consumption.
    7 Endogenous income as a result of flexible labor supply will lead to more risk taking of working households, which is shown in

Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992) and Gomes, Kotlikoff, and Viceira (2008). Regarding medical expenses, DeNardi, French, and
Jones (2010) compare the results on wealth accumulation from models with exogenous and endogenous medical expenses and find little
difference.




                                                                 4
2.1    Heterogeneity of Exogenous Processes                                                                      2   DATA FACTS


      The process of log income at the household level is composed of deterministic and stochastic components:


                                                          yi,t = ȳi,t + ỹi,t .                                              (1)


Here i indexes the household and t is the time period.
      As is common to empirical models that use panel data sets, age, time and cohort effects are impossible to
generally separate. This is an issue for the income processes characterized in this section as well as the moments
summarizing household financial decisions presented later.8
      A common practice in the literature is to separate age effects and time effects in the data. We follow this in
the baseline specification. Accordingly, the empirical model of deterministic income includes age ai and time t as
well as other covariates, Xi :
                                                  ȳi,t = γ0 + γ1 ai + γ2 t + γ3 Xi .                                         (2)

In practice, we use age and year dummies for ai and t to allow for non-linear age and time effects. Since, on
average, income is growing over time, removing time effects from age effects leads to a stationary age profile of
income. Consistent with this treatment, the time effects are separated from age effects for each of the household
finance variables in the baseline model.
      As an alternative specification, the cohort effects, rather than then time effects, are included in the covariates
to remove their influence. That is, the deterministic income depends on age ai and the cohort of the individual, ci ,
and other covariates:
                                                  ȳi,t = γ0 + γ1 ai + γ2 ci + γ3 Xi .                                        (3)

With this specification, the role of time and age are not separated. Thus any deterministic trend in income is
embodied in age effects, leading to a steeper age profile of income. For robustness, we also study this alternative
specification of income, and the associated financial choice moments that allow for cohort effects as well.
      Figure 1 presents the profiles of deterministic income of the four education groups, for the two treatments of
cohort and time effects.9 The left-side controls for year effects, as in (2), and the right-side controls for cohort
effects, as in (3).
      The focus of this research is on differences in financial behavior by education group. A starting point for this
appears in the mean of the paths which clearly illustrate gains to education. These differences in mean income by
education group will account for a large amount of the differences in household financial decisions by education
group.
      All the profiles have a hump-shape, though the magnitude depends on the treatment of time and cohort effects.
For the high education group, deterministic income rises much more rapidly with age when cohort effects are
controlled for compared to the alternative. This reflects a rising return to education during the sample period,
which magnifies the age effects in (3).
  8 Ameriks    and Zeldes (2004) provide a thorough discussion of these issues in the context of household finance moments.
  9A    very similar figure appears in Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005) though for a different sample period.




                                                                    5
2.1    Heterogeneity of Exogenous Processes                                                                                     2   DATA FACTS



                     Deterministic Income (year effect controlled)                     Deterministic Income (cohort effect controlled)
                 3                                                                     3
                                                  school ∈ (12 16]                                                    school < 12
               2.5                                school > 16                        2.5                              school = 12

                 2                                                                     2

               1.5                                                                   1.5

                 1                                                                     1

               0.5                                                                   0.5

                 0                                                                     0
                       30     40      50         60      70        80                         30   40    50         60   70    80
                                           age                                                                age

                                            Figure 1: Pre-retirement Deterministic Income
       This figure shows the average profiles of deterministic income by educational attainment. Income profiles are normalized
       so that the average income of the pooled households is one.


      By assumption, post-retirement income is deterministic. Income falls with age after retirement as shown in
Figure 1.
      The stochastic component of pre-retirement income, ỹi,t , is decomposed into transitory and persistent shocks.


                                                                        ỹi,t = zi,t + i,t
                                                                   zi,t = ρzi,t−1 + ηi,t                                                   (4)


where i,t and ηi,t are independent zero-mean random shocks, with variance σ2 and ση2 respectively. The shock ηi,t
is persistent, with a parameter of ρ. The accumulation of persistent shocks is represented by zi,t . The Appendix
provides additional details on this decomposition and the estimation of these stochastic income processes.


                                                 Table 1: Stochastic Processes for Income
                                                                                        Income
                                             years of school                  σ2         ση2         ρ
                                                  <12                       0.107        0.017      0.963
                                                                           (0.017)      (0.004)    (0.007)
                                                         12                 0.071        0.016      0.952
                                                                           (0.007)      (0.002)    (0.004)
                                                      ∈ (12, 16]            0.067        0.018      0.960
                                                                           (0.007)      (0.004)    (0.006)
                                                        >16                 0.020        0.037      0.935
                                                                           (0.008)      (0.007)    (0.009)

              This table reports the variances and persistence parameters of income shocks estimated from PSID
              (1989-2007) for four education groups. Standard errors are presented in parentheses.


      The stochastic properties of income for different groups are presented in Table 1. The rows denote the years of


                                                                                6
2.1    Heterogeneity of Exogenous Processes                                                                         2    DATA FACTS


                          Deterministic Medical Expense                                   Death Probability
                0.4                                                      0.4
                              school < 12                                              school < 12
              0.35            school = 12                                              school = 12
                0.3           school ∈ (12 16]                           0.3           school ∈ (12 16]
                              school > 16                                              school > 16
              0.25
                                                                         0.2
                0.2

              0.15
                                                                         0.1
                0.1

              0.05                                                         0
                        70           80          90          100                  70          80           90           100
                                       age                                                      age


                             Figure 2: Post-Retirement Medical Expenses and Death Probability

       The left panel shows the average profiles of post-retirement out-of-pocket medical expense relative to post-retirement income
       by education group. The right panel is the estimated death probability conditional on survival.


schooling of the household head. Households with more educated heads are exposed to smaller transitory income
shocks. The persistence and size of persistent income shocks are about the same across education groups, except
that the most educated group appears to have less persistent but larger shocks.10
      While their income is deterministic, retired households are subject to medical expense shocks. The estimation
of out-of-pocket medical expenses is based on data from French and Jones (2004). That paper shows that the
logarithm of stochastic component of out-of-pocket medical expenses can be well represented by an AR(1) process
plus a transitory shock. We assume the stochastic process of medical expenses to be the same across education
groups, and take the estimates directly from French and Jones (2004). We estimate the ratio of out-of-pocket
medical expenses to post-retirement income for each education group. Details about data sources, definitions and
the stochastic process for medical expenses are given in the Appendix.
      Deterministic out-of-pocket medical expenses relative to post-retirement income is plotted in the left panel of
Figure 2. Medical expenses relative to income increases sharply with age. What’s more important for this paper is
the increase of expenses with educational attainment, although the increase emerges after age 85 for the two most
educated groups.
      The right panel of Figure 2 shows death probability as a function of age by education group. Consistent with
the literature, see for example Lleras-Muney (2005) and Starr-McCluer (1996), less educated individuals are faced
with higher mortality risks.
      In the estimation of the model, these income, medical expense and mortality processes are taken as exogenous
inputs. Moreover, the variance of income innovations varies by education class. As noted above, we restrict the
  10 Some other papers in the literature also find the less educated are exposed to larger transitory income shocks. Examples include

Guvenen (2009) (Table 1) and Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994) (Appendix A.4). The t-statistics reported in Hubbard, Skinner,
and Zeldes (1994) imply that these parameters are imprecisely estimated. One the other hand, Carroll and Samwick (1997) (Table 1)
offer very precise estimates, but find a non-monotone relation between educational attainment and size of income shocks.




                                                                    7
2.2    Patterns of Household Finance                                                                       2   DATA FACTS


variability of medical expenses post-retirement to be the same across education groups.


2.2      Patterns of Household Finance
The life-cycle profiles of asset market participation, the share of stocks in financial assets, the portfolio adjustment
rate and the wealth-income ratio are used to motivate our analysis. These profiles are later used as moments for
structural estimation of preferences and costs associated with stock market participation and portfolio adjustment.
      A household is a participant in asset markets if it either directly or indirectly owns stocks according to our
sample from the SCF. The share of stocks in a household’s total financial wealth is the ratio of stock holdings to
the sum of stock and bond holdings.11 Adjustment refers to the actual purchase or sale of stocks by the household
as well as the reinvestment of dividends. This is measured bi-annually. This adjustment rate includes changes in
IRA-holdings. Automatic reinvestments are not considered as adjustments. The wealth-income ratio is presented
both with and without the inclusion of net housing equity in wealth. The Appendix provides additional detail on
data sources and definitions.
      To obtain the patterns of stock market participation, stock share and adjustment rate, we regress each variable
on a constant, age, age-squared, education dummies, and year dummies. For wealth-income ratio, the interaction
of education dummies with age and age-squared are also included in the regression. We exclude these interactions
in the regression of participation, stock share and adjustment rate, because the shape of profiles are similar across
education groups. On the other hand, the life-cycle profile of wealth-income ratio is much steeper for more educated
households, thus the age-education interaction is necessary. As with the income profiles, in the robustness check we
control for cohort effects instead of year effects for these household finance variables. These regression coefficients,
reported in Table 2, will be used as the data moments in the simulated method of moments estimation.
      Figure 3 reports the life-cycle patterns of household finance by education group. Participation rates and wealth-
income ratios increase sharply with educational attainment. The stock share and the adjustment rate increase as
well, though not as much. The rise of median wealth-income ratio with educational attainment is consistent
with the finding that richer households save more, as in Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004). Using Swedish data,
Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) and Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009) show that more educated households
participate in the equity market more, have riskier portfolio and adjust their stock account more.
      Over the life-cycle, the participation rate, adjustment rate and share (without housing) are hump-shaped. The
wealth-income ratio, both with and without housing, is increasing with age. This partly reflects the drop in income
post-retirement but also the slow deaccumulation of wealth. As in DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010), a challenge
for the estimation will be to replicate the increase in the wealth-income ratio as a function of age.
      These patterns provide guidance on the model we construct. The incentives for asset accumulation reflected
in the wealth to income ratio will come from income risks, low post-retirement income, post-retirement medical
expense risks and a bequest motive. The discount factor, risk aversion, and the value of bequests will determine
the response of financial choices to income patterns.
  11 This measure is adjusted as explained below when housing is included in the data and the model. Here we do not consider the

demand for money. See Aoki, Michaelides, and Nikolov (2012) for recent work integrating money demand into portfolio choice.


                                                               8
                                                                                                                          3   MODEL


                               Participation                                            Adjustment Rate
              1                                                      0.8

                                                                     0.6
            0.5
                                                                     0.4

              0                                                      0.2
                  30     40     50         60   70    80                   30     40            50         60   70   80

                               Stock Share                                          Stock Share (housing)
                                                                     0.5

                                                                     0.4
            0.6
                                                                     0.3
            0.5
                                                                     0.2

            0.4                                                      0.1
                  30     40     50         60   70    80                   30     40            50         60   70   80

                              Wealth/Income                                       Wealth/Income (housing)
             15                                                       20
                                                                                  school < 12
                                                                                  school = 12
                                                                      15          school ∈ (12 16]
             10
                                                                                  school > 16
                                                                      10
              5
                                                                       5

              0                                                        0
                  30     40     50         60   70    80                   30     40            50         60   70   80
                                     age                                                             age

                                     Figure 3: Profiles of Household Financial Decisions
     These profiles show the age dependence of household financial decisions. With the exception of the wealth-income equation,
     these come from a linear regression model with a constant, age, age-squared, time dummies and education dummies as
     independent variables. For the wealth-income regressions, the independent variables were a constant, age, age-squared,
     time dummies and education dummies interacted with age and age-squared. For the figures labelled ‘housing’, home equity
     is included in the measurement of wealth.


    The costs of asset market participation as well as the costs of portfolio adjustment are relevant for understanding
the frequency of adjustment, the participation decisions and the portfolio shares. A unique feature of our study
is the presence of both of these costs. Having moments on participation as well as adjustment rates will allow us
to identify them. As with the savings decision, household preferences also influence adjustment and participation
choices.



3     Model
To infer parameters from these moments requires an optimization model at the household level. Both the partic-
ipation and adjustment decisions are discrete while the portfolio share is a continuous choice variable. We embed
these discrete and continuous decisions into a life-cycle framework.



                                                                 9
3.1    Dynamic Optimization Problem                                                                               3   MODEL


3.1      Dynamic Optimization Problem
A household makes consumption, saving and financial choices during its working and retirement period. The
retirement age, T r , is exogenous in our analysis. In periods t = 1, 2, 3, ..., T r the household is working and earns a
stochastic income, characterized in Table 1 and Figure 1. Confronting the riskiness of income while working is a
main motive for household finance choices. The household is faced with a death probability which is a function of
age, education and permanent income. The death probability equals one at age T + 1 for each education group, so
that the maximum life span is T . In the quantitative analysis, T r = 65 and T = 95.
      At t = T r the household’s income is deterministic, following the pattern in Figure 1. During retirement, the
household faces stochastic medical expenses. As described above, following DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010),
these medical expenses are treated as variations in household disposable income and thus are a source of risk during
retirement.
      The state of a household of age t in education group e is its current labor income yte , its medical expenses met ,
its current holdings of stocks, denoted As , and bonds, denoted Ab , and the return on assets R. Income and medical
expenses are superscripted by educational attainment, e. These exogenous difference across education groups will
lead to endogenous difference in saving and financial choices. Let Ω = (yte , met , R, A) represent the current state,
with A = (Ab , As ) being a vector of endogenous state variables. Notice that the distribution of R is time (age)
invariant and independent of educational attainment.
      The dynamic optimization problem of the household is formulated with time separable preferences. This pre-
sentation is consistent with familiar CARA and CRRA preference specifications and allows us to highlight the
participation and adjustment decisions of households. Section 3.2 enriches the model by considering a recursive
utility formulation, as in Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990).
      A household currently not participating in the stock market has the choice in period (at age) t to remain outside
of that market or to pay an entry cost for the right to trade stocks. That discrete choice is represented as:

                                                              n         p
                                              we,t (Ω) = max{we,t (Ω), we,t (Ω)}                                         (5)

                                                                         p                                n
for all Ω. Here we,t (Ω) is the maximum of the values of participating, we,t (Ω), and not participating, we,t (Ω).
The value functions are subscripted by educational attainment and age because of the finite-horizon nature of the
optimization problem.
      If the household chooses to remain outside of asset markets, the household can engage in consumption smoothing
through its bond account and re-optimize in the following period. The value of that problem is given by:

                                                                 n                                            o
                    n                                               e            0            e        b b0
                   we,t (Ω) = max
                               0
                                  u(c) + βEy e
                                             t+1 ,m e
                                                    t+1 |y e ,me
                                                           t   t
                                                                  νt+1 w e,t+1 (Ω  ) + (1 − ν t+1 )B(R  A   )            (6)
                              Ab ≥Ab

                                           e
for all Ω. Here β is the discount factor, vt+1 is the survival probability, as indicated in the right panel of Figure 2.




                                                               10
3.1     Dynamic Optimization Problem                                                                                 3   MODEL


B(b0 ) is the value of leaving a bequest of size b0 and is explained in detail below. Consumption is given by


                                             c = yte + T Rt − met + Rb Ab − Ab0 .                                             (7)


Here T Rt is the transfer from the government from various social insurance programs. Following Hubbard, Skinner,
and Zeldes (1995) and DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010), we assume the following functional form for this transfer


                                           T Rt = max{0, c − (yte + Rb Ab − met )}                                            (8)


where c is the consumption floor, the minimum level of consumption guaranteed by the government. In order to be
eligible for the transfer, a household’s means of living net of medical expenses, yte +Rb Ab −met , must be less than the
floor. Therefore the transfer function captures asset-based, means-tested social programs such as Medicaid, food
stamps and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. This support program has implications for precautionary
savings, particularly by low wealth households.
       In this problem, there is a lower bound on bond holdings, Ab . The household is not allowed to own stocks as it
is a non-participant in the stock market. Hence in (6), As = As0 = 0 is imposed.
       If a household chooses to participate in the stock market, then it incurs an entry cost of Γ and becomes a
participant with future value of ve,t+1 (Ω). This cost is assumed to be paid one time and is not a flow participation
cost. This switch in status happens instantly and the household is in a position to make portfolio adjustment
decisions. The value of participating is given by:


                                                                             n                                      0    0  0
                                                                                                                               o
          p
         we,t (Ω) = maxAb0 ≥Ab ,As0 ≥0 u(c) + βEye     e     s0 e   e    s
                                                                               e
                                                                              νt+1 ve,t+1 (Ω0 ) + (1 − νt+1
                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                            )B(Rb Ab + Rs As )
                                                 t+1 ,mt+1 ,R |yt ,mt ,R

s.t.
                                          c = yte + T Rt − met + Rb Ab − Ab0 − As0 − Γ                                         (9)
                                             T Rt = max{0, c − (yte + Rb Ab − met )}.                                         (10)


Here the bequest value is a function of total wealth, including the liquidated value of stocks. The household chooses
a bequest portfolio without knowing the stock return that will determine the full value of the inheritance.
       A participant in asset markets has a discrete choice between adjusting, not adjusting its stock account or exiting
asset markets. This choice is represented as:

                                                          a         n         x
                                          ve,t (Ω) = max{ve,t (Ω), ve,t (Ω), ve,t (Ω)}                                       (11)

for all Ω.




                                                                11
3.1     Dynamic Optimization Problem                                                                                     3   MODEL


       If the household adjusts, it is able to adjust both its stock and bond accounts. The household solves:
                                                                                 n                                      0    0  0
                                                                                                                                   o
          a
         ve,t (Ω) = maxAb0 ≥Ab ,As0 ≥0 u(c) + βEye         e     s0 e   e    s
                                                                                   e
                                                                                  νt+1 ve,t+1 (Ω0 ) + (1 − νt+1
                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                )B(Rb Ab + Rs As )
                                                     t+1 ,mt+1 ,R |yt ,mt ,R

s.t.
                                                                                         0
                                         c = yte + T Rt − met +       Ri Ai − i=b,s Ai − F
                                                                    P        P
                                                                       i=b,s                                                      (12)
                                             T Rt = max{0, c − (yte + i=b,s Ri Ai − met )}.
                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                  (13)


       In this problem, there is again a lower bound to bond holdings which we assume is the same as that for non-
participants. The household is not allowed to sell stocks short. The transfer function in (13) is the same as (8) for
non-participants, except that the means of living now includes wealth from stock holdings.
       The F in budget constraint (12) is the cost of adjusting stock account. It is assumed to be independent of
educational attainment, age and income. It is possible to include an additional adjustment cost proportional to
income as in Bonaparte, Cooper, and Zhu (2012), as well as flow costs of asset market participation, as discussed in
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002b). For matching the moments that are the focus of this study, this fixed adjustment cost
along with the participation cost are sufficient.12 As we shall see, the cost of adjustment induces exit from stock
participation. In addition, these costs are important for the forward-looking household’s choice to participate in
asset markets.
       The adjustment cost should be interpreted as a comprehensive measure of commission, time cost of adjustment
and cost of information search. Much of these costs are not directly observable, but are closely related to the
observed infrequent adjustment of stock account. By matching the adjustment rates of different education groups,
both pre- and post-retirement, we obtain quite precise estimates of the fixed cost.
       A household that participates in asset markets but chooses not to adjust its stock portfolio is able to freely
adjust its bond portfolio. The value of no-adjustment is given by:
                                                                             n                                      0    0  0
                                                                                                                              o
              n
             ve,t (Ω) = maxAb0 ≥Ab u(c) + βEye         e     s0 e   e    s
                                                                               e
                                                                              νt+1 ve,t+1 (Ω0 ) + (1 − νt+1
                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                            )B(Rb Ab + Rs As )
                                                 t+1 ,mt+1 ,R |yt ,mt ,R

      s.t
                                                   c = yte + T Rt − met + Rb Ab − Ab0                                             (14)
                                                             As0 = Rs As                                                          (15)
                                             T Rt = max{0, c − (yte + i=b,s Ri Ai − met )}
                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                  (16)


where As0 = Rs As since the return on stocks is (costlessly) reinvested into the stock account.
       Finally, a household may choose to exit the stock market. This choice is particularly pertinent for agents late
in life. The value of exit is given by:
  12 See    Gomes and Michaelides (2005) and Alan (2006), among others, for models with participation costs alone.




                                                                      12
3.2    Preferences                                                                                                    3   MODEL




                                                                      n                                           o
                     x                                                   e            0            e        b b0
                    ve,t (Ω) = maxAb0 ≥Ab u(c) + βEyt+1
                                                    e     e     e   e
                                                        ,mt+1 |yt ,mt  νt+1 w e,t+1 (Ω  ) + (1 − ν t+1 )B(R  A   )          (17)
             s.t.
                                             c = yte + T Rt − met +               Ri Ai − Ab0
                                                                      P
                                                                        i=b,s                                               (18)
                                          T Rt = max{0, c − (yte +                Ri Ai − met )}.
                                                                      P
                                                                          i=b,s                                             (19)


      This dynamic discrete choice problem allows us to capture the pertinent choices of market participation and
portfolio adjustment. One of the interesting tensions, explored in Bonaparte, Cooper, and Zhu (2012), in the
household’s problem is how to respond to income shocks. For small fluctuations in income, adjustment in the bond
account will be adequate for consumption smoothing. For large fluctuations in income, the household will need to
adjust its stock and bond holdings jointly, thus incurring that adjustment cost. The riskiness of income influences
the portfolio choice: all else the same, a riskier income process implies a more liquid (a lower stock to bond ratio)
portfolio.
      There is also a richness in the participation decision. By participating in stock markets, household can take
advantage of a higher average return. But that higher return comes at two costs: stocks are riskier and more
expensive to trade.
      Differences between pre- and post-retirement come into play in a couple of ways. First, entry into asset markets
is a type of investment and thus the gains to participation will depend on the horizon of the household, along with
the discount factor. Second, the income process changes over the life-cycle.
      Finally, there is the exit decision from asset markets. Since retirement income is lower on average than that
during working life, participation ought to fall during retirement. Further, due to the presence of large medical
expense shocks during retirement (modeled as large income shocks), a household may be induced to liquidate stock
holdings in low income states and then exit from asset markets.


3.2      Preferences
Three types of preferences are considered. Estimating preference parameters beyond the traditional CRRA speci-
fication is one of the contributions of this paper.
      The first is the commonly used CRRA preferences (power utility), with

                                                                 1 1−γ
                                                       u(c) =       c  .                                                    (20)
                                                                1−γ

The second one is CARA preferences (exponential utility), with


                                                          u(c) = −e−γc .                                                    (21)


      As is well understood from Merton (1971), for example, these two preference structures impose certain properties


                                                                13
3.3    Bequest Value                                                                                                      3   MODEL


on portfolio shares when markets are complete. Under CRRA the portfolio share of the risky asset is constant.
Under CARA, the amount invested in the risky asset is constant so that its share is lower in larger portfolios.
Neither of restrictions imposed by these two extremes fit the data well, though both are used for convenience in
theoretical and some empirical exercises. Further, we have incomplete markets: households bear some risk due to
idiosyncratic shocks.
      Finally, we go beyond these familiar representations and consider a recursive utility model where the current
value depends on current consumption and the expected future value. The EZW representation of preferences,
taken from Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990), is given by

                        (                                                                         ) 1
                                                             1                       1 1−1/θ 1−1/θ
                                   1−1/θ        e        1−γ 1−γ          e         1−γ 1−γ
               Ve,t =    (1 − β)c          + β νt+1 Et Ve,t+1     + (1 − νt+1 ) Et Bt+1                  ,                          (22)


where Ve,t is a state-dependent value of the optimization problem, and the bequest value Bt+1 is a function of wealth
left behind upon the household’s death. Here the bequest value is subscripted by t to remind the readers that it
depends on the realization of stock return in period t + 1. Different education groups have the same functional
form of Bt+1 .
      This representation allows more flexibility by distinguishing risk aversion (γ) from the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (θ). Bhamra and Uppal (2006) discuss the portfolio implications of this preference structure. Among
other things, they point out that in the face of stochastic returns, the portfolio choice depends jointly on the
elasticity of substitution and the degree of risk aversion, i.e. the parameters (θ, γ). As in Weil (1990), non-
interest income is deterministic in their analysis. Relatively few quantitative studies of household portfolio choice,
Gomes and Michaelides (2005) being a prime exception, use this specification of preferences in a fully stochastic
environment.13


3.3      Bequest Value
Denote wealth, and hence the bequest of an agent, at death by Z. The utility flow from a bequest, in the case of
CRRA preferences, is:

                                                                   (φ + Z)1−γ
                                                       B(Z) = L               .                                                     (23)
                                                                      1−γ
      For the CARA preferences, the specification in (23) changes accordingly. For the EZW preferences, the bequest
function is:


                                                         B(Z) = L(φ + Z).                                                           (24)
   13 Gomes and Michaelides (2005) provide simulation results for a variety of parameterizations, illustrating the sensitivity of partic-

ipation and portfolio shares to risk aversion and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Cocco, Gomes, and Maenhout (2005)
consider EZW preferences in their simulations and study the sensitivity of portfolio shares to the EIS. In contrast to our paper, there
is no estimation in either paper.




                                                                   14
3.4     Education Choice                                                                     4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


The curvature parameter γ appears in (22) rather than (23).
      For each of the bequest functions, the parameters L and φ determine the utility flow from a bequest. L measures
the strength of the bequest motive, and φ measures the degree of luxuriousness of a bequest.14 With φ > 0, a
bequest is a luxury good and the utility of a bequest becomes non-homothetic. In section 7.1, we will show that φ
plays an important role in generating differences in the wealth-income ratio by education.
      With EZW preferences the effect of variations in L on the strength of the bequest motive depends on the sign
      θ−1
of     θ .   This point is clear when one looks at the first-order condition for the optimization problem in the last
                                                                      θ−1
period: the marginal value of a bequest is multiplied by βL            θ    .


3.4        Education Choice
The human capital decision is made prior to the portfolio choice. Suppose that the net cost of education is given
by the random variable ψ which is distributed across the population. Differences in the cost of education could
reflect heterogeneity in ability, in the socioeconomic status of parents, in school quality, etc. Given a draw of ψ,
households will optimally choose the amount of education. Having made this decision, education only matters
for household financial choices through the processes for income, mortality and medical expenses. It is precisely
these effects of education choice that we capture through the mapping of education specific processes to household
financial choices in our initial estimation.
      There could be heterogeneity across households that is not directly observable but underlies their education
choices. Some of these differences would have no effect on household saving and portfolio choice. For example,
households may differ in the disutility of time spent studying relative to leisure, as in Keane and Wolpin (2001).
      Other factors, such as the discount factor, could explain the education choice. Further, education itself could
influence parameters such as participation costs and adjustment costs, which is studied in the literature of financial
literacy.15 Moreover, factors such as cognitive ability which help to determine the education choice, may also
matter for household financial decisions. These possibilities are explored when parameters are allowed to vary by
education type.16


4       Quantitative Analysis
The quantitative analysis of the model revolves around estimating the parameters of the household optimization
problem as well as adjustment costs to match key moments from the data. To do so, the various preference
representations in section 3.2 are studied.
      The initial set of estimates focuses on the effects of education specific processes that are directly observable in
the data. The goal is to understand the relative importance of these observable factors. Accordingly, we initially
assume that all households have identical preferences and stock market cost parameters in section 5.
 14 This  structure also appears in, inter alia, Gomes and Michaelides (2005), DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010) and Cagetti (2003).
 15 See, for example, Lusardi (2008).
  16 Bringing together the education choice, say as in Keane and Wolpin (2001), along with the complex financial decisions modeled in

this paper would be of interest and could place further restrictions on parameters.


                                                                 15
4.1    Approach                                                                                  4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


      Section 6 broadens the analysis to allow parameter differences as well. These results are then used to determine
to what extent unobservable heterogeneity accounts for differences in household finance relative to the differences
in observable exogenous processes.


4.1        Approach
The estimation of the processes for income, stock returns, out-of-pocket medical expenses and mortality are in-
dependent of the structural model. Preference parameters and costs related to stock market are estimated by
simulated method of moments. The estimation of the set of structural parameters, Θ ≡ (β, γ, Γ, F, L, φ, c, θ), is
based on the the following problem:


                                          £ = minΘ (M s (Θ) − M d )W (M s (Θ) − M d )0                                               (25)

where W is a weighting matrix, discussed in Section 9.4 of the Appendix.
      In the set of parameters, β is the discount factor, γ is the curvature (risk aversion) of the utility function and θ is
the EIS for the EZW specification. There are two parameters for the bequest function, (L, φ). There are two types
of costs: Γ the cost to participate in the stock market and F , the fixed trading cost. Finally, c is the consumption
floor both pre- and post-retirement. Agents are not able to borrow so that Ab = 0. This is consistent with the
argument in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995) that the presence of a consumption floor limits borrowing.
      Table 2 presents the moments for our analysis. These are essentially the coefficients used to generate the age
profiles for household financial decisions shown in Figure 3. These regression coefficients are used as moments in
the estimation of the structural parameters.
      By this choice of moments, we have elected to summarize the life-cycle profile through a regression on age and
age-squared. This contrasts with an approach that substitutes age specific dummies for the quadratic specification.
The quadratic approximation captures the basic life-cycle patterns in a parsimonious way.17
      The simulated moments, M s (Θ), are calculated from the simulated data set created by solving the household
optimization problem specified in equations (5) to (23) given the parameter vector Θ and a representation of utility.
The moments from the simulated data are calculated in the same way as the moments from the actual data.
      The initial distribution of assets is important for the moments generated by the solution of the model. For
example, a household may never participate in the stock market if it is not a participant initially, but may stay in
the stock market until the end of life if it is in the market initially. This is because participation status itself has
value due to the entry cost. Hence the mean level of participation, a key moment, will depend on initial conditions.
      We estimate the initial distribution of households on the product space of stock and bond holdings from the
SCF.18 Using this initial condition, we simulate the paths of consumption, stockholding and bond holding for a
large number of households to create a simulated panel given a vector of parameters. The moments in (25) are
calculated from this panel and the objective function is evaluated for a given value of Θ.
  17 The  age specific dummies would focus attention on certain aspects of the life-cycle, such as retirement, that are not central to our
analysis.
  18 Section 9.3 in the Appendix provides some statistics from this initial distribution.




                                                                   16
                                                                                          5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS



                                       Table 2: Regression Coefficients From the Data
                                   year effect controlled
               const.       age       age2      edu2        edu3              edu4
    part.      -0.680      0.029   -0.00023    0.182        0.412             0.603
              (-18.16)   (25.79)   (-20.81)   (16.05)     (38.79)           (51.84)
    share      0.260     9.5E-03   -0.00009     0.024       0.054            0.092
              (6.197)    (7.722)   (-7.462)   (1.558)      (3.69)           (6.194)
    adj.        0.189      0.012   -0.00013     0.061       0.135             0.222
              (1.897)    (3.749)   (-4.226)   (1.795)     (4.325)           (6.844)
               const.       age       age2   edu2 ×age edu3 ×age           edu4 ×age     edu2 ×age2     edu3 ×age2     edu4 ×age2
    W/I        1.393      -0.086   1.3E-03     -0.012      -0.015            -0.004       0.00051        0.00114        0.00130
               (2.94)    (-5.287)   (7.495)   (-1.136)    (-1.498)          (-0.317)       (3.104)        (7.299)        (7.211)
                                  cohort effect controlled
               const.       age       age2      edu2        edu3             edu4
    part       -0.783      0.029   -0.00020     0.181       0.412            0.602
              (-4.621)   (13.92)   (-9.714)   (15.89)     (38.69)           (51.60)
    share       0.357     -0.003   0.00008      0.023       0.052            0.088
              (1.786)    (-1.236)   (3.880)   (1.465)     (3.534)           (5.881)
      adj       0.582      0.000   -0.00004    0.046        0.118            0.200
              (0.466)    (-0.014) (-0.305)    (1.332)     ( 3.744)          (6.061)
               const.       age       age2   edu2 ×age edu3 ×age           edu4 ×age     edu2 ×age2     edu3 ×age2     edu4 ×age2
    W/I        1.706      -0.072    0.00102    -0.010      -0.012            0.003        0.00047        0.00106        0.00119
              (0.786)    (-2.554)   (3.620)   (-0.901)    (-1.101)          (0.215)        (2.788)        (6.712)        (6.468)
 These are the coefficient estimates obtained by regressing the four elements of household financial choices. With the exception
 of the wealth-income equation, these come from a linear regression model with a constant, age, age-squared, time dummies and
 education dummies as independent variables. For the wealth-income regressions, the independent variables were a constant, age,
 age-squared, time dummies, and education dummies interacted with age and age-squared. Here and in the tables that follow
 edui denotes education group i = 1, 2, 3, 4 ordered by years of schooling. Point estimates of the constant term are adjusted by
 year/cohort effect coefficients, so that the levels match the averages over different waves of surveys. Standard errors are adjusted
 correspondingly.


5       Homogenous Parameters
This section estimates the structural parameters under the assumption of no differences in parameters across
education groups. The next section allows heterogeneous preferences and cost parameters.


5.1         Estimation Results
The estimation results are reported in Tables 3 and Figure 4. The results for the three leading preference speci-
fications are shown, CRRA, CARA and EZW. The last two rows, labeled EZW(I) and EZW(c), are explained in
Section 5.2 where we discuss robustness of the estimation results.


5.1.1       Parameter Estimates

Table 3 shows the parameter estimates as well as the fit. Under each parameter estimate is the standard error. As
indicated by the last column of the table, the fit of the EZW specification is considerably better than either of the
alternative preference representations.19 Hereafter we take the EZW specification with homogeneous parameters as
 19 Of   course the EZW model nests CRRA. The point is to see that the restriction of the CRRA case is rejected.



                                                                 17
5.1    Estimation Results                                                                5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


the baseline. The baseline model will be compared with various extensions such as housing in wealth, heterogeneous
preferences and the model with cohort effects controlled.
      Regarding the parameter estimates for the EZW model, the discount factor is estimated at 0.862, below con-
ventional estimates, and the estimated risk aversion is 4.409. For the EZW specification, θ controls the elasticity
                                                                                                 1
of intertemporal substitution and is 0.601. The estimated θ is much larger than                  γ   so the time separable CRRA
model is rejected.
                                                      1
      The identification of high EIS (relative to     γ)   largely comes from the post-retirement profile of wealth accumu-
lation and stock market participation. A large fraction of wealth accumulation before retirement is the buffer stock
against income shocks. This precautionary motive becomes much weaker after retirement, because income shocks
disappear and medical expense shocks are largely transitory. Therefore households need to run down precautionary
wealth. If the EIS is too low, households reduce wealth too slowly, leading to wealth-income ratio profiles that
are too steep. This also implies that participation rates should remain high until very old age. In summary, a
reasonably high EIS is chosen to match the participation and wealth-income ratio profiles in the data.
      For comparison, the baseline calibration of Gomes and Michaelides (2005) assumes: β=0.96, γ=5, θ=0.2,
Γ=0.025. Binsbergen, Fernandez-Villaverde, Koijen, and Ramirez (2012) estimate a DSGE model with EZW
preferences based on the term structure of interest rate. The estimated γ ranges from 41-85 and the EIS ranges
from 1.30-2.01, implying even larger risk aversion and inter-temporal substitution. Based on consumption Euler
equation, Vissing-Jorgensen (2002a) estimates the EIS to be around 0.3-1.0. Cagetti (2003) estimates a β around
0.98 for college educated while his estimated discount factor is between 0.85 and 0.90 for high school education and
below.
      The participation cost, Γ, and adjustment costs, F , are each statistically and economically significant.20 The
values reported are fractions of the average pre-retirement income of all households. Thus the entry cost is about
1.0% of average income. The adjustment cost is larger, about 2.0%, of average income. The average household
income in terms of 2010 US dollar in our PSID sample is about $68,400. Therefore the entry and adjustment costs
are about $684 and $1,368 respectively. In comparison, Bonaparte, Cooper, and Zhu (2012) estimate fixed trading
costs of about $900 though in that model there are no participation costs and everybody participates. While large
relative to income, these costs are, of course, much more modest relative to financial wealth.
      The estimated parameters for the bequest motive are both significant. This is important as bequests are a rele-
vant factor in the savings decision. In contrast, our CRRA model, as well as the CRRA model in DeNardi, French,
and Jones (2010), fails to identify a significant bequest motive. This again is related to the run-down of precau-
tionary wealth after retirement. The low EIS implied by the CRRA model results in slow wealth deaccumulation,
which is “confused” with the bequest motive, leading to identification problems.
      The consumption floor is 20.1% of income. Here these parameters are fractions of overall mean income and
thus are the same across education groups. Consequently, the floor is much closer to the mean income of the low
  20 Some studies, such as Attanasio and Paiella (2011) and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002b), consider a flow rather than a one-time cost of

participation. We added a flow cost to the structural model. The point estimate turned out to be 0.00189, and it was not significantly
different from zero. Therefore we dropped it from the model.




                                                                 18
5.1    Estimation Results                                                                    5    HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


education group compared to others.
      Overall, about 27% of households in the low education group hit the consumption floor. For each education,
the chance of hitting the floor is much higher during retirement. 35% of the second group and 17% of the next
to higher group hit the floor during retirement. Even the highest education group is supported through the floor
during retirement in about 10% of the observations. The upper block of Table 5 reports the fraction of households
that hit the consumption floor in the simulated data.
      The CRRA model has a lower estimate of risk aversion, lower stock adjustment cost and higher consumption
floor. In comparison, Alan (2006) estimates parameters to match the coefficients of a reduced form regression of
participation on age and lagged participation. She estimates β = 0.92 and a CRRA parameter of 1.6.
      The lower estimate of risk aversion in CRRA model can be understood intuitively. Suppose the estimates of
risk aversion is as high as that from EZW model, i.e., γ = 4.409, then the implied EIS would be 0.227, much lower
than the estimate of θ = 0.601. As a compromise, the estimated γ from CRRA model is much lower than that
from EZW model.
      The standard CARA model predicts constant holding of risky assets, thus the stock share would be lower
for the more educated households, inconsistent with the data. The problem can potentially be remedied by the
stock adjustment cost, because low-income households care more about the cost. Consequently the CRRA model
estimates a relatively higher F compared to CRRA and EZW model. The estimated β is lower, so that households
accumulate less wealth and consequently care even more about the stock adjustment cost. As in the CRRA model,
there is no significant bequest motive.


                                                   Table 3: Estimation Results
                           β           γ          Γ           F            L         φ             c         θ            £
             EZW         0.862       4.409      0.010       0.020        0.031     1.834         0.201     0.601      212.69
            (baseline)
                         (0.006)    (0.156)    (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.013)   (0.443)       (0.016)   (0.017)
            CRRA          0.869      3.515      0.012       0.012         0.128     0.730         0.318      na      1430.95
                         (0.005)    (0.035)    (0.002)     (0.001)       (0.343)   (3.083)        (0.01)
            CARA          0.763      5.481      0.011       0.022         0.096     1.726         0.262      na      1061.35
                         (0.008)    (0.054)    (0.001)     (0.002)       (2.751)   (35.12)        (0.01)
            EZW(I)        0.903      6.249      0.028       0.021         0.054     2.035         0.219     0.614     0.0618
                          (0.27)    (14.58)    (0.215)      (0.09)       (0.396)    (22.8)       (0.377)   (2.986)
            EZW(c)        0.862      4.850      0.015       0.022         0.091     1.600         0.350     0.664     288.78
                         (0.006)    (0.223)    (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.054)   (0.395)       (0.034)   (0.041)

       This table reports the estimated parameter values and fit (distance between model and data moments) for the CRRA,
       CARA and EZW preferences. The inverse of variances is used as weighting matrix, except in the case of EZW(I) where
       the identity matrix is used. The EZW(c) case, explained in the text, created moments by controlling for cohort rather than
       year effects.




                                                                    19
5.1    Estimation Results                                                                          5     HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


5.1.2     Model Moments

The moments of the estimated models are presented in two ways. First, Figure 4 graphs the life-cycle profiles
estimated from simulated data as well as those from the actual data. This is done for the baseline EZW estimation.
Table 4 presents the data moments and those produced by simulating the models at the estimated parameter values
for all of the specifications in Table 3.

                                       Data: Participation                             Model: Participation
                        1                                                  1




                       0.5                                                0.5
                             30   40       50    60        70   80              30   40      50    60         70   80
                                          Stock Share                                       Stock Share

                       0.8                                                0.8
                       0.6                                                0.6
                       0.4                                                0.4
                       0.2                                                0.2
                             30   40      50    60     70       80              30   40      50    60     70       80
                                       Adjustment Rate                                    Adjustment Rate
                        1                                                  1


                       0.5                                                0.5


                        0                                                  0
                             30   40     50      60   70        80              30   40     50      60   70        80
                                        Wealth/Income                                      Wealth/Income
                       15                                                 15
                                                                                     school < 12
                       10                                                 10         school = 12
                                                                                     school ∈(12,16]
                        5                                                  5         school > 16


                        0                                                  0
                             30   40       50         60   70   80              30   40       50         60   70   80
                                                age                                                age

                         Figure 4: Profiles of Household Financial Decisions: Simulated Moments
       These profiles show the age dependence of household financial decisions in the actual (left) and simulated (right) data. As
       with the actual data, the profiles from simulated data come from a linear regression with a constant, age, age-squared, and
       education dummies as independent variables. For the wealth-income regressions, the independent variables were a constant,
       age, age-squared and education dummies interacted with age and age-squared.


      Looking at Figure 4, the left panel shows the data profiles and the right panel shows those from the estimated
model. We evaluate the model fit both in terms of the affects of education and the life-cycle profile.
      The model does a good job of capturing the affect of education on participation, stock share, adjustment rates
and the wealth-income ratio: i.e. the difference of these choices across education groups is close to that in the data.
The successful match is mainly driven by heterogeneity in mean income, coupled with costs associated with stock
market, and non-homotheticity of preferences due to the consumption floor and the luxuriousness of a bequest.


                                                                     20
5.1    Estimation Results                                                               5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


This point will be made clear later on.
      The model succeeds in matching the participation profiles for all education groups. The low education group
participates less and the high education group has the highest participation rates, for all ages. This good fit reflects
the relatively high weight put on the participation moments by the weighting matrix, given in Table 15.


                                          Table 4: Moments from Simulated Data
                                         2
              const.       age          age         edu2         edu3         edu4
                                    Participation
      Data     -0.680      0.029     -0.00023      0.182        0.412         0.603
              (-18.16)   (25.79)     (-20.81)     (16.05)      (38.79)       (51.84)
  EZW          -0.634      0.032     -0.00026      0.180        0.392         0.505
 CRRA          -0.989      0.048     -0.00038       0.258       0.391         0.470
 CARA          -0.698      0.035     -0.00033      0.132        0.434         0.636
 EZW(I)        -0.665      0.034     -0.00026      0.334        0.467         0.566
 EZW(c)        -0.803      0.036     -0.00030       0.165       0.356         0.507
                                         Share
      Data     0.260     9.5E-03 -0.00008          0.024        0.054         0.092
              (6.197)    (7.722)     (-7.462)     (1.558)       (3.69)       (6.194)
  EZW          0.382      0.015      -0.00012      0.040        0.056          0.072
 CRRA          0.102      0.025      -0.00020      0.010        0.076          0.070
 CARA          0.428      0.008      -0.00007      0.031        0.049         -0.006
 EZW(I)        0.215       0.024     -0.00025      0.028        0.016         -0.005
 EZW(c)        0.659      0.005      -0.00008      0.001        0.024          0.033
                                     Adjustment
      Data      0.189      0.012     -0.00013      0.061        0.135         0.222
              (1.897)    (3.749)     (-4.226)     (1.795)      (4.325)       (6.844)
  EZW          -0.271      0.013     -0.00008      0.048        0.155         0.242
 CRRA          -0.234      0.018     -0.00009       0.068       0.239         0.308
 CARA          -0.661      0.019     -0.00009      0.200        0.441         0.590
 EZW(I)        0.212       0.001    0.000003       0.024        0.094         0.137
 EZW(c)        -0.310      0.014     -0.00034       0.027       0.104         0.188
                                 wealth-income Ratio
              const.        age         age2    edu2 ×age     edu3 ×age     edu4 ×age    edu2 ×age2     edu3 ×age2     edu4 ×age2
      Data    1.393       -0.086      0.00132      -0.012       -0.015        -0.004       0.00051       0.00114        0.00130
              (2.94)     (-5.287)     (7.495)    (-1.136)      (-1.498)      (-0.317)      (3.104)        (7.299)        (7.211)
  EZW         1.207       -0.048      0.00061     -0.0013       -0.019        -0.051       0.00013       0.00061         0.0015
 CRRA         -2.131       0.094     -0.00066     -0.0060       -0.030        -0.074      0.00037        0.00108        0.00236
 CARA         -2.869       0.118     -0.00105      0.0103        0.006        -0.047      -0.00007       0.00051        0.00257
 EZW(I)       1.404       -0.067      0.00120     -0.0338       -0.047        -0.095       0.00103       0.00166        0.00308
 EZW(c)       -0.983       0.043     -0.00034     -0.0005       -0.008         0.001       0.00010       0.00033        0.00025
 These are the coefficient estimates obtained by regressing the four elements of household financial choices. With the exception of
 the wealth-income equation, these come from a linear regression model with a constant, age, age-squared ,and education dummies
 as independent variables. For the wealth-income regressions, the independent variables were a constant, age, age-squared and
 education dummies interacted with age and age-squared.


      The model also captures the basic patterns for the stock share, the adjustment rates and the wealth-income
ratios but misses on the levels of these choices. This partly reflects the weighting matrix that puts much less
weight on the constant terms of these regressions relative to the coefficients on age, age-squared and education
dummies. The predicted stock share is higher in the model than in the data. Two channels in the model can lower
the stock share: higher stock adjustment cost and higher risk aversion. Both channels are disciplined by other


                                                                21
5.1    Estimation Results                                                        5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


moments that we try to match. A larger adjustment cost will deteriorate the match of stock average adjustment
rate. Raising the degree of risk aversion jeopardizes the fit of education dummies, because a high γ diminishes the
roles of consumption floor and luxuriousness of bequests, hence reducing the non-homotheticity of the preferences.
      Table 4 is informative about the ways in which the CRRA and CARA models fail to match the moments.
As discussed earlier, the CRRA model implies a much lower EIS and hence much slower wealth deaccumulation,
reflected in the much larger coefficient on age in the wealth-income ratio regression. In addition, a higher wealth level
is associated with a higher participation rate and stock share, therefore the coefficients on age are also excessively
large in the participation and share regression. Finally, the too-low deaccumulation of wealth after retirement
trivializes the role of adjustment cost, consumption floor, and luxuriousness of bequests, impairing the ordering of
participation and stock share by educational attainment. On the other hand, the slow deaccumulation of wealth
generate wealth-income ratio profiles that are closer to the data than the EZW case. But this does not improve
the overall fit much as the model puts more weights on participation moments than wealth-income ratio ones.
      A main failing of the CARA model is in matching the stock share. Standard CARA model predicts constant
holding of risky assets, implying a lower share for the more educated. Thus the coefficients on education dummies
are not matched. The CARA model estimates a high adjustment cost and a lower β which partly explains the too
large gradient of adjustment rate with respect to educational attainment.
      The model successfully generates wealth-income profiles that increase with age, implying slow deaccumulation
of wealth as in DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010). Is this mainly driven by the bequest motive, or the level of
medical expenses, or medical expense shocks? To answer the question, we shut down these channels one at a time.21
      When the bequest motive is assumed not to exist, the wealth-income ratio falls to zero at age 67 for the least
educated group, and at age 79 for the most educated. Consequently the model fit becomes much worse with
£ = 2408. On the other hand, shutting down medical expense shocks changes the moments very little, except that
the post-retirement stock share is slightly higher for each education group. Setting the level of medical expenses
to zero does not worsen the model fit much either, with £ = 258. And the post-retirement wealth-income ratio
profiles become steeper, because medical expenses no longer erode the wealth of households. In summary, the slow
wealth deaccumulation is mainly driven by the bequest motive in our model.
      Absent bequest motive, households run down assets quickly because they rely on the consumption floor to a
large extent. This is clear from Table 5. During retirement, 62% of the least educated and 18% of the most educated
rely on the consumption floor in the absence of a bequest motive. These numbers are significantly higher than in
the baseline. In the absence of medical expense shocks, the overall chance of hitting the floor is slightly lower than
the baseline.
      In DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010), medical expense risks play a more important role in the slow deac-
cumulation of wealth after retirement. The difference largely comes from different parameterizations. DeNardi,
French, and Jones (2010) ignores portfolio decisions and estimates a much higher β. In addition, because DeNardi,
French, and Jones (2010) uses CRRA preferences, the estimated EIS (inverse of risk aversion) is much lower. These
 21 We   are grateful to Dirk Krueger for suggesting this exercise.




                                                                      22
5.2    Extensions and Robustness                                                   5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS



                            Table 5: Fraction of Households Hitting the Consumption Floor
                                          lifetime pre-retirement post-retirement
                                          Baseline
                                   edu1     0.267       0.112            0.575
                                   edu2     0.119       0.003            0.352
                                   edu3     0.057       0.000            0.172
                                   edu4     0.034       0.000            0.102
                                          No Bequest Motive
                                   edu1     0.284       0.117            0.618
                                   edu2     0.136       0.004            0.400
                                   edu3     0.080       0.000            0.241
                                   edu4     0.059       0.000            0.176
                                          No Medical Expenses Shocks
                                   edu1     0.266       0.112            0.572
                                   edu2     0.122       0.002            0.361
                                   edu3     0.055       0.000            0.164
                                   edu4     0.034       0.000            0.102
                                          No medical expenses
                                   edu1     0.233       0.112            0.474
                                   edu2     0.066       0.002            0.194
                                   edu3     0.028       0.000            0.085
                                   edu4     0.019       0.000            0.057
       The table reports the fraction of households who hit the consumption floor for each of the four education group.
       The numbers are the averages of lifetime, pre-retirement years and post-retirement years respectively.


parameter values make households willing to keep wealth levels high even if the bequest motive is weak, which also
explains why the estimates of bequest parameters have large standard errors in DeNardi, French, and Jones (2010).


5.2      Extensions and Robustness
This section presents further estimation results to study an extension of the model to housing and the robustness
of our parameter estimates.


5.2.1     Housing

Cocco (2005) and Yao and Zhang (2005), among other studies, stress the relevance of home-ownership on portfolio
decisions. Thus far our model has excluded this important element of household financial decisions.
      There are two approaches to extending the model to accommodate housing. The first approach, termed “Housing
in Wealth” adds housing to both the model and data. In particular, we recompute the share and wealth-income
ratio moments to include housing and amend the model to add housing to utility and to asset holdings. The second
approach, termed “Housing out of Moments”, extracts the effects of housing from the moments, and re-estimates
the model. Overall, we find that neither of these treatments of housing influences our main findings regarding the
effects of education on household financial decisions nor the parameter estimates.




                                                             23
5.2   Extensions and Robustness                                                             5      HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS




                                                   Table 6: Moments: Housing

                                                                                                       home           home
                    const.        age        age2        edu2                edu3        edu4          owner          equity
                                           Participation
                   Housing in Wealth
       Data        -0.680     0.029         -0.00023        0.182            0.412       0.603
      EZW(h)       -0.860     0.036         -0.00028        0.107            0.347       0.491
                    Out of Moments
       Data        −0.251     0.017         −0.00013        0.152            0.352       0.512         −0.040          0.013
                   (−4.488)     (14.47)      (−12.20)       (13.78)         (33.81)     (44.44)        (−2.375)        (18.88)
 Baseline Data      -0.680      0.029       -0.00023        0.182           0.412       0.603
   EZW(nh)          -0.344      0.021       -0.00015        0.189           0.355       0.462
                                               Share
                   Housing in Wealth
       Data         0.221     0.0015        -0.00002        0.089            0.097       0.158
      EZW(h)        0.122     0.016         -0.00013        0.026            0.049       0.038
                    Out of Moments
       Data         0.271     0.009         −0.00008        0.022            0.050       0.084         −0.062          0.003
                    (2.447)     (6.813)      (−6.839)       (1.379)         (3.368)     (5.526)        (−1.171)        (1.397)
 Baseline Data      0.260       0.010      -0.00008   0.024                 0.054       0.092
   EZW(nh)          0.342       0.017      -0.00015   0.052                 0.067        0.088
                                           Adjustment
                   Housing in Wealth
       Data         0.189     0.012         -0.00013        0.061            0.135       0.222
      EZW(h)       -0.129     0.004         -0.00002        0.031            0.082       0.157
                    Out of Moments
       Data         0.338     0.008         −0.00009        0.045            0.098       0.182         −0.619          0.056
                   (−0.730)     (2.348)      (−2.916)       (1.304)         (3.059)     (5.455)        (−4.849)        (5.396)
 Baseline Data      0.189     0.012      -0.00013   0.061                   0.135       0.222
   EZW(nh)          -0.301     0.013     -0.00009    0.035                  0.150       0.240
                                    wealth-income Ratio
                   const.       age        age2   edu2 ×age                edu3 ×age   edu4 ×age     edu2 ×age2     edu3 ×age2     edu4 ×age2
                   Housing in Wealth
       Data         2.473     -0.173       0.003    -0.008                  -0.003      0.040         0.00049         0.0010         0.00067
      EZW(h)        0.252     -0.002       0.001    -0.002                  -0.010      -0.036        0.00009         0.0004         0.00104
                    Out of Moments
       Data         3.260    −0.133       0.0016   −0.020                   −0.031      −0.028         0.0006         0.0013          0.0015
                    (4.503)     (−7.980)      (9.116)      (−1.805)         (−3.033)    (−2.421)       (3.548)         (8.283)        (8.578)
 Baseline Data      2.473       -0.173       0.0031        -0.008           -0.003      0.040          0.0005         0.0010          0.0007
   EZW(nh)          2.752       -0.115       0.0013        -0.012           -0.024      -0.046         0.0003         0.0007          0.0013
 Model and data moments with housing treated. The ‘Housing in Wealth’ treatment adds housing to the measure of wealth, with
 home equity categorized as a bond. The ‘Housing Controlled’ treatment controls for the potential effects of housing on financial
 choices by including a dummy for home ownership and home equity to the regression equations. For ease of comparison, regression
 coefficients from the baseline are also reported in italics. For the wealth-income ratio regression, the coefficients on home ownership
 and home equity are -1.704(7.80) and 0.129(13.95) respectively. Reported in the parentheses are t-statistics.




                                                                      24
5.2    Extensions and Robustness                                                       5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


Housing in Wealth          This approach introduces housing into the model both as a consumption good and as an
asset. Returning to the household choice problem, let c represent the consumption flow of the household. As in
Cagetti (2003), consumption is a composite of goods and services (x) as well as the service flow from housing (h).
Assume a Cobb-Douglas function, c = xα h1−α , so that a constant fraction of expenditures is on housing services.
      The return of housing as an asset has two components: price appreciation and (imputed) rental return. Various
evidence shows that long-run price appreciation is low and the rental return is the major component.22 Since
housing rent is relatively stable over time, the housing return resembles a bond. For this reason, and to ease
computational burden, we combine housing asset with safe financial asset, and call this bundle of safe asset bond.
      With housing treated as an safe asset, the return to bonds needs to be re-calibrated. First, we take housing return
to be 5% per annum. As noted before, the majority of housing return comes from rental income. Campbell, Davis,
Gallin, and Martin (2009) show that the rent-price ratio for the US residential market is about 0.05 on average,
but appears to decline since the end of 1990s. Next, from SCF data, on average housing wealth is about 69.5% of
total wealth. Therefore the return of composite bond-housing asset is 69.5% × 5% + (1 − 69.5%) × 2% = 4.08%.
      Two sets of moments are re-calculated from SCF data with housing equity included – stock share in total wealth
and wealth-income ratio. These new moments are reported in the block of Table 6 labeled “Housing in Wealth”.
Not surprisingly, looking at the regression constant, shares are much lower and wealth-income ratios are much
higher than without housing (labeled ‘Baseline Data’ in the table). The life-cycle patterns though are roughly the
same, and the ordering with respect to education remains.
      The parameter estimates for this case are presented in Table 7 in the ‘EZW(h)’ row. Relative to the baseline
estimates (reported in the first row of the table), the degree of risk aversion is higher when housing is included
because the model attempts to match the lower stock share. A higher γ implies a stronger precautionary motive
and higher saving. The estimated β is slightly lower relative to the baseline estimation, but the estimated θ is also
lower, which helps generate more wealth accumulation. The other parameters are fairly close to the baseline.
      The model does not fit the moments as well as the baseline. Generally, it is difficult for a rational expectations
model to generate a low stock share. When housing is included in bonds, the stock share from the data is much
lower than the baseline, posing a challenge to our model. In response to that, a high γ is estimated. But as
discussed earlier, a high γ diminishes the role of parameters that make preferences non-homothetic. In addition,
the average level of wealth is much higher in model with housing, which reduces the role of entry and fixed costs.
      From Table 6, the simulated moments from the estimated model generally follows the same ordering by education
as in the data. The exception is the stock share: the estimated model predicts a slightly lower share for the most
educated group compared to the college graduates.


Housing Out of the Moments              An alternative approach is to remove the effects of home-ownership and housing
assets from data moments. That is, instead of adding housing to the model, we extract its influence from the data.
Since our goal is to study the affects of education on financial choices, we are not directly interested in the affects
  22 For example, during 1987-2011, the Case-Shiller index at national level increased at an average rate of 0.285% per annum after

inflation adjustment.



                                                                25
5.2     Extensions and Robustness                                                         5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS



                                                Table 7: Estimation Results: Housing
                              β          γ           Γ         F           L          φ          c          θ           £
             Baseline       0.862      4.409       0.010     0.020       0.031      1.834      0.201      0.601     212.69
                           (0.006)    (0.156)     (0.001)   (0.002)     (0.013)    (0.443)    (0.016)    (0.017)
             EZW(h)         0.837      4.712       0.013     0.019       0.042      1.539      0.171      0.554     390.71
                           (0.003)    (0.053)     (0.001)   (0.006)     (0.013)    (0.092)    (0.003)    (0.016)
            EZW(nh)         0.853      4.429       0.008     0.022       0.033      0.290      0.220      0.629     155.98
                           (0.006)    (0.076)     (0.002)   (0.002)     (0.008)    (0.110)    (0.017)    (0.037)

        This table reports the estimated parameter values and fit (distance between model and data moments) for the baseline and
        two housing models.


of housing on these choices.
      To do this, we supplement the regressions presented in Table 2 with a dummy variable indicating home ownership
and a measure of home equity. The resulting estimates are reported in the second block of Table 6 labeled
‘Out of Moments’. Consistent with the findings in Cocco (2005) and Yao and Zhang (2005), including these
controls changes the life-cycle profiles of household financial choices. As indicated in the table, being a home-
owner reduces participation, stock share and the frequency of stock adjustment. In their simulation exercise, Cocco
(2005) and Yao and Zhang (2005) find that home ownership crowds out stock holdings, which is supported by
the negative coefficients on home ownership in our regression. The positive coefficients on home equity partly
reflects a diversification benefit as home equity can be used to buffer financial and labor-income risks, a mechanism
emphasized in Yao and Zhang (2005). Further, except for stock share, the estimated life-cycle profiles change as
well.
      However, the important patterns regarding the effect of education are not changed. For the stock share equation,
the coefficients of education dummies are changed only marginally. Regarding participation, adjustment rate and
wealth-income ratio, almost all the coefficients related to education dummies are smaller. Thus the education effect
is somewhat weaker when housing is controlled, but it is still at about the same scale as the baseline.
      The model is re-estimated using these regression coefficients as moments. By conditioning on housing, the
coefficients on age, age-squared and the education dummies, which are our moments, differ from the baseline. Thus
the parameter estimates will be different as well.
      The parameter estimates are shown in the row labeled ‘EZW(nh)’ in Table 7. The estimated discount factor
as well as the estimates of risk aversion and the EIS are very close to the baseline. The point estimate of the
participation cost is slightly lower, which is consistent with the argument in Cocco (2005) that in the presence of
housing, a lower fixed cost of equity market participation is needed to generate the empirically observed levels of
participation.
      The only significant change is the much lower estimate of φ. That is, a bequest becomes less of a luxury and the
preferences are less non-homothetic. This is partly in response to the weaker education effect on financial choices
found in the data. The model fit is actually better than the baseline.
      Looking at the moments, the ordering by education of participation, share and adjustment remain in both the


                                                                   26
5.2    Extensions and Robustness                                                            5   HOMOGENOUS PARAMETERS


estimated model and the data, conditioning on home ownership and equity. The estimated model also mimics the
age dependence of these financial choices. But as in the baseline, we do not match the constant well. The stock
share, adjustment rate and wealth-income ratio are lower in the simulated data.


5.2.2     Identity Matrix

The optimal weighting matrix is created by inverting the variance covariance matrix. As noted earlier, this procedure
puts a lot of weight on the participation equation and less on other moments, such as the coefficients from the share
and adjustment coefficients.23 Also it puts more weight on education dummies and less on the constant terms.
      While the efficient weighting matrix puts more weight on moments that are more precisely estimated, it is
interesting to see the parameter estimates under an alternative given the small sample. The row denoted EZW (I)
in Tables 3 and 4 present estimates and moments for the EZW case where the weighting matrix, W , in (25) is the
identity matrix.24 This weighting matrix produces consistent estimates, but is not as efficient in large samples.
      For this treatment, the estimated discount factor and coefficient of risk aversion are higher than in the baseline
as is the estimated degree of risk aversion. The participation cost is considerably larger as well. Other parameter
estimates are relatively close to the baseline.
      Looking at the moments, the constant coefficient from each regression is well matched to the data, but the
coefficients on education dummies are much worse than the baseline model. This is because the identity matrix
places considerably more weight on the constants. The good match for constants are achieved by the higher
estimates for β, γ and Γ. In other words, with plausible parameter values, our model is able to generate the mean
levels of household finance variables.


5.2.3     Cohort Effects

As noted above, the regression model used to produce the moments for the estimation included controls for year
effects. The underlying assumption was that cohort effects did not exist. But, as illustrated in Figure 1 the life-cycle
profile of deterministic income was surely not independent of this identifying assumption. The same can be said
for the moments reported in Table 2. Thus it is useful to study the robustness of our results to an alternative
structure which controls for cohort rather than year effects.
      To do so, the data moments reported in Table 2 were replaced with those calculated using a cohort dummy rather
than a time dummy. The parameter estimates are reported in the row labeled ‘EZW(c)’ in Table 3. Compared to
the baseline, the parameter estimates are not significantly different. The moments are provided in the last row of
Table 4. The education effect is also close to that in the baseline, except that the education dummies for stock
share regression are not matched as good as in the baseline. Thus the overall fit is slightly worse.
  23 As seen in Table 15, there is considerable variation across regressors. Due to the tiny scale of of coefficients on age-squared, they

get a considerable amount of weight.
  24 With W = I in (25), the EZW model again outperformed the other preference specifications.




                                                                   27
                                                                                      6   HETEROGENOUS PARAMETERS


6     Heterogenous Parameters
As indicated by the above results, agents in different education groups are induced to make different financial
decisions. These differences arise solely from exogenous income, mortality and health expense processes. By
assumption, the preferences and stock market entry/adjustment costs are the same across groups.
    Yet one could conjecture that the discount factor, adjustment costs and other parameters could differ by
education, or could be the factors that influenced education choice.25 All else the same, more patient people will
go to school. And more educated people might face lower adjustment costs. In addition, differences in risk aversion
might underlie the differential finance choices across education groups. In this section, we allow some unobservable
heterogeneity.
    The model is re-estimated using the same strategy and moments as in the baseline model, but allowing one
parameter to be heterogeneous in each experiment. Five cases are considered, with heterogeneous β, γ, Γ, F and
θ respectively. Estimation results are reported in Table 8 and the moments are shown in Appendix Table 16. For
each case of heterogeneity, estimates of education specific parameters are reported in the bottom part of the table.
For ease of comparison, the top row of the table reports estimates from the homogenous (baseline) preferences
model.
    The heterogeneous entry cost model brings the most improvement in fit, from 212.69 in the baseline model down
to 121.55, as indicated in the last column of the table. The heterogeneous discount factor model also performs well,
bringing the fit down to 139.83. The lower block of the table shows that higher education are associated with a
lower entry cost and a higher discount factor.
    Plausibly, individuals who receive higher education are endowed with higher cognitive ability. In addition,
education could lead to reinforced learning ability, making it easier for individuals to search and grasp knowledge
and skills need to participate in the stock market. These potential mechanisms are reflected in the decrease of Γ
with educational attainment. On the other hand, individuals who receive (or choose to receive) higher education
could inherently be more patient, as captured by the increase of β with educational attainment.
    Heterogeneity in γ does not improve the model fit significantly. This seems a little surprising given that the
literature has attached so much importance to the differences in risk aversion. In fact one of the main motivation
to introduce EZW preferences is to disentangle γ from θ, so that researcher could freely choose γ to fit the asset
pricing moments. The estimation results here are driven by differences in stock share and wealth-income ratio
by education group. On the one hand, γ needs to increase with educational attainment so that more educated
households have higher precautionary saving hence match the wealth-income ratios. On the other hand, γ needs
to decrease with education so that more educated households would have higher stock shares. Due to the tension
between these two mechanisms, the heterogeneous γ cannot go too far to improve the model fit. Nevertheless,
we find that the most educated households have significantly higher γ than the least educated ones. Similarly,
estimates in Cagetti (2003), based on the median wealth distribution, ranges from 4.3 for high school graduates to
  25 Haliassos and Michaelides (2003) assumes heterogeneity in risk aversion and argue that stock market participants may be more risk

averse than non-participants. Gomes and Michaelides (2005) and Cagetti (2003) also have heterogeneous groups. Keane and Wolpin
(2001) do not allow the discount factor to vary across individuals except for marital status.



                                                                 28
                                                                                       6   HETEROGENOUS PARAMETERS



                                  Table 8: Estimation Results: Heterogenous Parameters
                          β          γ            Γ            F            θ         L           φ          c          £
         Baseline       0.862      4.409       0.0103       0.0202       0.601      0.031       1.834      0.201      212.69
                       (0.006)    (0.156)      (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.017)    (0.013)     (0.443)    (0.016)
         Hetero β                  4.141       0.0115       0.0267       0.701      0.092       0.692      0.167      139.83
                                  (0.052)     (0.0027)     (0.0048)      (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.189)    (0.034)
         Hetero γ       0.856                  0.0106       0.0205       0.600      0.025       1.608      0.192      181.05
                       (0.004)                (0.0009)     (0.0028)     (0.022)    (0.009)     (0.371)    (0.014)
         Hetero Γ       0.859      4.170                    0.0297       0.589      0.024       1.778      0.210      121.55
                       (0.006)    (0.271)                  (0.0028)     (0.043)    (0.007)     (0.528)    (0.023)
         Hetero F       0.872      4.112    0.0116                       0.642      0.049       1.609      0.208      182.53
                       (0.003)    (0.242) (0.0008)                      (0.024)    (0.018)     (0.321)    (0.007)
         Hetero θ       0.857      4.536    0.0104      0.0244                      0.029       1.778      0.200      173.03
                       (0.006)    (0.098) (0.0014) (0.0028)                        (0.012)      (0.53)    (0.009)
                                  Education specific Parameters
                          β          γ         Γ           F               θ
         edu1           0.855      4.094    0.0161      0.0212           0.620
                       (0.005)     (0.19)   (0.003) (0.0023)            (0.048)
         edu2           0.855      4.697    0.0159       0.022           0.588
                       (0.007)    (0.396) (0.002) (0.0030)              (0.028)
         edu3           0.865      4.253    0.0111       0.023           0.564
                       (0.006)     (0.51)   (0.005) (0.0026)            (0.018)
         edu4           0.874      4.686    0.0033       0.017           0.557
                       (0.004)    (0.073) (0.005) (0.0026)              (0.020)

     This table reports the estimated parameter values and fit (distance between model and data moments) for EZW preferences
     allowing some parameters to differ by education group. Each part of the table allows heterogeneity in one parameter. The
     rows refer to the education groups: edu1 is less than 12 years, edu2 is 12 years, edu3 is between 12 and 16 and edu4 is more
     than 16 years of schooling.


2.4 for those not finishing high school.
    Our estimates of the EIS decrease with educational attainment. On the contrary, the Euler equation estimation
in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002a) and Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) yields higher EIS for stockholder relative
to non-stockholders, and for wealthier households relative to poorer ones. These results are driven by the higher
correlation between consumption growth and asset return for the wealthier stockholders. Our estimates of EIS is
largely driven by the fact that more educated households run down assets more slowly hence have steep wealth-
income profiles, which is captured by the lower EIS of the more educated who try to smooth more consumption
into later stage of life.26
    Gomes and Michaelides (2005) and Gomes and Michaelides (2008) show that households with higher EIS are
more likely to participate in the stock market. A key assumption there is that the discount factor β is sufficiently
high, so that households generally prefer to save for the future, more so for those with high EIS. Our estimation
consistently show that β is much lower than one minus the rate of return on assets. As a result, households with
  26 Estimations in Vissing-Jorgensen (2002a) and Vissing-Jorgensen and Attanasio (2003) are based on linearized Euler equations,

which entails strong assumptions regarding the correlation between asset return and labor income. In addition, consumption Euler
equation does not hold when households refrain from portfolio rebalancing due to adjustment costs. It would be interesting to reconcile
our results from those based on Euler equation using a structural framework.


                                                                  29
                                                                        7   WHY DOES EDUCATION MATTER?


higher EIS would save less instead.



7     Why Does Education Matter?
Given these estimates, we return to a central question of the paper: what factors determine the different
choices made by the disparate education groups? The analysis is in part motivated by the results of
Campbell (2006) which indicated a role for both realized income and education in household choices.
    We start with the case of homogenous parameters. As our analysis allows the processes for income, mortality and
medical expenses to differ across education groups, even if two households have the same income realization, they
may make different choices if they come from different income groups. In addition, we emphasize it is permanent
income, rather than realized income, that matters most for household finance.
    This section also discusses models of heterogeneous parameters, building on the results reported in Table 8. This
allows us to study both observable and unobservable sources of differences across education groups simultaneously.
    Our main finding is that the primary source of different financial decisions across education groups stems from
higher income levels associated with education. Other differences, such as the discount factor and participation
costs reported in Table 8, are not nearly as important.


7.1    Homogenous Parameters
We report two principal findings. First, the education specific mean level of income is a main source of differences
in household financial decisions. Second, differences in the shape of income over working years, mortality rates and
medical expenses are far less important.
    Table 9 presents the detailed simulation results for alternative specification of income and medical expenses.
These are simulation results using the baseline parameters for alternative specifications. There is no re-estimation.
Each row of the table has a different treatment of mortality, income and medical expenses across education groups.
In the baseline model, all of these processes differ across education groups.
    The “Same Determ. Inc.” treatment forces all education groups to have the same mean income profile. The
“Same Stoch. Inc.” treatment assumes that all education groups have the same variances of income shocks.
The “Same Income Shape” case imposes the same life-cycle pattern on all groups but keeps the mean level of
income heterogeneous. The “Same Medical Exp.” treatment forces all education groups to have the same average
expenditure relative to post-retirement income. The “Same Mortality” treatment forces all education groups to
have the same mortality rates.
    For each of these treatments, the process for the lowest education group is used as the common element of the
process. So, for example, in the “Same Determin. income” treatment, all education groups have the profile of the
lowest education group. This choice of using the profile of the lowest education group is simply to provide a basis
of comparison.
    As this table makes very clear, the difference in deterministic income is the major factor explaining the diverse



                                                          30
7.1    Homogenous Parameters                                                       7     WHY DOES EDUCATION MATTER?



                               Table 9: Exogenous Processes and the Effects of Education
                                 const.    age        age2        edu2    edu3         edu4                 £
                                                       Participation
           Baseline              -0.634   0.032     -0.00026      0.180    0.392       0.505              212.69
           Same Determ. Inc.     -0.317   0.022     -0.00019     -0.053   -0.037       0.024              5323.4
           Same Stoch. Inc.      -0.625   0.034     -0.00029      0.282   0.425        0.562              402.50
           Same Income Shape     -0.743   0.035     -0.00027      0.170   0.372        0.452               337.3
           Same Med. Exp.        -0.645   0.033     -0.00027      0.174    0.382       0.501              246.63
           Same Mortality        -0.636   0.031     -0.00025      0.200    0.412       0.519              205.58
                                                        Stock Share
           Baseline              0.382    0.015     -0.00012      0.040    0.056    0.072
           Same Determ. Inc.     0.196    0.018     -0.00011     -0.008   -0.012   -0.009
           Same Stoch. Inc.      0.158    0.022     -0.00017     -0.004    0.049   0.044
           Same Income Shape     0.322    0.016     -0.00013      0.035    0.047    0.078
           Same Med. Exp.        0.388    0.014     -0.00012      0.039    0.055    0.068
           Same Mortality        0.356    0.016     -0.00013      0.040    0.051    0.061
                                                     Adjustment Rate
           Baseline              -0.271   0.013    -7.65E-05      0.048   0.155        0.242
           Same Determ. Inc.      0.019   0.000     4.94E-05     -0.064   -0.035       0.030
           Same Stoch. Inc.      -0.231   0.012    -7.89E-05      0.089    0.188       0.278
           Same Income Shape     -0.288   0.013    -8.35E-05      0.025    0.134       0.199
           Same Med. Exp.        -0.273   0.013    -7.47E-05      0.050   0.160        0.243
           Same Mortality        -0.258   0.012    -7.62E-05      0.048   0.153        0.229
                                                       wealth-income
                                                                 age ×    age ×    age ×         age2 ×     age2 ×    age2 ×
                                 const.    age        age2        edu2     edu3     edu4          edu2       edu3      edu4
           Baseline              1.207    -0.048    0.00061     -0.0013   -0.019   -0.051       0.00013   0.00061    0.0015
           Same Determ. Inc.     -0.018   -0.001    0.00021      0.0056    0.006    0.008      -0.00017   -0.00017   -0.0001
           Same Stoch. Inc.       1.216   -0.048    0.00061      0.0036   -0.015   -0.047       0.00012    0.00060   0.0013
           Same Income Shape     1.849    -0.072    0.00081     -0.0063   -0.027   -0.038       0.00019    0.00070   0.0010
           Same Med. Exp.        0.862    -0.035    0.00049     -0.0005   -0.016   -0.046       0.00011   0.00056    0.0014
           Same Mortality        1.923    -0.075    0.00084     -0.0069   -0.037   -0.071      0.00026    0.00102    0.0019

       This table reports the model moments from counter-factual exogenous processes. “Same Determ. Inc.” case
       imposes the same deterministic income of the least educated group on the remaining three. “Same Stoch. Inc.”
       uses the stochastic income process of the least educated for the other three groups. “Same Income Shape” imposes
       the shape of life-cycle income profile of the least educated to the other groups, but keeps the levels of lifetime
       income different between education groups. “Same Med. Exp” uses the out-of-pocket medical expenses of the
       lowest income group for all groups. “Same Mortality” uses the mortality rates of the lowest education group for
       all groups. The simulations are based upon the baseline estimates from the EZW preferences. Fit is computed
       from (25) for the various cases.


financial decisions across education groups. This is seen from the column of Table 9 labeled £, which shows how
well the model fits the moments under the alternative processes. The fit in the “Same deterministic income”
treatment is over 20 times worse than the baseline. The fit for the other treatments worsened but not by the same
magnitude, except the case of same mortality where the fit increases slightly.
      The key to understanding how the different processes influence household decisions is through the patterns for
the education dummies in Table 9. When all households have the same deterministic income, the differences in
participation, portfolio share and portfolio adjustment essentially disappear across education groups relative to the
baseline. This is also true for the wealth-income ratio where age effects are interacted with education dummies
hence harder to read.




                                                                 31
7.1    Homogenous Parameters                                                         7   WHY DOES EDUCATION MATTER?


Why does the Income Level Matter? Education matters for household finance mainly because it increases
the income level. But what are the underlying mechanisms? Three channels are potentially important. First,
income is the stable stream of return on human capital, and thus partially substitutes for bond holdings, as shown
in Heaton and Lucas (1997). This income substitution effect should be stronger for higher income households,
leading to higher stock share, which in turn could affect wealth-income ratio because higher stock share implies
higher return on investment. Second, high income diminishes the entry cost and stock adjustment cost which are
fixed rather than being proportional to income or wealth. This “fixed cost effect” induces higher participation rate
and stock share for the higher-income households. Third, the consumption floor and the luxuriousness of a bequest
(as measured by the parameter φ) induce a lower stock share but a higher wealth-income ratio for higher-income
households who rely less on the floor and care more about the riskiness of bequeathed assets.
      We perform three experiments to understand the relative importance of these channels. In experiment one, we
set Γ = 0 and F = 0, with other parameters taken from the baseline estimation, so that the fixed cost affects are
shut down. In experiment two, in addition to Γ = 0 and F = 0 we set c = 0. Finally in experiment three, we
further set φ = 0, so that the aforementioned channel two and three are both shut down.

                                    Table 10: The Roles of Non-proportional Parameters
                                                                 edu2     edu3    edu4
                                                                      stock share
                                    Baseline                    0.040    0.056    0.072
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0                -0.053 -0.071 -0.078
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0, c = 0         -0.015 0.058      0.075
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0, c = 0, φ = 0 -0.016 0.063       0.085
                                                                     wealth-income
                                    Baseline                    0.363    1.016    2.093
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0                0.399    0.985    2.037
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0, c = 0         0.006    0.392    1.294
                                    Γ = 0, F = 0, c = 0, φ = 0 -0.338 -0.207 0.662

                     The table reports the differences in stock share and wealth-income ratio of education
                     group two, three, four relative to group one in various experiments.


      Table 10 reports the stock shares and wealth-income ratios of education group two, three, and four relative to
group one.27 Essentially, these moments are coefficients for education dummies when we regress stock share or
wealth-income ratio on a quadratic function of age and the education dummies. For comparison, we also report
the moments from the baseline model.
      In the absence of costs (Γ = 0 and F = 0), the model generates an ordering of stock share which is exactly the
opposite of that in the data. Thus the costs play an critical role. Without these costs, the income substitution
effect is dominated by the roles of the consumption floor and bequests. However when c = 0 and φ = 0 , more
educated households clearly have higher stock share, except that education group two has slightly lower stock share
than group one, which is due to the higher medical expenses of group two relative to group one. In summary, it is
  27 With zero costs, participation rate for each group is basically 100%. Theoretically the adjustment rate is also 100%, but it is below

100% due to computational error.


                                                                   32
7.2    Heterogenous Parameters                                               7   WHY DOES EDUCATION MATTER?


the joint force of income substitution effect and fixed cost effect that delivers the observed ordering of stock share
by educational attainment.
      Regarding the wealth-income ratio, the zero costs case delivers almost the same ordering by education as the
baseline model. That is, the costs do not play a significant role in the ordering of wealth-income ratio, although
they induce higher stock shares hence higher investment return for the more educated. The ordering becomes
much weaker when c = 0, and it disappears when φ = 0. Clearly, wealth-income ratio increases with educational
attainment mainly because the higher-income households rely less on the consumption floor and care more about
bequests.


7.2      Heterogenous Parameters
Returning to the quantitative importance of various education-related attributes to household finance, Table 11
reports the fits for various combinations of preferences specifications (columns) and restrictions on differences across
education groups (rows). So, for example, the ‘Same Stochastic Inc.’ row and the ‘Hetero γ’ column combines
the estimates reported in Table 8 with the restriction, as in Table 9, that all households have the same stochastic
income as the low education group. The entry in the table is the model fit for that case.
      The row of “same parameter” takes the estimated parameters from Table 8, but assumes households have
homogeneous preferences. For example, in the heterogeneous β case, the “same parameter” treatment imposes the
β of education group one on the remaining groups. This parameterization differs from the baseline since the other
parameters differ once heterogeneity is allowed in one dimension. That is, for example, in the heterogeneous β case
reported in Table 8, the estimates of all the other parameters differ from the baseline as well.


                             Table 11: Model Fit for Heterogeneous Preferences Cases
                                        Hetero β Hetero γ Hetero Γ Hetero F Hetero θ
                    Full Model           139.83      181.05     121.55      182.53   173.03
                    Same Determ. Inc.    4280.20     5043.16    4655.08    5177.15   4834.31
                    Same Stocha. Inc.    311.97      410.29     219.36      370.13   374.16
                    Same Income Shape    174.86      281.05     218.92      285.82   245.04
                    Same Med. Exp.       155.11      204.78     131.32      209.21   185.70
                    Same Mortality       169.74      199.66     171.42      186.81   222.86
                    Same Parameter       279.63      296.24     217.26      192.03   265.71

             The table reports the distance between model and data moments from various heterogeneous pref-
             erences models, and from counter-factual exogenous processes. The “Same Parameter” imposes the
             preference parameter of the least educated group to all the households, hence the models return to
             a homogeneous preferences one.


      As reported above, differences in deterministic income remain the dominating factor: the fit explodes when the
deterministic income profiles of the least educated is imposed on other groups. Comparing the fit from the “same
parameter” case to the full model, it is evident that preference heterogeneity account for only a small fraction of
the difference in households finance.



                                                             33
                                                                                                   8   CONCLUSION


8     Conclusion
This paper studies household financial decisions for different education groups. Patterns of household finance,
including participation in asset markets, portfolio shares, stock adjustment rates and wealth to income ratios, differ
across education groups. One contribution is to study these patterns jointly.
    A main contribution of the paper is to estimate a structural model that maps education-related differences
to household financial decisions. This mapping goes through a dynamic choice model in which households face
uncertainty in income and stock returns, and make costly decisions regarding asset market participation as well as
portfolio adjustment.
    Based on the rich patterns of household finance, we estimate adjustment costs, the discount factor and three
common utility functions: constant relative risk aversion, constant absolute risk aversion and recursive utility. The
recursive utility representation of household preferences fits the data best.
    Among the observable education specific factors, the important difference across households is their mean
income. More educated households have higher mean income and this translates into a higher rate of asset market
participation, higher stock share in wealth, a higher adjustment rate and a higher wealth to income ratio. Other
observable factors, including income uncertainty, shape of income profile, mortality and medical expenses, have little
power in explaining different household finance patterns across education groups. Among the various specifications
with unobservable heterogeneity, we find that the more educated groups discount the future less and have lower
participation costs than the less education groups.
    There are a couple of areas for further research based upon our findings. First, while housing is studied,
the potential costs associated with adjustments in the stock of housing are not included. This is partly due to
tractability problems from having too large of a state space. Adding housing with its own adjustment costs to an
optimization problem with costs of stock adjustment would be of considerable interest.
    Second, the model is estimated using moments aggregated across households. It would be of interest to com-
plement this exercise using moments created from individual decisions. For example, using data that include
household choices of adjustment, participation etc. as well as relevant state variables, one could create moments
from estimating an approximate decision rule and then use these moments to estimate structural parameters.
    Finally, the current model can be extended to a general equilibrium one, and used to study its policy implications.
An interesting policy experiment would be to reduce the level and uncertainty of out-of-pocket medical expenses,
which mimics “Obamacare”, and study its impact on savings, portfolio choice and asset prices.




                                                          34
                                                                                                        9   APPENDIX


9     Appendix

9.1       Exogenous Processes
Income process before retirement                  We estimate household’s income process from the PSID during the period
of 1989-2009, corresponding to the time periods from which we construct household finance moments.28 Compared
with most of the relevant studies, we include more recent waves of the survey. Household income is defined as the
sum of labor income of both spouse and transfers, adjusted for inflation based on CPI, so that income is in 1998
dollar before being re-scaled.
    From the PSID, we extract a balanced panel of 1245 households. Households with the following traits are
excluded: (i) in low-income (SEO) subsample (ii) with invalid information on age, education, and race of head (iii)
younger than 30 or older than 65 in 2009, the last wave of survey (iv) zero income in any year (iv) income growth
below 1/20 or over 20 in any year.
    To estimate the deterministic income profile and stochastic processes of income, we break the data into four
education groups. For each education group, data from various years are pooled together. Then the logarithm of
income is regressed on age dummies, year dummies and dummies for race.
    The education specific deterministic income profile comes from the coefficients of age dummies, re-scaled so that
average income equals education specific average income. Then we pool the income profiles of the four education
groups together, re-scaled the data again, so that the mean income of the four groups equals one. The profiles in
Figure 1 are the smoothed versions. We use a Hodrick-Prescott filter with smoothing parameter of 400.
    It should be noted that the deterministic income profiles are a mixture of age effect and cohort effect. In the
dummy regression, year effect is specifically controlled for. Due to the well-known identification problem among
year effect, cohort effect and age effect, we are unable to control for cohort effects once year effects are in the
regression.
    The residuals from the regression, denoted yi,t are assumed to be income shocks that follows the stochastic
process in equation(4) To estimate ρ, σ2 and ση2 , we employ the standard minimum distance method, matching
the variance-covariance of {yi,t } from the econometrics model with that in the data. For details about moments
construction and estimation method, see Guvenen (2009).


Medical Expenses           Information on medical costs is based on University of Michigan Heath and Retirement Study
(HRS). This is a longitudinal panel study that surveys a representative sample of more than 26,000 Americans over
the age of 50 every two years. Supported by the National Institute on Aging and the Social Security Administration.
Out-of-pocket medical expense is defined as the sum of what the household spends on insurance premia, drug costs,
and costs for hospital, nursing home care, doctor visits, dental visits, and outpatient care. The waves of survey
used in this paper are: 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008.
    We assume the same stochastic process for each education group, and take the persistence and variances of
shocks directly from French and Jones (2004). The variance of transitory shocks is large with σ2M = 0.442. The
 28 The   survey has been bi-annual since 1997.


                                                                35
9.2    Moments                                                                                                      9   APPENDIX


variance of the persistent shocks is ση2M = 0.0503 with serial correlation of ρM = 0.922. Importantly, the same
process applies for each education group. Deterministic out-of-pocket medical expenses differ significantly cross
education groups.
      For our model we need the ratio of out-of-pocket expenditure over post-retirement income. To estimate the
profiles of this ratio, we take the data used in French and Jones (2004). Educational attainment information
is not available from the online data of French and Jones (2004), so we obtain it from HRS website (http:
//hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/) and merge it with other variables by matching household identities. From the
match data we delete respondents whose ratio is not positive or greater than 10. Totally there are 11866 respondents.
We regress the ratio on age, age-squared, income, income-age interaction, education dummies and the interaction of
education dummies with age. In the structural model, we use these regression coefficients to predict out-of-pocket
medical expenses for household’s optimization problem.


Death Probability          Following the method in DeNardi, French, and Jones (2006), we estimate survival probability
as a function of age, age-squared, income, and education dummies, then calculate death probability (conditional
on survival) as one minus survival probability. We take the data used in DeNardi, French, and Jones (2006), and
augment it with educational attainment information from HRS via matching household identities.29 .


Asset Returns         The return process for stocks is taken from Robert Shiller’s online data of S&P 500 for the
period 1947-2007. The return is defined as the sum of annual dividend return and capital gain, deflated by CPI.
The estimated mean and standard deviation of annual stock return are 6.33% and 15.5% respectively. The return
on bonds is assumed to be non-stochastic and is set at 2% annually.


9.2       Moments
The moments are summarized in Table 2. Their definitions follow.


9.2.1     Participation, stock share and wealth-income ratio

We obtain household level stock market participation, stock share in financial wealth for stockholders and median
wealth-income ratio from seven waves of Survey of Consumer Finances: 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998, 2001, 2004 and
2007.30 From each wave of survey, data with one of the following traits are excluded: (i) not having valid information
on asset holding, non-asset income, age of head, and educational attainment of head; (ii) stock holding being
negative; (iii) bond holding being non-positive; (iv) house-heads is younger than 25 or older than 85. Table 12
presents the basic information on data from the SCF.
  29 We  are grateful to Eric French for sharing the data and stata code with us.
  30 We  also obtain the two profiles from PSID data introduced below. The resulting profiles have very similar shape as in SCF, but of
different scales. For example, the mean stock market participant rate for working households is 47.6% in PSID, but it is 59.2% in SCF.
For working households, the mean stock share is 44.2% in PSID, but 70.3% in SCF. The major reason for such differences should come
from different sampling strategy. In addition to a standard multistage area-probability design, which leads to a representative sample,
SCF selects a second sample based on tax data from the Statistics of Income Division of the Internal Revenue Service, which leads to a
representative sample of approximately 1,500 high-wealth households. Consequently, SCF has a larger sample of wealthier households.



                                                                  36
9.2    Moments                                                                                                         9   APPENDIX



                                       Table 12: Basic            statistics of SCF data
               Survey year                       1989               1992 1995 1998              2001      2004     2007
               sample size                      1,393              2,457 3,632 3,728            3,966     4,011    3,923
               mean age                          56.6               43.1     49.5   49.5         49.7      50.3     51.0
               mean participation rate          0.501              0.496 0.500 0.548            0.564     0.559    0.575
               median wealth-income             1.391              0.350 0.337 0.479            0.683     0.555    0.602
               mean stock share (participants) 0.379               0.501 0.543 0.627            0.606     0.578    0.581


      We define stock as the sum of three categories: (i) publicly trade stock (including those with brokerage account,
employment related stock and foreign stock) (ii) mutual fund and trust or managed investment account that are
investment in equity market (iii) IRA and annuity. Part of IRA and annuity may not be invested in equity, but
we include them in our definition of stocks because these assets are costly to adjust, which is consistent with our
model definition of stock. We define bonds as the sum of assets in two broad categories: (i) checking account,
savings account, CDs, bond market account and whole insurance (ii) mutual fund and trust or managed investment
account that are investment in bond markets or CDs.
      To bring assets in mutual fund and trust or managed investment account into our definition of stock and bond,
we follow Gomes and Michaelides (2005). Specifically, based on the answer of respondents to survey question “how
is [this money] invested?”, if most of the asset is in stocks, then it is included in our definition of stock. If most of
the asset is in bonds or money market or CDs, it is included in our definition of bond. If the investment is reported
as a combination or mixed or diversified, then half of that asset is included in stock and the other half in bond.
For other answers to the survey, we assume the asset is non-financial.31
      Our definition of stocks and bonds covers the majority of financial assets held by US households. We define
stock market participants as those who own have positive stockholding by our definition. For the participants, we
                                                   stock
define stock share in financial wealth as       stock+bond .   Both stockholding and bondholding are adjusted to 1998 dollar
based on CPI urban series.
      To compute median-income ratio, we define income as total family income minus asset income reported in SCF.
The following are included as asset income: income from non-taxable investments such as municipal bonds, income
from dividends, income from stock, bond and real estate and other interest income.


9.2.2     Treatment of housing

As one way to deal with housing, we include housing asset in the measurement of wealth. The SCF provides
information about the self-reported market value of home at the time of interview. Also reported is the amount
of mortgage related to home, including the second or third mortgage. We define home equity as the difference
between home value and mortgage. In the pooled sample, about 3% of households have negative home equity. For
homeowners, home equity on average accounts for 53% of their total wealth. For homeowners who participate in
the stock market, home equity accounts for 39% of their total wealth.
  31 Other ways of investment include life insurance, fixed contract, annuities, tangible assets other than real estate, intangible assets,

business investments and others.



                                                                    37
9.2    Moments                                                                                       9   APPENDIX



                       Table 13: Basic statistics of PSID data used   to estimate adjustment rate
                                   Survey year        2001 2003         2005 2007
                                   sample size        2496 2541         2473 2518
                                   mean age            47.4   47.8      48.5   48.8
                                   mean adj. rate 0.639 0.574          0.577 0.581


      For this housing in wealth case, we re-calculate stock share and wealth-income ratio based on the new definition
of wealth: the sum of stock, bond and home equity. Since home equity is treated as a safe asset, the stock share is
lower compared to the baseline, and wealth-income ratio is higher.


9.2.3     Adjustment rate

We obtain stock adjustment rate of stockholders from four waves of Panel Study of Income Dynamics: 2001,
2003, 2005, 2007. Starting from 1997, PSID survey includes a set of questions regarding households’ wealth status
and its dynamics since last survey. These questions enable us to estimate adjustment rate for each education
group. Stockholders are defined in a similar way as with SCF data. Stock is defined as the sum of “non-IRA
stock (variables ER15007 ER19203 ER22568 ER26549 ER37567)” and “IRA/annuity (variables ER15014 ER19210
ER22590 ER26571 ER37589)”. Since we are obtaining stock adjustment information for stockholders, households
with zero stockholings are dropped from the sample. Low income families (SEO subsample), as well as those with
invalid information on stockholding and stock adjustment are also dropped. Finally, in each wave of survey we drop
households whose heads are either younger than 20 or older than 80. Basic statistics about the data are presented
in Table 13.
      PSID asks a set of questions about the changes in stock account. For non-IRA stocks, it asks the following
questions:
(i)“[Since January of last survey], did you (or anyone in your family) buy any shares of stock in publicly held
corporations, mutual funds, or investment trusts, including any automatic reinvestments–not including any IRAs?”
(ii)“Did you (or anyone in your family) also sell any such assets?”
(iii)”Did you buy more or sell more–that is, on balance, did you put money into stocks, mutual funds, or investment
trusts, take money out of them, or put about as much in as you took out?”
For IRA and annuity, the following questions are asked:
(i)“[Since January of last survey], did you (or your family) put aside money in any private annuities or IRAs?”
(ii)“did you (or anyone in your family) cash in any part of a pension, private annuity, or IRA?”
We define household level adjustment as a binary variable. The variable is assigned “1” if a household reported
to have bought or sold shares in non-IRA stock, or have put aside money in or cash in private annuities or IRAs.
It should be noted that our definition is the“net adjustment”, in the sense that it excludes the adjustment of
individual stocks within the stock portfolio, whether it is done by the household or mutual fund manager.




                                                           38
9.3   Initial Distribution                                                                              9   APPENDIX


9.3    Initial Distribution
As noted earlier, the quantitative analysis requires an initial distribution of asset holdings. Table 14 summarizes
the initial asset allocation by education group. Both average stock and bond holdings are positively correlated
with the level of educational attainment. The initial participation rate and stock shares are also higher for the high
education group.


                                   Table 14: Initial Asset Allocation By Education
                       Stock        Bond                                                           Stock Share
        Schooling     (1998 $)    (1998 $)  Stock/Income        Bond/Income      Participation    (participants)
                                            Means
          <12          81.37      1,951.39      0.003               0.091            0.032            0.425
          =12          776.71     3,334.41      0.035               0.160            0.137            0.493
        ∈ (12, 16]    3,941.72   6,459.67       0.169               0.301            0.299            0.498
          >16         6,118.96   8,812.79       0.269               0.421            0.399            0.538
                                      Standard Deviations
          <12         658.42      4,966.91      0.025               0.225
          =12        3,836.69    8,058.36       0.174               0.404
        ∈ (12, 16]   13,824.92   13,099.07      0.581               0.633
          >16        15,894.16   12,402.11      0.668               0.557

       This table reports the initial holdings of stock and bonds by education group. Within education group means
       and standard deviations are calculated from the pooled data of seven waves of SCF survey (1989, 1992, 1995,
       1998, 2001, 2004, 2007). CPI is used to adjust asset levels to 1998 dollar.




                                                           39
9.4    Weighting matrix                                                                                               9     APPENDIX


9.4      Weighting matrix
In the basic model, we use the inverse of the variances of the moments as the weighting matrix. This is a diagonal
matrix. The usual variance-covariance matrix is not used for two reasons. First, the moments are from two data
sets: PSID and SCF, so it is not possible to calculate covariances of moments from different sources. Second, stock
shares from SCF are based on a small sample containing only stockholders, while participation rates and wealth-
income ratios are based on a larger sample including non-participants. Therefore one can only have covariances of
moments for stockholders only, weighting matrix from which may not be more informative than diagonal matrix
for our estimation.

                                             Table 15: Weights on Data Moments
                                            year effect controlled
                   const.     age          age2           edu2          edu3        edu4
 part.              715     769,614   8,524,006,838       7,756         8,845       7,392
 share              568     655,587   7,717,196,151       4,099         4,686       4,538
    (housing)       527     586,579   7,293,260,343       4,733         5,450       5,317
 adj.               101     92,499    1,091,077,591        874          1,030        950
                                              2
                   const.     age          age          edu2 ×age     edu3 ×age   edu4 ×age    edu2 ×age2      edu3 ×age2      edu4 ×age2
 W/I                445     374,606   3,239,424,302      832,947       942,480     730,843    3,651,286,066   4,128,719,268   3,060,855,771
   (housing)        754     634,821   5,489,639,409     1,411,540     1,597,159   1,238,512   6,187,594,466   6,996,669,128   5,187,031,058
                                           cohort effect controlled
                   const.     age          age2           edu2          edu3        edu4
 part.               35     223,088   2,472,135,697       7,740         8,837       7,357
 share               25     198,862   2,385,649,135       4,020         4,594       4,444
 adj.               0.64     5,989      68,248,186         847           999         914
                   const.     age          age2         edu2 ×age     edu3 ×age   edu4 ×age    edu2 ×age2      edu3 ×age2      edu4 ×age2
 W/I                0.21     1,274     12,685,156         8,158         9,166       7,075      35,664,309      39,995,330      29,542,011
                                              housing in wealth
                   const.     age          age2           edu2          edu3        edu4
 stock share         33     37,613     44,275,7361         235           269         260
                                              2
                   const.     age          age          edu2 ×age     edu3 ×age   edu4 ×age    edu2 ×age2      edu3 ×age2      edu4 ×age2
 wealth-income      754     634,821   5,489,639,409     1,411,540     1,597,159   1,238,512   6,187,594,466   6,996,669,128   5,187,031,058
                                           housing out of moments
                                              2
                   const.     age          age            edu2          edu3        edu4
 participation      319     745,044   852,645,5612        8,243         9,221       7,535
 stock share         81     576,208   7,030,556,878       3,981         4,504       4,299
 adjustment rate     5       86,605   1,036,668,746        839           974         902
                                              2
                   const.     age          age          edu2 ×age     edu3 ×age   edu4 ×age    edu2 ×age2      edu3 ×age2      edu4 ×age2
 wealth-income        2      3,585      31,972,179        8,428         9,481       7,304      36,991,688      41,742,465      30,863,149

 This table reports the weights used to compute model fits in the Simulated Method of Moments. The weights are calculated as the
 inverse of the variances of data moments.




                                                                      40
9.5     Moments From Heterogeneous Preferences Models                                                             9   APPENDIX


9.5       Moments From Heterogeneous Preferences Models


                                     Table 16: Heterogeneous Preferences Models: Moments
                   const.    age       age2         edu2       edu3          edu4
                                             Participation
      data         -0.680   0.029    -0.00023       0.182      0.412         0.603
      hetero   β   -0.658   0.029    -0.00022      0.183       0.433         0.567
      hetero   γ   -0.610   0.031    -0.00025      0.196       0.400         0.519
      hetero   Γ   -0.634   0.029    -0.00023       0.170      0.421         0.558
      hetero   F   -0.670   0.032    -0.00026      0.205       0.407         0.530
      hetero   θ   -0.615   0.031    -0.00025      0.190       0.420         0.530
                                              Stock Share
      data         0.260    0.010    -0.00008       0.024      0.054         0.092
      hetero   β   0.402    0.013    -0.00011       0.044      0.059         0.081
      hetero   γ   0.394    0.014    -0.00012       0.023      0.051         0.058
      hetero   Γ   0.364    0.014    -0.00010      0.052       0.069         0.097
      hetero   F   0.416    0.014    -0.00012       0.031      0.045         0.077
      hetero   θ   0.394    0.013    -0.00011       0.037      0.054         0.070
                                           Adjustment Rate
      data          0.189   0.012    -0.00013       0.061      0.135         0.222
      hetero   β   -0.251   0.009    -0.00006      0.035       0.158         0.252
      hetero   γ   -0.342   0.015    -0.00010      0.050       0.156         0.233
      hetero   Γ   -0.199   0.007    -0.00003       0.045      0.120         0.195
      hetero   F   -0.279   0.013    -0.00008      0.038       0.132         0.290
      hetero   θ   -0.240   0.009    -0.00005      0.059       0.164         0.241
                                          wealth-income Ratio
                   const.    age        age2     edu2 ×age edu3 ×age      edu4 ×age     edu2 ×age2     edu3 ×age2     edu4 ×age2
      data         1.393    -0.086    0.00132      -0.012     -0.015        -0.004       0.00051        0.00114        0.00130
      hetero   β   1.106    -0.042    0.00052      -0.003     -0.024        -0.059       0.00013        0.00069        0.00167
      hetero   γ   1.478    -0.060    0.00071       0.001     -0.018        -0.046       0.00008        0.00056        0.00136
      hetero   Γ   1.905    -0.078    0.00088      0.000      -0.020        -0.057       0.00010        0.00062        0.00155
      hetero   F   1.037    -0.043    0.00059      -0.002     -0.021        -0.049       0.00016        0.00068        0.00146
      hetero   θ   1.676    -0.061    0.00065      -0.005     -0.032        -0.071       0.00022        0.00092        0.00192
 These are the coefficient estimates from various heterogeneous preferences models. With the exception of the wealth-income
 equation, these come from a linear regression model with a constant, age, age-squared , and education dummies as independent
 variables. For the wealth-income regressions, the independent variables were a constant, age, age-squared and an education dummies
 interacted with age and age-squared.




                                                                 41
REFERENCES                                                                                      REFERENCES


References
Achury, C., S. Hubar, and C. Koulovatianos (2012): “Saving rates and portfolio choice with subsistence
  consumption,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(1), 108–126.

Alan, S. (2006): “Entry Costs and Stock Market Participation over the life cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics,
  9, 588–611.

Ameriks, J., and S. P. Zeldes (2004): “How do household portfolio shares vary with age,” Discussion paper,
  working paper, Columbia University.

Aoki, K., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2012): “Inflation, Money Demand and Portfolio Choice,” mimeo,
  ECB.

Attanasio, O. P., and M. Paiella (2011): “Intertemporal Consumption Choices, Transaction Costs and Limited
  Participation in Financial Markets: Reconciling Data and Theory,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26(2),
  322C343.

Bhamra, H. S., and R. Uppal (2006): “The role of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution in dynamic
  consumption-portfolio choice with recursive utility,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 30(6), 967–
  991.

Binsbergen, J., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, R. Koijen, and J. Ramirez (2012): “The terms tructure of
  interest rates in a DSGE model with recursive preferences,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(7), 634–648.

Bodie, Z., R. C. Merton, and W. F. Samuelson (1992): “Labor supply flexibility and portfolio choice in a
  life-cycle model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 16(3-4), 427–449.

Bonaparte, Y., R. Cooper, and G. Zhu (2012): “Consumption Smoothing and Portfolio Rebalancing: The
  Effects of Adjustment Costs,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 751–68.

Cagetti, M. (2003): “Wealth accumulation over the life cycle and precautionary savings,” Journal of Business &
  Economic Statistics, 21(3), 339–353.

Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007): “Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of Household
  Investment Mistakes,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(5), 707–747.

         (2009): “Fight or flight? Portfolio rebalancing by individual investors,” The Quarterly journal of eco-
  nomics, 124(1), 301–348.

Campbell, J. Y. (2006): “Household finance,” The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1553–1604.

Campbell, S. D., M. A. Davis, J. Gallin, and R. F. Martin (2009): “What moves housing markets: A
  variance decomposition of the rent–price ratio,” Journal of Urban Economics, 66(2), 90–102.


                                                      42
REFERENCES                                                                                       REFERENCES


Carroll, C., and A. A. Samwick (1997): “The nature of precautionary wealth,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 40(1), 41–71.

Cocco, J. F. (2005): “Portfolio choice in the presence of housing,” Review of Financial studies, 18(2), 535–567.

Cocco, J. F., F. J. Gomes, and P. J. Maenhout (2005): “Consumption and portfolio choice over the life
  cycle,” Review of financial Studies, 18(2), 491–533.

Cole, S., A. Paulson, and G. K. Shastry (2014): “Smart Money: The Effect of Education on Financial
  Outcomes,” Review of Financial Studies, 27(7), 2022–2051.

Cooper, R., and G. Zhu (2013): “Household finance: Education, permanent income and portfolio choice,” NBER
  Working Paper #13824.

DeNardi, M., E. French, and J. B. Jones (2006): “Differential mortality, uncertain medical expenses, and the
  saving of elderly singles,” Working Paper 12554, National Bureau of Economic Research.

           (2010): “Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(1),
  39–75.

Dynan, K., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes (2004): “Do the rich save more?,” Journal of Political Economy, 112(2),
  397–444.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset
  returns: A theoretical framework,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 937–969.

French, E., and J. B. Jones (2004): “On the distribution and dynamics of health care costs,” Journal of Applied
  Econometrics, 19(6), 705–721.

Gomes, F., and A. Michaelides (2005): “Optimal life-cycle asset allocation: understanding the empirical
  evidence,” Journal of Finance, 60(2), 869–904.

        (2008): “Asset Pricing with Limited Risk Sharing and Heterogeneous Agents,” Review of Financial Studies,
  21(1), 415–448.

Gomes, F. J., L. J. Kotlikoff, and L. M. Viceira (2008): “Optimal Life-Cycle Investing with Flexible Labor
  Supply: A Welfare Analysis of Life-Cycle Funds,” American Economic Review, 98(2), 297–303.

Guvenen, F. (2009): “An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Process,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 12,
  58–79.

Haliassos, M., and A. Michaelides (2003): “Portfolio choice and liquidity constraints,” International Economic
  Review, 44, 143–177.




                                                         43
REFERENCES                                                                                        REFERENCES


Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1997): “Market frictions, savings behavior, and portfolio choice,” Macroeconomic
  Dynamics, 1(1), 76–101.

Hubbard, R., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes (1994): “The importance of precautionary motives in explaining
  individual and aggregate saving,” in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 40, pp. 59–125.
  Elsevier.

         (1995): “Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(2), 360–399.

Keane, M. P., and K. I. Wolpin (2001): “The effect of parental transfers and borrowing constraints on educa-
  tional attainment,” International Economic Review, 42(4), 1051–1103.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2005): “The relationship between education and adult mortality in the United States,” The
  Review of Economic Studies, 72(1), 189–221.

Lusardi, A. (2008): “U.S. Household Savings Behavior: The Role of Financial Literacy, Information and Financial
  Education Programs,” NBER Working Paper #13824.

Merton, R. C. (1971): “Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,” Journal of
  Economic Theory, 118(3), 373C413.

Starr-McCluer, M. (1996): “Health insurance and precautionary savings,” The American Economic Review,
  86(1), 285–295.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002a): “Limited Asset Market Participation and the Elasticity of Intertemporal Sub-
  stitution,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 825–853.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002b): “Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice heterogeneity: Nonfi-
  nancial income and participation cost structures,” NBER Working Paper #8884.

Vissing-Jorgensen, A., and O. P. Attanasio (2003): “Stock-Market Participation, Intertemporal Substitution,
  and Risk-Aversion,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 93(2), 383–391.

Wachter, J. A., and M. Yogo (2010): “Why Do Household Portfolio Shares Rise in Wealth?,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 23(11), 3929–3965.

Weil, P. (1990): “Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1), 29–42.

Yao, R., and H. H. Zhang (2005): “Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky housing and borrowing
  constraints,” Review of Financial Studies, 18(1), 197–239.




                                                       44
