                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EMPIRICAL LINKAGES BETWEEN GOOD GOVERNMENT AND NATIONAL
                              WELL-BEING

                                            John F. Helliwell
                                             Haifang Huang
                                             Shawn Grover
                                              Shun Wang

                                         Working Paper 20686
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20686


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




The authors are grateful to the Gallup Organization for access to data from the Gallup World Poll,
to CIFAR and the KDI School for research support. This paper is drawn from the empirical portions
of Helliwell et al (2014), prepared for the Public Governance Committee of the OECD. The opinions
and analysis are the responsibility of the authors, and not of the OECD or the NBER. For helpful comments
on an earlier version, we thank Martin Forst, Carol Graham, David Gyarmati, Jon Hall, Mario Marcel,
Charles Montgomery, Tom Sander, Conal Smith, Alois Stutzer, and Tatyana Teplova. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, Shawn Grover, and Shun Wang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Empirical Linkages between Good Government and National Well-being
John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, Shawn Grover, and Shun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 20686
November 2014
JEL No. H11,I31,P52

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper first reviews existing studies of the links between good governance and subjective well-being.
It then brings together the largest available sets of national-level measures of the quality of governance
to assess the extent to which they contribute to explaining the levels and changes in life evaluations
in 157 countries over the years 2005-2012, using data from the Gallup World Poll.

The results show not just that people are more satisfied with their lives in countries with better governance
quality, but also that actual changes in governance quality since 2005 have led to large changes in
the quality of life. For example, the ten-most-improved countries, in terms of delivery quality changes
between 2005 and 2012, when compared to the ten countries with most worsened delivery quality,
are estimated to have thereby increased average life evaluations by as much as would be produced
by a 40% increase in per capita incomes.

The results also confirm earlier findings that the delivery quality of government services generally
dominates democratic quality in supporting better lives. The situation changes as development proceeds,
with democratic quality having a positive influence among countries that have already achieved higher
quality of service delivery.


John F. Helliwell                                     Shawn Grover
Vancouver School of Economics                         Department of Finance Canada
University of British Columbia                        90 Elgin St, Ottawa
997-1873 East Mall                                    Ontario, K1A 0G5
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z1                                  Canada
CANADA                                                shawngrover@gmail.com
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca                                 Shun Wang
                                                      School of Public Policy and Management
Haifang Huang                                         Korea Development Institute (KDI)
Department of Economics                               85 Hoegiro, Dongdaemun Gu
University of Alberta                                 Seoul, 130-868, Korea
8-14 HM Tory                                          swang@kdischool.ac.kr
Edmonton Alberta T6G 2H4 CANADA
haifang.huang@ualberta.ca
Part I: Setting the Stage
In this first part we start by setting out what we shall cover by way of measures of well-being, then
describe our selected measures of the quality of government, and finally consider different ways of
measuring the theoretical and empirical linkages between good government and well-being. We then
review and expand the available evidence at the national level.


Measures of well-being

Our primary interest is in measures of subjective well-being, and especially in how people value their
own lives. Within the general term ‘subjective well-being’ there are three main categories: life
evaluations, measures of positive affect (or emotion) and measures of negative affect (or emotion). The
most widely available comparison of these three types of subjective well-being is provided by the
Gallup World Poll, and summarized in the World Happiness Report and the World Happiness Report
2013. The Gallup World Poll life evaluation asks respondents to think of their lives as a ladder, with the
worst possible life for them as 0, and the best possible life as 10. They are then asked to use this scale
to evaluate their current lives. The other major life evaluation questions also use scales with 10 as the
highest score, and ask about each respondent’s life satisfaction, or, alternatively, about how happy they
are with their life as a whole. It was at one time thought, on the basis of comparing data drawn from
different samples of respondents, that these alternative forms of life evaluation gave significantly
different results, with income (and possibly other life circumstances) being most closely linked to the
Gallup ladder, less so with life satisfaction, and least with general happiness1. However, it has since
been found that all three types of life evaluation give structurally comparable answers when asked of
the same respondents. This has been shown by comparing Cantril ladder and life satisfaction responses
in the Gallup World Poll, and by comparing life satisfaction and happiness responses in the European
Social Survey. Although these different questions give rise to unequal means and different distribution
shapes for within-country responses, they tell the same structural story, both within and across
countries, so much so that more precise estimates can be obtained by using the averages of two
different measures2.

Although different life evaluations are similar to one another, as a group they differ markedly from
measures of positive and negative affect3. There is also a difference between positive and negative
affect, with the former having a much stronger link to life evaluations than is true for negative affect4.
In the health sciences, measures of affect, and especially of depression and other measures of negative
affect, have been used much more widely than life evaluations. This is partly because only in recent
decades has research accumulated showing that future health and life circumstances are more closely
linked to positive than to negative emotions5. Life evaluations are now being considered, along with
positive emotions, and the more usually monitored negative emotions, as part of baseline patient
monitoring by family doctors.

Measures of affect are more widely used than are life evaluations in the context of studies of time-use,

1
  See Diener et al (2010) Table 1.2.
2
  This is reported in Helliwell et al (2010) Table 10.1 for the ladder and life satisfaction in the Gallup World Poll, and in
Helliwell & Wang (2012, p. 16) for life satisfaction and overall happiness in the ESS.
3
  See Helliwell & Wang (2012).
4
  See Helliwell & Wang (2013) Table 2.1.
5
  See De Neve et al (2013).
                                                                1
since moods are more sensitive to changes in the hourly and daily patterns of life6.

The OECD has recently issued guidelines for the collection of subjective well-being data by national
statistical offices. The guidelines advise collecting all three types of subjective well-being data, along
with a range of variables important for their understanding, within each country’s established systems
of population-based individual and household surveys7. If there can only be a single measure,
preference is given for a life evaluation, in the form of a life satisfaction question on a 0 to 10 scale.
The reasons for concentrating on a life evaluation are the same as those presented in the first World
Happiness Report, where a whole range of national-level life evaluations and affect measures were
assembled and compared. The first reason is that while emotions vary a lot among individuals,
variations are relatively smaller at the national level8. Second, and even more importantly, a much
higher proportion of the international variation in life evaluations, compared to either positive or
negative affect, is explained by differences in established measures of the quality of life9.

Although the collection and use of subjective well-being data as central measures of the quality of life
have become increasingly accepted over the past two decades, there remains some uncertainty, and
occasionally controversy, about how these data should augment, complement or even supplant other
national-level outcomes often taken to capture how well a nation is doing. The two main alternative
types of well-being measure are GDP per capita and some weighted combination of a broader range of
measures of human development. Per capita incomes have been held to be insufficient because they fail
to account for important aspects of the economy, fail to cover a variety of non-economic features of
life, and neglect sustainability10.

The UNDP has championed a broader human development approach, under the intellectual leadership
of Amartya Sen, with the UNDP’s Human Development Index (HDI) as the primary measure. Jon Hall
has argued that the human development approach and the HDI are complementary with subjective life
evaluations, since the latter are influenced by the key underlying supports for the human development
approach, while also providing an umbrella measure that avoids the need for experts to choose weights
on the components of the HDI or any alternative well-being index11. The HDI and subjective well-
being measures share the benefit of broadening government and private discussions of national
objectives and the policies best able to support better lives. A side benefit of these broader discussions
may be the development of cross-government discussions and increasing trust and collaboration among
departments.12

Subjective well-being, and especially the notion of happiness as a sufficient measure of well-being, has
been criticized as being too subject to adaptation, peer effects, survey context13, and to lack due
6
   See Krueger (2009) and Helliwell & Wang (2014).
7
   See OECD (2013) and Durand & Smith (2013).
8
   Thus of all the global variation among individuals in their responses to the Cantril ladder life evaluation, 22% was among
countries (and hence 78% among individuals in the same country), compared to 7% among countries for positive affect and
4% for negative affect. See Table 2.1 in the first World Happiness Report.
9
   For a sample of 732 national observations, comprising several annual average observations from each of 149 countries,
three-quarters of the pooled variance of the Cantril ladder is explained by six key variables. This is to be compared with less
than one-half for positive affect and less than one-quarter for negative affect. See Table 2.1 of World Happiness Report
2013. Table 3.1 of the first World Happiness Report shows a similar result for cross-sections of national averages.
10
    All three of these points are made in Stiglitz, Sen & Fitoussi (2009).
11
    In Hall (2013).
12
    This point is made more fully in Hall & Rickard (2013, p.16).
13
    Deaton (2012) emphasizes the potentially swamping effect of these effects by reference to whether life evaluations in the
Gallup Daily Poll were asked after a set of political questions that sharply reduced life evaluations. Similarly, Bonikowska
                                                               2
attention to the basics of a good life. These are all important points, but recent research tends to suggest
that none of these problems are fundamental14.

Amartya Sen has argued that happiness as an emotion is likely to be too narrow and short-term to be an
adequate reflection of a good life. For that, he argues, a broader notion of happiness is needed- as a
judgment about life as a whole. There are now sufficiently broad samples of both sorts of happiness
measure to support the linguistic distinction made by Sen15. When people are asked about happiness
yesterday, or right now, they take it as a question about emotions, and answer accordingly16.
Conversely, when they are asked how happy they are with their lives as a whole, they make a cognitive
judgment and answer appropriately17. Thus, as we have already noted, life evaluations, whether
expressed in terms of happiness or satisfaction with life, do reflect the broader aspect of human
development, while reports about happiness yesterday are emotional reports that are less reflective of
longer-term life circumstances.

Thus for the purposes of assessing the links between good governance and well-being, we rely, as has
most earlier research, on life evaluations as the preferred measure of well-being. However, since much
previous research has looked at links between good governance and some other variables that might be
presumed to improve well-being, we shall do the same where it rounds out the available evidence in a
helpful way. We shall not attempt to survey the vast literature linking various types of institutions,
including especially government ones, to either the levels or rates of change of GDP per capita18. We
shall, however, when explaining the correlations between governance and subjective well-being, try to
assess the extent to which economic growth is a mediating factor.


Measures of government quality

For the national-level statistical analysis we need government quality measures that have been
collected in comparable ways for many years and covering the largest number of countries. The most
important of these are the six composite measures proposed and reported as part of the World Bank
Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) Project19. There are six measures, which we divide into two
groups20. The first group contains four measures primarily concerned with the quality of the delivery of

et al (2013) show a variety of contextual effects on answers to the life satisfaction question in several large Canadian
surveys. However, the paper also shows how it is relatively easy to measure and adjust for these contextual effect, and thus
to effectively combine data from different surveys and survey contexts.
14
   For a summary of the evidence on each of these issues, see Helliwell & Wang (2012). See also Diener et al (2009),
especially Chapter 5.
15
   In his keynote address (http://www.auditorium.com/eventi/5495077) to the January 2013 Rome Science Congress. His
primary reference was to the later Wittgenstein (1953), with roots attributed to Gramsci via Sraffa, as described in Sen
(2003).
16
   The UK Office for National Statistics happiness question is of this form.
17
   Thus, as already noted, the life satisfaction and overall happiness answers in the European Social Survey are both
determined, in consistent patterns, by the same life circumstances.
18
   For a wide-ranging review of that literature, see Acemoglu & Robinson (2012).
19
   The Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) are a research dataset summarizing views on the quality of governance
provided by a large number of enterprise, citizen and expert survey respondents in industrial and developing
countries. These data are gathered from a number of survey institutes, think tanks, non-governmental organizations,
international organizations, and private sector firms. See Kaufmann, Kraay & Mastruzzi (2009).
http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home
20
   Langbein & Knack (2010) argue that these six measures of government quality draw heavily from overlapping and
connected sources of data, and are hence hard to distinguish as six separate factors. They present principal components
analysis (2010, Table 2) showing that the first principal component has equal weights on the four variables we have used to
                                                             3
government services: government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and the control of
corruption. The second group of two indicators measures the state of democracy: the first covering
voice and accountability, and the second political stability and absence of violence. As we shall see,
this aggregation of the six indicators into two gives us one variable capturing the quality of the delivery
of government services, and the other more closely capturing aspects of the electoral process. Previous
studies have found the former to be more closely linked to subjective well-being than the latter, to an
extent that differs for countries at different stages of development. We shall in the following sections
summarize these and other past results, and see to what extent they are supported by the larger samples
of global data now available21.

We shall pay special attention to various measures of trust, including measures of social and domain-
specific trust, which have been shown to be strong supporters of well-being, as well as selected
measures of trust in government, which is in its own right an important measure of the quality of
governance.


What connects good government to well-being?

Does good government improve well-being directly, or does it act mainly or entirely indirectly, because
of what it can achieve by way of other outcomes? Or, more plausibly, does it work in both ways?
Examples of both possibilities may be found. Consider education, as a particular example of a service
typically delivered or assured to children, and often to adults, by local or national governments. Across
countries there is a strong positive correlation between average education levels and subjective
evaluations of life. Yet when allowance is made for each respondent’s income, health and social trust,
the remaining positive link between education and subjective well-being usually disappears, and
sometimes turns negative. The theoretical interpretation of this sort of result is that education plays
primarily an instrumental role in improving happiness.

For an alternative example, consider the control of corruption, which has been shown to affect well-
being both directly and indirectly. Absence of corruption has often been shown to increase the
efficiency of public and private enterprise, but there is also lots of evidence that the higher levels of
general and specific trust make people happier above and beyond the higher incomes and better health
that may be achieved in a high-trust environment22.

To help to distinguish direct from indirect linkages between good governance and well-being at the
national level, we shall consider two main types of correlational evidence, first the simple relations and
then models that attempt to sort out the likely channels of influence. Both types of comparison are
sometimes difficult because measures of governance and of national well-being are often relatively
slow-moving, and governance and well-being are both likely to be influenced by some of the same
factors. Thus the global evidence may show a whole range of good and bad things tending to go
together, with plausible reasons why that should be so. In these circumstances, it is difficult to establish

comprise delivery, while the second and third components give weight instead to the two measures we combine to represent
democratic quality. Hence their analysis supports our division.
21
   In Helliwell et al (2014, Table 12) we also test the Freedom House measures of democratic quality, press freedom and
economic freedom, and find that they do not add to or alter the main findings reported here.
22
   See Helliwell & Putnam (2004) Table 1 for results showing that several types of trust have positive impacts on life
evaluations even after allowing for their possible instrumental roles acting through education, health, social connections and
income. The evidence includes multicountry modeling based on the World Values Survey, and national modeling based on
U.S. and Canadian surveys.
                                                              4
clearly the direction and size of causal forces. From time to time, of course, extraneous events or
structural changes can be treated as natural experiments, thus increasing confidence about the direction
and scale of influence.

In our attempts to disentangle the links between good governance and well-being, we shall pay special
attention to models that use changes in the quality of governance to explain changes in well-being.
Analysis of changes enables us to abstract from a whole range of country-specific histories that may
have led some countries to have high quality governance and high levels of well-being. It also provides
a greater degree of policy relevance, as it can potentially reveal where improvements of governance
have been made, and perhaps to establish the extent to which they provide useful lessons for others.


Earlier studies often used economic outcomes to link good governance and well-being

Before broader measures of well-being were sufficiently widely measured and understood, the effects
of good governance were usually assessed by searching for linkages between governance and economic
outcomes, and treating these economic outcomes as proxies for well-being more generally.
Traditionally, there have been two models used to describe how good governance could improve
economic well-being. The first is a market-enhancing governance approach viewing governance as
effective if it helps to foster strong property and contract rights and a stable rule of law. This is
presumed to keep transaction costs low to permit private individuals and entities to increase their own
utility and economic potential, and hence to improve general well-being. The second traditional model
is a growth-enhancing governance approach. It viewed good government as that which fostered
economic growth by managing incentives to enhance productivity and help shift activity to more
economically productive endeavors with the underlying assumption that such productivity would lead
to increased well-being.

However, both of these approaches assume economic outcomes to be the sole intermediate links
between good governance and improved well-being. This assumption has increasingly been argued to
be unduly restrictive. The existence of some connection between income and well-being is well
established. It would therefore seem intuitive that economic growth would improve well-being. This
has been questioned in two quite different ways, one emphasizing the uncertainty of the links between
income and well-being, and the second arguing that other factors than income cannot be ignored, since
together they might be more important than income. Especially relevant to our study of governance and
well-being, governance may affect income and these other factors in quite different ways.

First, there is the proposition most famously presented by Richard Easterlin and known as part of the
Easterlin Paradox23, that as countries become richer, they might not become happier, because increased
incomes cause associated increased material norms. Other scholars have found little strong evidence of
a direct connection between growth and SWB in middle-income countries and theorized that this could
be because increased income also is associated with “negative indicators of life quality such as
increased pollution, the social costs of economic transformation, the importance positional goods and
the dominance of country- or locally-based relative income concerns.”24 While the Easterlin Paradox
has been qualified by a variety of studies showing that when income differences are represented in
proportionate terms they are frequently found to have quite comparable effects in and among countries


23
     See Easterlin (1974).
24
     See Kenny (2005).
                                                   5
at all stages of development25, whether national-level average incomes and happiness move in the same
or different directions depends a great deal on the countries and time periods chosen for comparison26.

Second, the evidence and arguments supporting the use of subjective well-being do not rest on the size
or constancy of the link between income and happiness, even if much literature has been directed to
that issue. The primary reason for looking beyond economic outcomes is not that the linkage between
incomes and happiness is insecure and variable, but that it excludes too many other things that are
fundamentally important for better lives.

Another way of putting this second point is that the most fundamental explanation for the Easterlin
paradox - if this paradox is represented by cases where income has risen a great deal yet average
happiness has declined - is not that the effects of income on happiness are absent, or even differ among
countries, but because other things critical to happiness have changed in the opposite direction. Thus it
has been argued that Easterlin’s widely quoted example showing much post-1970 economic growth in
the United States without any increases in average happiness can be well explained by a model in
which income has significant positive impacts of happiness that have been offset by declines in other
key supports for well-being, including especially the declines in social trust and the quality of social
connections27. In the same vein, when average changes in life evaluations from 2005-07 to 2010-12 are
examined for 130 countries, three-quarters of the explained changes in average life evaluations were
due to factors other than income, with one-quarter due to income28. And this period spans the largest
(and unevenly distributed) economic recession in the past seventy-five years. Income changes were
indeed a significant part of the story, as would be expected in such circumstances, but nonetheless other
factors together played a much larger part.

Additionally, as will be discussed later in this paper, better governance improves well-being beyond
any impacts it has on income or transaction costs. For example, lives are happier in communities where
people feel that they can trust others, including police, neighbours, work colleagues and strangers,
above and beyond the happiness that may flow from higher incomes that may be facilitated by high
trust29. Furthermore there is substantial evidence that international differences in the quality of
governance play directly into these well-being consequences, as suggested by the fact that when people
are asked about the chances of a lost wallet being returned intact if found by a police officer, there is a
much bigger difference in answers across nations for this variable than there is about the likelihood of a
lost wallet being returned if found by a stranger or a neighbor30. Furthermore, differences of social trust
have been found to also play a significant role in explaining other outcomes that affect well-being
through a variety of non-income channels. For example, differences across countries in social trust are

25
   The Gallup World Poll data for more than 150 countries have been found to show income effects that are quite similar for
countries at different levels of development (Deaton 2010, Sacks, Stevenson & Wolfers 2012, and Helliwell, Barrington-
Leigh et al 2010). This stands in contrast to earlier findings based on the World Values Survey that suggested income effects
to be smaller in OECD than in non-OECD countries (Helliwell 2003).
26
   See for example, Easterlin & Sawangfa (2010) and Sacks, Stevenson & Wolfers (2012).
27
   See Bartolini et al (2013). Their analysis divides the negative influences equally between declines in trust and social
connections, on the one hand, and relative income effects of the sort emphasized by Easterlin.
28
   The changes from 2005-07 to 2010-12 in national average life evaluations are shown in Figures 2.5 and 2.6 of Helliwell
& Wang (2013). When these changes are explained by changes in the six factors used in Table 2.1 of the same chapter, 25%
of the variance is predicted by the model, with one-quarter of that coming from changes in income and the other three-
quarters coming from the combined effects of changes in the other five factors. A similar model is used later in this paper to
provide an updated assessment of the linkages between governance and well-being.
29
   See Helliwell & Wang (2011) and Helliwell, Huang & Wang (2014).
30
   Table 1 of Helliwell & Wang (2011) shows the international share of the variance to be about twice as high for answers
about the police as it is for the parallel question relating to neighbours and strangers.
                                                              6
significantly correlated with differences in both traffic fatalities and suicide rates31.


Models for the relationship between good governance and well-being

There are several types of theory that have been used to underlie linkages between good governance
and well-being. In this section, and for most of the rest of this paper, we shall use life satisfaction or
equivalent self-assessments of the quality of life as our primary overarching measures of well-being.
Good governance may improve life evaluations either directly, because people are happier living in a
context of good government, or indirectly, because good governance permits people to achieve higher
levels of something else that is directly important to their well-being. Mixed cases are likely, as the
implicit definition of good government is likely to include the capacity to provide instrumental support
should the need arises. Hence an identified direct effect may reflect the respondent’s expectation that
help would be there if and when it was needed- that the fire department would turn up and douse the
flames if there were to be a fire.

One complication needs to be addressed at the outset. While much of the literature argues or assumes
that causal forces run from the quality of governance to levels or changes in subjective well-being,
there is the possibility of causal arrows running also in the other direction. For example, there is a large
literature showing that those who are happier tend thereafter to have longer, healthier, better-connected
and generally more successful lives32. If these feedbacks are always positive, then the total effects of a
policy improvement may exceed the initial direct effects, although there is a related risk of over-
estimating these direct effects while underestimating the combined direct and indirect effects.

Another theoretical complication is posed by the variety of individual tastes about what constitutes
good government. Citizens and voters may differ a lot amongst themselves about the purposes of
government, and about how well any given government is doing its job. It has been shown that people
in OECD countries are happier when and if the government in power is one that matches their own
political preferences33, presumably because the views of those voters and their governments are more
likely to be closely aligned. Theory would suggest that average happiness is likely to be higher where
different groups of citizens have fairly consistent views about what sort of government they want.
There will likely also be differences across nations and cultures in what constitutes good government,
and hence some ambiguity in measures of government quality that are internationally comparable, and
that have similar effects on well-being in all countries. This increases the value of finding links
between changes in governance and changes in well-being, but it will remain true that we are
measuring the average size of the effect. It will be therefore useful to see how these linkages differ
among groups of countries at different stages of development, and among different income groupings
within nations. Some assurance of cross-cultural comparability of life evaluations and their
determinants has been provided by individual-level estimation of well-being relationships in each of
more than 150 countries showing a high degree of consistency on what determines subjective well-
being across the world34.


31
   See Helliwell & Wang (2011, p. 50-51). Traffic fatalities and suicide are roughly tied as the tenth leading cause of deaths
around the world, and effects of international trust differences are substantial. For both suicide and traffic fatalities, a change
in social trust of 0.1 on a scale running from 0 to 1.0 is associated with a 10% change in both death rates.
32
   See the recent survey by De Neve et al (2013).
33
   See Di Tella & MacCullough (2005).
34
   Helliwell et al (2010) Figure 10.3 shows the cross-country distributions of the estimates of the life-evaluation effects of
key variables.
                                                                7
Part II: Theories, Models and Evidence
In this section we turn to consider the well-being effects of governance in more specific and
quantitative terms. We start by reviewing and updating the evidence relating to aggregate measures of
governance quality and levels of subjective well-being. We shall use two ways to get evidence on the
key relationships between changes in governance and changes in well-being. The first is to allow for
two-way fixed effects using our full panel of countries and years. Allowing for country fixed effects
means that our estimates are based on the within-country relations between changes in governance and
changes in life evaluations. The second way, similar to that adopted in World Happiness Report 2013,
is to measure the difference in average life evaluations in each country from before the global financial
crisis (based on average evaluations in the years 2005-07) until the most recent period (based on
averages from the years 2010-12), and then do a cross-country analysis to see to what extent
improvements and losses in the quality of governance were matched by changes in average life
evaluations. Both types of evidence suggest that governance changes are correlated with changes in
well-being, above and beyond any effects flowing through economic channels. We shall then consider
more detailed theories and evidence about a range of specific governance issues.


What are the key empirical linkages between the quality of governance and subjective
well-being?

At the aggregate level, several studies have compared the well-being links between two major sets of
government characteristics and average life evaluations. The first set of characteristics relates to the
reliability and responsiveness of governments in their design and delivery of services, referred to here
as the quality of delivery. The second set of characteristics relate to the presence and pervasiveness of
key features of democratic electoral elections and representation. This we refer to as democratic
quality.

The first multi-country evidence was from three waves of the World Values Survey, based on 46
countries with a heavy representation from OECD industrial countries. The key results, using a model
that included both individual-level and national-level variables were that cross-country differences in
life satisfaction were very strongly linked to international differences in an average of the six World
Bank governance quality measures35. In these fully specified models, this significant effect of
government quality suggested an importance beyond that channeled through other outcomes. By
contrast, per capita GDP and education levels, although significantly correlated to life satisfaction in
simple terms, dropped out of the more complete models, suggesting that their impact was mostly
instrumental. These initial results were, however, based on relatively few countries, and the model also
included significant regional effects that were possibly also indirectly picking up some of the effects of
differences in income and other factors36.

Subsequent work extended the number of countries and years being considered, and split the six World
Bank governance measures into two separate quality measures. The quality of delivery was measured
as the average of four measures37: government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, and the

35
   These include the four measures now included in our variable called delivery quality (government effectiveness,
regulatory quality, rule of law, and the control of corruption) and the two that comprise the democratic quality variable
(voice and accountability, and political stability and absence of violence).
36
   See Helliwell (2003) Table 6.
37
   From Kaufmann, Kraay & Mastruzzi (2009) and Helliwell & Huang (2008).
                                                              8
control of corruption. The quality of a country’s democratic processes was based on the average of the
remaining two World Bank measures: voice and accountability, and political stability and absence of
violence. The results showed that for all countries taken together the quality of delivery mattered more
for well-being than did the presence or absence of democracy. The quality of delivery was strongly
important for all groups of countries, while the democracy variable had a zero effect for all countries as
a group, with a positive effect among richer countries offset by a negative effect among the poorer
countries.

Subsequent studies using ever-larger country samples, and a variety of survey sources and life
evaluations, have generally supported this ranking of the relative effects of the delivery and democratic
aspects of government quality38. One thing that has changed over the past decade, as country samples
have embraced more countries and more years, is that GDP per capita has become a stronger element
of the full model than it was in the results based on the first three rounds of the World Values Survey.
Since the more recent work has been based on the Gallup World Poll, which uses the Cantril ladder
form of life evaluation, it was first thought that this difference was because the ladder form of life
evaluation was responsible for the higher weight found for per capita incomes, when compared to the
life satisfaction responses in the World Values Survey39. However, inclusion of both forms of
evaluation in the same Gallup surveys has revealed that both attach the same weight to income40. Thus
the larger role given to income differences in more recent studies must instead be attributed to the
greater number of countries involved, which has correspondingly broadened the range of national
income differences under review.

To confirm and extend these earlier results, we make use of a larger set of years and countries than has
previously been available. This involves data from 157 countries, with each country represented by as
many observations as there were Gallup World Poll surveys conducted in that country between 2005
and 2012. By combining time series and cross-country evidence for a large number of countries and a
reasonable number of years, we have a real chance of identifying linkages between changes in the
quality of governance and changes in subjective well-being. We present results from four different
types of model, each of which is estimated in three versions. These versions go from simpler to more
complicated structures. The first explains differences in well-being, whether across countries or over
time, in terms of the corresponding values for our two key variables, one for the quality of delivery and
the second for the extent of democratic processes. The second version adds GDP per capita for each
country-year, while the third version adds the remaining variables used in the World Happiness Report
2013 to explain differences across countries and over time in the same life evaluations used here41.

The four different models include a pooled OLS model with fixed effects for years and regions, a panel
model with fixed effects for both years and countries, a pure cross-section explaining an all-year
average of life evaluations in each country, and finally a cross-section comprising changes in national-
average life evaluations from their 2005-07 values to their averages for 2010-12. We pay most attention
to the second and fourth models, since they are entirely based on changes in governance and well-being

38
   See, for example, Ott (2010, 2011) and Bjørnskov et al (2010).
39
   See Diener et al (2010).
40
   See Helliwell et al (2010), Tables 10.1 and 10.3 for the matched analysis. Indeed, even though the means and distribution
shapes of the answers to the two forms of question (the life ladder and life satisfaction) differ significantly (Helliwell et al
2010, Figures 10.1 and 10.2), the determinants are so similar that stronger models are obtained by averaging the answers to
the two questions (as shown in Tables 10.1 and 10.3).
41
   The key difference is that here we do not use the corruption perceptions variable employed in the WHR 2013, since
control of corruption is already a key component of the delivery quality variable. An additional advantage of this procedure
is that it permits a slightly larger sample of countries to be used.
                                                               9
within each country, and are therefore more likely to illustrate what can be achieved by feasible
changes in the quality of government. The underlying data and models, along with a full range of
results, are reported in our estimation appendix. We shall outline here only the main features of our
results, and then turn to a more detailed set of questions about specific types of linkage between
governance and well-being.

Our key results are to be found in Table 3, which contains three blocks of three equations each. The
first block shows pooled OLS regressions including fixed effects for each year. The second is same as
the first but adding regional effects, while the third block shows regressions with fixed effects for years
and countries. Since the third block is both empirically stronger and more theoretically convincing, we
shall concentrate here on those results. The results in the third block are theoretically preferable
because the use of country fixed effects means that the estimated effects are driven by changes over
time in governance, life evaluations, income, and other variables.

The first equation in the third block (column 7 of Table 3) shows that changes in delivery quality, but
not democratic quality, are significantly correlated with changes in well-being for the Gallup World
Poll sample of 157 countries over the 2005 to 2012 period. This confirms, in a larger and more current
sample, and with full allowance for country fixed effects, the same pattern of results found using
smaller samples of earlier data from the World Values Survey. The estimated effects of delivery quality
are very substantial. The governance variables are in standardized form, with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of 1.0. So the coefficient on delivery quality of 0.84 in column 7 of Table 3 suggests
that an improvement in delivery quality equal to one standard deviation would lead to an increase in
average life evaluations of 0.84, which corresponds to a change of about three-quarters of a standard
deviation of the distribution of national averages of life evaluations42. This estimate is from a
regression with two-way fixed effects (country-fixed effects and year-fixed effects), so the sources of
variations behind the estimate are within-country changes in governance and life evaluations relative to
changes in other countries. As shown in Table 14 of Helliwell et al (2014), the ten countries with the
largest increases in delivery quality are Peru, Brazil, Macedonia, Taiwan, Paraguay, Poland, Myanmar,
Georgia, Rwanda and Palestinian Territories; the average increase is 0.3. Life evaluations rose in eight
of the ten countries (except Myanmar and Rwanda), the average increase for the entire group of ten is
0.15. On the opposite end, the countries with the largest declines in delivery quality are Madagascar,
Greece, Venezuela, Yemen, Austria, Kuwait, Tanzania, Nepal, South Africa and Hungary. All except for
Venezuela, Austria and Kuwait saw declines in life evaluations. The average changes are -0.26 for
delivery and -0.18 for life evaluation. When we compare the ten-most-improved countries with the ten
most worsened, in terms of delivery quality, the associated well-being difference is equivalent to that
from a 40% change in per capita incomes43.

Column 8 of Table 3 adds GDP per capita to the equation, permitting us to estimate the extent to which
the quality of government is influencing happiness by improving the material efficiency and
productivity of the economy. The coefficient on delivery quality drops from 0.84 to 0.74, suggesting
that some, but only a fraction, of the life-improving effects of better governance are flowing through its
effects on GDP per capita. Of course, better governance will affect the structure as well as the size of
the economy, and thus enable increases in the amount of well-being provided by a given level of GDP.
For example, if levels of corruption are lower, streets and communities safer, and trust levels higher,
people are more likely to get the goods and services they want, and the required levels of defensive

42
  The distributions of the variables are shown in Table 1 of the Statistical Appendix.
43
  The calculation is based on the average of the high and low estimates of the relative effects of per capita incomes and
delivery quality from Table 3, as described and shown for each country in Table 14 of Helliwell et al (2014).
                                                             10
expenditures will be lower44. The equation shows changes in GDP per capita and governance to have
contributed significantly to changes in national-average life evaluations over the 2005-2012 period,
with delivery quality being slightly the more important contributor, since changes in delivery quality
have slightly greater variance than changes in GDP (0.14 to 0.12 in terms of standard deviations of
changes from 2005-07 to 2010-12, as shown in Table 2) and the former have a larger estimated
coefficient (0.74 to 0.65). Furthermore, the delivery effect is, in principle, net of the effects flowing to
well-being indirectly through changes in GDP per capita.

The last column of Table 3 extends the list of explanatory variables, and therefore adds to the number
of channels through which good governance might be influencing life evaluations. The variables added
are those that were used to explain a similar set of Gallup World Poll life evaluations in World
Happiness Report 201345. The most significant changes appear to have been in perceived freedom to
make life choices, and in the proportion of respondents who report having someone they can count on
in times of trouble. When these variables are added, there is a decrease in the direct governance effect,
and an increase in that for GDP, suggesting that changes in perceived freedom and social support were
more likely to be positively correlated with changes in delivery quality than with changes in GDP per
capita46.

In Table 4, we divide the sample into two parts: those with higher and lower than average quality of
service delivery. Within each subsample, we repeat Table 3’s panel regressions with country and year
fixed effects. The first two columns show the results based only on the two quality of government
measures, and show that the effects of delivery quality are highly significant, and to an equal extent, for
both groups of countries, while democratic quality has a positive impact for those countries that have
achieved sufficiently high delivery quality, but none for countries with low delivery quality. These
results remain when GDP per capita is added, in columns (3) and (4). Table 4’s last two columns report
the split-sample estimates for the most fully specified model. A stark but expected contrast emerges.
For the countries that have already achieved better-than-average delivery quality, , it is democratic
quality that has a positive and significant effect on life evaluations; the effect of delivery quality is
essentially zero and statistically insignificant. The exact opposite is true for the countries with low
delivery quality: the effect of delivery is positive and significant, while the effect of democratic quality
is zero. This is consistent with earlier findings reported in Helliwell and Huang (2008), but we now
have many more countries, use a different survey source, test alternative ways of splitting the sample,
and cover a more recent time period47. This difference in source, scope and years covered makes the

44
   The utility-wasting effects of defensive expenditures have been central to many influential complaints about using GDP
to represent levels of welfare. See especially Stiglitz et al (2009). If the quality of government has a large and systematic
effect on the amount of life satisfaction provided by any given level of GDP per capita, then we might expect to find an
interaction term between GDP per capita and delivery quality. To test for this, we added a second GDP variable for
observations where delivery quality was above average. The estimated coefficient was small and negative, suggesting no
significant interaction effect between the quality of delivery and the life satisfaction benefits of measured GDP.
45
   We exclude the perceived corruption variable because control of corruption is already one of the key components of the
delivery quality variable.
46
   It is also worth noting that the variables measuring freedom and having someone to count on are drawn from the same
survey respondents as the life evaluations, while GDP per capita and delivery quality are drawn from different sources. Thus
any changes from year to year in the representativeness of the population samples may lead to an upward bias in the size of
the effects estimated for freedom and social support, although not for GDP per capita and delivery quality.
47
   In Helliwell and Huang (2008), we split the sample by GDP per capita, with the split between richer and poorer countries
was set at a value of real GDP per capita equal to half of that in the United States. In the parallel work reported in Helliwell
et al (2014, Table 11), our usual split is at a GDP per capita equal to one-quarter of that in the United States. In both cases
the splits were done so as to give reasonably equal sample sizes to the two groups of countries. In each case the results are
close to what we report here using delivery quality as our preferred splitting variable.
                                                              11
new results strongly confirming of the pattern that had been appearing in earlier studies based on the
World Values Survey.

In Table 5 we extend the analysis by adding a measure of confidence in government, derived from
survey responses in the Gallup World Poll, to see to what extent it supplements or substitutes for the
independent estimates of the actual quality of delivery. Once again, our analysis uses the specification
including both country and year fixed effects, so that we are estimating the extent to which the
variables are affecting the with-country changes. The confidence measure is the percentage of
respondents who answered positively to the question “Do you have confidence in each of the
following, or not? How about the national government?” Although the samples are slightly different,
the two effects contribute independently to life evaluations48. For both groups, confidence in
government has a positive effect on life evaluations and does so with comparable effect sizes49.
Presumably the implicit coverage of the confidence measure embraces some elements of both delivery
and democratic quality, perhaps with weights that shift as one goal is achieved and attentions turns to
the other. The confidence in government measure must cover more than what is in the delivery and
democracy variables, as it has an importance above and beyond their effects50. We shall return later to
consider these results in the context of specific analysis of trust in government.

Table 6 presents findings from two additional statistical specifications, and demonstrates that the
positive effect of good governance on life evaluations exists both across countries and over time, thus
greatly increasing the likelihood that changes in governance quality are leading to changes in well-
being. The table’s first two columns are from “pure” cross-sectional regressions, in which each country
appears once; the observations are average levels by country covering all surveys during the 2005-2012
period. From this it is seen that delivery quality has a significant effect after allowing for regional fixed
effects. Column (3) is from a regression based on changes from 2005-07 to 2010-12. Again a country
appears only once; but the observations are changes instead of levels. So the regression utilizes an
entirely different source of variation compared to column (2). But again, delivery quality is found to
have a positive and significant effect on life evaluations, with an estimated magnitude that is greater
than the one found in the level regression. It thus appears that, while both levels and changes contribute
to the estimated effect, the contribution from the longitudinal variation is greater.


Relationships between some features of governance and well-being

In this section we consider a number of specific aspects of governance that theory and evidence have
suggested to be important parts of the general linkage between good government and well-being. We
deal with seven aspects, while realizing that even such a long list must be incomplete, and that there are
many alternative ways of digging into the details. Here we summarize only some of the main strands of
evidence51.

48
   In principle we would expect that the two measures would be correlated, and hence that the coefficient on the delivery
variable would fall when the confidence variable was added. However, over the 886 cases where both variables are
measured, the correlation is essentially zero (-0.02).
49
   For example, in equation 3, the most fully specified model in Table 4, the coefficients are 0.45 on confidence in
government and 0.59 on delivery quality. As shown in Table 2, the standard deviations of the changes in the two variables
are also very similar, 0.13 for confidence in government and 0.14 for delivery quality.
50
   See columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, showing the impact of confidence in government to be strong even when the other two
variables are included.
51
   The literature review table in Helliwell et al (2014) is divided according to these same seven features of governance to
provide easy access to a broader range of results.
                                                             12
Inclusive institutions and inclusive law-making and policy-making processes

Providing the public with a voice in policy-making and the governance of institutions could impact
well-being in several ways. Assuming that people are the best judges of their needs and preferences,
allowing the public to have a bigger say in the direction of government should create a government that
better suits their needs.

However, the SWB benefits of inclusive institutions and policy-making could extend beyond just
improved government policies. In addition to better outcomes, well-being can be improved if people
feel that the procedures52 that led to the policy were fair and inclusive. Such procedures could deliver
enhanced well-being through an improved feeling of self-determination. In contrast, policies made
through procedures that exclude the public could alienate the public and reduce well-being, even if the
outcomes are fair and desirable.

As discussed in greater depth below, there is a strong negative connection between corruption and well-
being and a strong positive connection between trust and well-being. It is possible that improving the
inclusiveness of government decreases corruption if citizens who are directly involved are better able to
discover and stop improper behavior. Beyond that, it has been shown that people are inclined, in the
absence of their own direct experience, to underestimate the goodwill of others and overestimate the
likelihood of criminal activity53. In the same vein, it has been shown that face-to-face meetings sharply
increase the likelihood that the best solutions will be found to the sorts of common-property problems
that governments are often asked to solve54.

Voting and political participation

Voting and political participation also provide routes to inclusive law-making, so long as voters feel
that the processes are trustworthy, and they are being offered meaningful choices at the ballot-box.
Most of the theoretical and empirical work on this issue has made use of measures of the extent and
quality of voting procedures, as well as on the availability of the information required for informed
voting. One of the general results reported above is that the empirical linkages between political
participation and life evaluations are generally weak, and sometime perverse. For example, one early
study based on the World Values Survey found that for the global sample as a whole, there was no
positive effect from the existence of democratic processes, once account was taken of the
responsiveness and reliability of government. Yet when the sample was split into two, either by average
income levels or some other measures of the stage of development, the right to vote was found to have
a positive well-being effect in countries with established and effective institutions, but to have a
negative effect in the rest of the sample55. One theory used to explain the negative effect is that unless
the overall institutions of government are of sufficiently high quality, the voting process may well
involve a choice of kleptocracies, and to be considered inferior to some possibly more efficient
autocratic alternatives. That democracy should have greater positive effects for more developed
countries follows from the fact that as the provision of health, education and other public services

52
   Frey & Stutzer (2000).
53
   Helliwell & Wang (2011) combine survey and experimental evidence to show that people underestimate the chances of
their lost wallets being returned, and survey evidence showing that they over-estimate the likelihood of being subject to
criminal activity.
54
   For a meta-analysis of fifty years of such studies, see Balliet (2010).
55
   See Helliwell & Huang (2008).
                                                            13
becomes a larger part of what governments do, there will arise a parallel citizen interest in having more
say in how these services are provided, and by whom56.

But even in the largest global samples, and especially at earlier stages of economic development, the
estimated effects of democracy are often absent or small, when compared to delivery quality. This
general pattern of findings is generally supported by our own results shown in Tables 3. However, in
Table 4, where we split our sample between the countries with higher and lower than average delivery
quality, we find a significant effect, within the group of countries with better delivery quality, linking
democratic quality improvements to higher subjective well-being57.

Fair playing field

Philosophers over millennia, with Aristotle and Buddha as notable examples, have argued that true
happiness involves a middle path where the needs and desires of the self are meshed with the interests
of others for the benefit of all58. If these philosophers are accurate in their perceptions of human nature,
then we should expect to find that people often act against their own selfish interests to achieve
fairness, and that they are happier when they can live within a fair system. Thus it is no surprise that
experimental evidence consistently shows systematic departures from narrow self-interest, even where
the experiments are set up to remove any prospects of reciprocity59. Likewise, experimental evidence
shows that people are prepared to pay to punish others who do not behave fairly. Experimental and
survey evidence have both been used to show that those who are generous to others are happier than
those who are not, and are happier living where generosity is the norm60, and where they and others do
not attempt to cheat the tax system61.

Corruption is another aspect of fairness, since it is inherently unfair in its application, and more likely
to affect those less able to protect themselves62.

There is also cross-country evidence showing that people are happier living in countries with more
complete social insurance and income-support systems63. This may in part be based on the increased
assurance this gives to individual citizens, but is likely to be linked also to other findings that average
life evaluations are higher in countries where there is less inequality in the distribution of well-being64.
There is also evidence that inequality in the distribution of well-being is less where the delivery quality
of governance is higher65. Our new results support earlier findings that subjective well-being is
significantly lower where there is more corruption. Beyond its negative direct effects of well-being
corruption also lowers the likelihood that foreign aid will improve subjective well-being in the recipient
countries66.
56
    This is the core of the argument made by Ott (2010) for the finding that democratic quality adds to the positive effects of
technical quality once technical quality has reached some minimal level.
57
    The same is true if we split the sample of countries by level of income, as shown in Table 11 of Helliwell et al (2014).
58
    For reviews and references, see Bok (2010) and Sachs (2013).
59
    See, for example, Fehr & Schmidt (1999) and Clark & D’Ambrosio (2013).
60
    See Aknin et al (2013) for both experimental and survey evidence that givers are happier than non-givers, and note the
effects of generosity in Table 3 of this paper.
61
    See Verme (2009) and Helliwell (2003) for results, based on the World Values Survey, showing that people who think that
it is wrong for people to cheat on taxes are happier than those who do not mind.
62
    See Kaufmann et al (2008).
63
    See Radcliff (2013) Chapter 5, Boarini et al (2013), and Pacek & Radcliff (2008).
64
    See Bolle et al (2009).
65
    See Ott (2011).
66
    See Arvin & Lew (2012).
                                                              14
Trust and the rule of law

As shown by the previous examples relating to corruption and the tax system, fairness and the rule of
law are closely related. Does living under the rule of law generally make people happier? Presumably
this depends both on the nature of the law and on people’s general views on the extent to which good
behavior should be internally motivated or externally governed. Some studies have suggested that trust
and the rule of law are substitutes, with the rule of law, and the expenditures required to enforce it,
being increasingly relied upon as the scope of business and other dealings extends beyond the network
size governed by personal trust networks, or where the norms of social trust have become frayed. Thus
Robert Putnam has argued for a causal link between the post-1970 declines in social trust in the United
States and the corresponding increase in the number of lawyers, judges and police as shares of the
employed civilian population67.

With respect to trust, there is less ambiguity: people are happier living where trust levels are high.
There is an important distinction to be made between trust, which is the belief that others will behave
appropriately, and trustworthy behavior, which is behavior that justifies the trust of others. Across
communities and countries, trust and trustworthiness go hand in hand, as shown by the finding that
international differences in the likelihood of dropped wallets being returned is correlated with
differences in the extent to which people think that others can be trusted68.

Most early studies of the effects of trust on well-being made use of the general question on social trust.
Its importance naturally led to attempts to measure and assess the consequences of trust in many
specific domains, as well as survey questions of a more behavioural sort, asking people about the
likelihood of their lost wallets being returned if found, alternatively, by neighbours, police, and
strangers69. Across domains, people were asked general questions about their trust, or sometimes
confidence, in neighbours, police, employers, work colleagues, and various parts of the political
system, ranging from municipal administration to the courts, legislature, and national governments. In
general, as we have already noted, the estimated well-being effects of having trust in nearby networks-
the workplace and neighbourhood especially – are stronger than those based on trust or confidence in
higher-level institutions. Presumably this is because the more local forms of trust are more likely to be
based on direct experience rather than hearsay. Probably of even greater importance is that life is built
on local contacts and experiences, and life evaluations are based on the happiness given, shared, and
remembered on those occasions. If these experiences are positive, they lead to a sense of belonging.
Research has shown that such a sense of belonging, or social identity, is a strong support for well-
being. The preponderance of the immediate and local over the abstract and distant shows up in the
relative importance of different senses of belonging. The effects of trust on happiness appear to be
mediated in good part through a sense of belonging to the relevant community, and belonging to one’s
local community has a stronger effect than belonging to one’s province or to the nation as a whole,
although all are important and none appears to exclude the others70.

Decentralization

If it is generally true, as the foregoing seems to suggest, that local circumstances matter most, then it

67
   See Putnam (2000, p. 141)
68
   See Knack (2001).
69
   For evidence that these measures are different, and that they are each important to well-being, see Helliwell & Wang
(2011) and Helliwell & Putnam (2004).
70
   See Helliwell & Wang (2011) for Canadian evidence on both these issues.
                                                            15
might be expected that decentralization would be associated with higher levels of happiness. This
assumes that equivalent or better levels of delivery effectiveness could be achieved, and that the
services delivered would, by dint of their decentralized administration, be equally or better adapted to
local tastes and needs, by providing voters closer access to and influence on decision-makers. Neither
of the elements of this reasoning are sure bets, so that empirical evidence is needed to confirm or deny
the possibility. Most of the related evidence is derived from the range of different degrees of
decentralization among or within OECD countries. The general tenor of the evidence supports the idea
that people are on average happier living in jurisdictions with more decentralization71.

Reliability, responsiveness and effectiveness

The bulk of the old and new evidence assembled in this paper shows clearly that people are happier
when they have governments that efficiently and reliably deliver what is needed, when it is needed. Is
there any evidence about which aspects of reliability and responsiveness are most important, and if
there are trade-offs among different aspects? One interesting UK study found that when unpacking
complaints about the long time taken for police to answer complaints, what mattered most was whether
police would come when they said they would come (reliability) rather than how soon they came
(responsiveness)72. The purpose of unpacking the different aspects of delivery quality was, and should
be, to permit services to be reconfigured so as to respond to what people feel to be important, in ways
that match their priorities.

It is useful to consider whether all groups in the population attach the same values to governmental
qualities. Earlier research using the World Values Survey found that delivery quality was on average
more important for poor countries than in richer countries73, and also that within countries low
governmental quality was more damaging for the poor than for the rich74. Using our new and much
larger country sample of data from the Gallup World Poll, we have seen that improvements in delivery
quality matter much more for poorer than for richer countries75. It is also useful to test if there is a
similar pattern among income classes within countries. As shown in Table 16 of Helliwell et al (2014),
there is no evidence that delivery quality matters differently for rich and poor respondents. Only when
we look more specifically at corruption, and especially when we account for the fact that the poor are
likely to face corruption76, do we find larger impacts of government quality among poorer respondents.

Freedom

We have already seen that people are happier when they feel that they are free to make key life
decisions, and that this impact is above and beyond the effects of the better health and higher incomes
that greater freedom may enable them to achieve. Earlier research has found, in the context of the
World Values Survey, where the freedom question combines freedom and control, that this combined

71
   See Tomaney et al (2011), Frey & Stutzer (2005), Diaz-Serrano & Rodríguez-Pose (2011), and Rodríguez-Pose &
Maslauskaite (2012).
72
   See Halpern (2010, p. 209).
73
   See Helliwell & Huang (2008), Table 2.
74
   See Helliwell & Huang (2008, p. 612).
75
   See Table 11 of Helliwell et al (2014). Note that this Table includes fixed effects for countries and years, and hence shows
the within-country effects of changes in governance quality.
76
   78.4% (se=0.6%) of those expressing opinions in the bottom income quintile see corruption as a problem in government
and business, compared to 75.0% (se=0.8%) in the top quintile. While not very large, this difference is significant, and is
buttressed by a comparable trend across all income quintiles. This is consistent with earlier micro evidence from Peru
(Kaufmann et al 2008).
                                                              16
variable is a stronger and more consistent predictor of life satisfaction than any other variable77. How
are the various aspects of perceived freedom influenced by governments? Although there are positive
correlations across countries in the prevalence of different aspects of freedom- freedom to vote,
freedom of the press, economic freedom, and civil liberties, there are enough differences to permit
some judgments to be made about what counts most. It would appear that the core freedom relates to
the freedom to make key life choices, especially coupled with a sense of control. Beyond that, there
appears to be only slight further contributions from the institutional freedom measures listed above.
Equations shown in Table 12 of Helliwell et al (2014) add various institutional freedom measures in
turn to the equation already including perceived individual freedom to make life choices, delivery
quality, income, healthy life expectancy, generosity and social support. The results show that life
evaluations are slightly higher where civil rights are greater, where press freedom is greater, and where
economic freedoms are more constrained78.

Freedom of choice needs to be sufficient, but there can be too much of a good thing, when choices and
brands multiply, making decisions harder and post-decision regret more likely79. Other experiments
with more direct relevance to governance have shown that some range of trusted choices plus a guided
path including sensible default options can help individuals to choose and be satisfied with pension80
or health plans.


Conclusions
This paper first sets the stage by making an evidence-based case that people’s own evaluations of the
quality of their lives provide reliable and inexpensive new ways to show how, and how much, good
governance matters. These well-being measures complement and encompass more established
indicators of economic and social progress. Their encompassing capacity is based on their focus on life
as a whole, thereby permitting economics, health, trust, freedom and social relations to be consistently
taken into account, using survey-based life evaluations as the research base to establish what matters
most.

The paper then brings together the largest available sets of national-level measures of the quality of
governance, and assesses the extent to which they contribute to explaining the levels and changes in
life evaluations in 157 countries over the years 2005-2012, using data from the Gallup World Poll
already analyzed in some detail in the World Happiness Report 2013. The results confirm earlier
findings, that the delivery quality of government services dominates democratic quality in supporting
better lives. The situation changes as development proceeds, with democratic quality having a positive
influence among countries that have already achieved a reasonable level of delivery quality.

The new results show not just that people are more satisfied with their lives in countries with better

77
   See Verme (2009).
78
   As can be seen in Table 12 of Helliwell et al (2014), the significance of these additional effects is modest. The positive
impacts from civil liberties and press freedom are at the 10% significance levels, while the negative effects of greater
economic freedoms are significant at the 5% level. It is important to note that the economic freedom variable is as defined
by the Heritage Foundation rather than by the perceptions of the survey respondents. Some of its components are already
reflected in the delivery quality variable. It differs by adding large government and more regulation of business as
constraints on economic freedom. The civil liberties index is from Freedom House, and the press freedom measure from
Reporters Without Borders. The index of political rights from Freedom House showed a positive but insignificant effect.
79
   See Iyengar & Lepper (2000) for experiments showing both of these outcomes in an experimental shopping context.
80
   See Sethi-Iyengar et al (2004).
                                                              17
governance quality, but also that actual changes in governance quality since 2005 have led to large
changes in the quality of life. For example, the ten-most-improved countries, in terms of delivery
quality changes between 2005 and 2012, when compared to the ten countries with most worsened
delivery quality, are estimated to have thereby increased average life evaluations by as much as would
be produced by a 40% increase in per capita incomes.

This provides much stronger evidence that governance quality can be changed, and that these changes
have much larger effects than those flowing simply through a more productive economy. When we
explain changes in average life evaluations over the 2005 to 2012 period, just as much was explained
by changes in governance quality as by changes in GDP, even though some of the well-being benefits
of better governance are delivered through increases in economic efficiency and hence GDP per capita.
Our new results thus confirm that quality of governance affects lives via many channels beyond those
captured by GDP per capita, and also that important improvements can be achieved within policy-
relevant time horizons.

Additional well-being benefits can arise where nations have stronger social fabrics that enable them to
better weather economic or other crises. These benefits lie above and beyond those already found to
flow from more traditional measures of governance quality. Thus while four Eurozone countries had
drops of life evaluations much larger than could be explained by their large income losses and increases
in unemployment (see Table 2.2 in World Happiness Report 2013), there were other countries severely
damaged by the global financial crisis – Ireland and Iceland- where despite severe damage to their
banking systems and economic performance, average life evaluations fell only slightly. In the Gallup
World Poll data, Ireland and Iceland rank right at the top in terms of social support, as measured by the
proportion of respondents who feel they have someone to count on in times of trouble. The well-being
benefits of these social connections become more obvious, and they are probably appreciated more,
when crises arise to give them a chance to show their value.

Trust in others has been repeatedly found to be a vital support for happier lives. This trust takes many
forms, ranging from the comforting thought that friends and relatives are ready to help in times of need,
to belief in the generosity of strangers willing to pick up and return a lost wallet, and the belief that the
word of a colleague or business associate can be relied upon, to broader trust in public institutions and
governments. While the evidence shows that all these forms of trust are important, trust in one’s local
environment of friends, neighbours and workmates matters most of all. This is important information
for policy-makers, who can help to design policies that both build and make use of the constructive
capacities of community-level connections and engagement.

Trust in the quality, completeness and fairness of broader public institutions is also an important part of
the overall support for better lives. Thus our new results show that changes in public confidence in
national institutions are important sources of changes in life evaluations even after account has been
taken of the effects of changes in delivery quality, GDP per capita and social support. That confidence
in public institutions has importance even beyond the conventional measures of the delivery quality of
their services suggests that some important ingredients are missed by the conventional measures.

Finally, we note that although the quantity and quality of information about the links between good
governance and well-being are much greater than even a few years ago, there is still much to learn. The
existing sources of comparable data are still quite limited, both in terms of geographic and
demographic detail, and in the frequency of measurement. Even more important, it will be necessary to
spend more time and effort learning how the processes of governance, and the operation of all public
                                                     18
and private institutions, affect the quality of peoples’ lives, as seen by them81. This knowledge will be
accumulated most efficiently by a collaborative combination of broader official collection of well-
being data, much local experimentation with alternative ways of doing things, broader sharing of
information about what works best, and field trials of the most promising options.


References

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty. New York: Crown Publishers. http://www.randomhouse.com/book/205014/why-nations-fail-
by-daron-acemoglu-and-james-robinson
Aknin, L.B., Barrington-Leigh, C.P., Dunn, E.W., Helliwell, J.F., Burns, J., Biswas-Diener, R., Kemeza,
I., Nyende, P., Ashton-James, C.E. and Norton, M.I. (2013). Prosocial spending and well-being: Cross-
cultural evidence for a psychological universal. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology 104(4),
635-652. http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/psp-104-4-635.pdf
Arvin, B. and Lew B. (2012) Development aid, corruption and happiness in 118 countries, 1996-2009.
Applied Econometrics and International Development 12(2), 68-78.
http://www.usc.es/economet/journals1/aeid/aeid1225.pdf
Balliet, D. (2010). Communication and cooperation in social dilemmas: A meta-analytic review.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 54(1), 39-57. http://jcr.sagepub.com/content/54/1/39/suppl/DC1
Bartolini, S., Bilancini, E. and Pugno, M. (2013). Did the decline in social connections depress
Americans’ happiness? Social Indicators Research 110(3), 1033-1059.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11205-011-9971-x
Bjørnskov, C., Dreher, A. and Fischer, J. (2010) Formal institutions and subjective well-being:
Revisiting the cross-country evidence. European Journal of Political Economy 26(4), 418-430.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11205-011-9971-x
Boarini, R., Cornola, M., de Keulenaer, F., Manchin, R. and Smith, C. (2013). Can governments boost
people’s sense of well-being? The impact of selected labour market and health policies on life
satisfaction. Social Indicators Research 13(1), 105-120.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11205-013-0386-8
Bok, S. (2010). Exploring Happiness from Aristotle to Brain Science. New York: Yale University Press.
http://yalepress.yale.edu/book.asp?isbn=9780300139297
Bolle, F., Okhrin, Y. and Vogel, C. (2009) A note on interdependent preferences. Journal of Socio-
Economics 38(5), 713-721. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053535709000365
Bonikowska, A., Helliwell, J.F., Hou, F. and Schellenberg, G. (2013). An assessment of life satisfaction
responses on recent Statistics Canada surveys. Statistics Canada, Analytical Studies Branch Research
Paper Series. http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11f0019m/11f0019m2013351-eng.pdf
Clark, A. and D’Ambrosia, C. (2013). Attitudes to income inequality. Chapter 14 of Atkinson, A.B. and
Bourguignon F.J. (Eds.) Handbook of Income Distribution Volume 2A. (Draft version from Paris
School of Economics). http://www.parisschoolofeconomics.com/clark-andrew/ChapterNov232013.pdf
Deaton, A. (2010). Income, aging, health and well-being around the world: Evidence from the Gallup

81
     A range of policy implications is explored in Part III of Helliwell et al (2014).
                                                                 19
World Poll. Chapter 9 of Wise, D.A. (Eds.) Research Findings in the Economics of Aging. Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 235-263. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c8204.pdf
Deaton, A. (2012). The financial crisis and the well-being of Americans. Oxford Economic Papers
64(1), 1-26. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17128
De Neve, J., Diener, E., Tay, L. and Xuereb, C. (2013). The Objective benefits of subjective well-being.
In Helliwell, J., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 54-79.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Diaz-Serrano, L. and Rodríguez-Pose, A. (2011). Decentralization, happiness and the perception of
institutions. IZA Discussion Paper No. 5647. http://ssrn.com/abstract=1812532
Diener, E., Lucas, R., Schimmack, U. and Helliwell, J.F. (2009). Well-Being for Public Policy. New
York: Oxford University Press. http://global.oup.com/academic/product/well-being-for-public-policy-
9780195334074;jsessionid=3F247484E6746BCB41CEE1CBDEC592A4?cc=ca&lang=en&
Diener, E., Kahneman, D., Tov, W. and Arora, R. (2010). Income’s association with judgments of life
versus feelings, Chapter 1 of Diener, E., Helliwell, J.F. and Kahneman, D. (Eds.) International
Differences in Well-Being. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3-15.
http://global.oup.com/academic/product/international-differences-in-well-being-
9780199732739?cc=ca&lang=en&
Di Tella, R. and MacCullough, R. (2005). Partisan social happiness. Review of Economic Studies 72(2),
367-393. http://restud.oxfordjournals.org/content/72/2/367.short
Durand, M. and Smith, C. (2013). The OECD approach to measuring subjective well-being. In
Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 112-137.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Easterlin, R. (1974). Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical evidence. In.
David, P.A and Reder, M.W. (Eds.) Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of
Moses Abramovitz, New York: Academic Press, 89-125.
http://graphics8.nytimes.com/images/2008/04/16/business/Easterlin1974.pdf
Easterlin, R. and Sawangfa, O. (2010). Happiness and economic growth: Does the cross-section predict
time trends? Evidence from developing countries. Chapter 7 of Diener, E., Helliwell, J.F. and
Kahneman, D. (Eds.) International Differences in Well-Being. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 166-
216. http://global.oup.com/academic/product/international-differences-in-well-being-
9780199732739?cc=ca&lang=en&
Fehr, E. and Schmidt, K.M. (1999). A theory of fairness, competition and cooperation. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(3), 817-868. http://qje.oxfordjournals.org/content/114/3/817.full.pdf
Frey, B.S., and Stutzer, A. (2000). Happiness, economy and institutions. Economic Journal 110(466),
918-938. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=203211
Frey, B.S. and Stutzer, A. (2005). Beyond outcomes: Measuring procedural utility. Oxford Economic
Papers 57(1), 90-111. http://www.bsfrey.ch/articles/414_05.pdf
Hall, J. (2013). From capabilities to contentment: Testing the links between human development and
life satisfaction. In Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 138-
153. http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Hall, J. and Rickard, L. (2013). People, Progress and Participation: How Initiatives Measuring Social
Progress Yield Benefits beyond Better Metrics. Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Stiftung.
http://www.bertelsmann-stiftung.de/cps/rde/xbcr/SID-1D8562BC-
                                                   20
134DB382/bst_engl/xcms_bst_dms_37947_37948_2.pdf
Halpern, D. (2010). The Hidden Wealth of Nations. Cambridge: Polity.
www.polity.co.uk/book.asp?ref=9780745648019
Helliwell, J.F. (2003) How’s Life? Combining individual and national variables to explain subjective
well-being. Economic Modelling 20(2), 331-360. http://www.nber.org/papers/w9065
Helliwell, J.F., Barrington-Leigh, C.P., Harris, A. and Huang, H. (2010). International evidence on the
social context of well-being. Chapter 10 of Diener, E., Helliwell, J.F. and Kahneman D. (Eds.)
International differences in well-being. New York: Oxford University Press, 291-350.
http://global.oup.com/academic/product/international-differences-in-well-being-
9780199732739?cc=ca&lang=en&
Helliwell, J.F. and Huang, H. (2008). How’s your government? International evidence linking good
government and well-being. British Journal of Political Science 38, 595-619.
http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/jhelliwell/papers/Helliwell-Huang-BJPolS2008.pdf
Helliwell, J.F., Huang H. and Wang S. (2014). Social capital and well-being in times of crisis. Journal
of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 145-162. DOI: 10.1007/s10902-013-9441-z.
Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) (2012). World Happiness Report.
http://www.earth.columbia.edu/sitefiles/file/Sachs%20Writing/2012/World%20Happiness%20Report.p
df
Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) (2013). World Happiness Report 2013.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Helliwell, J.F. and Putnam, R.D. (2004). The Social context of well-being. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B 359(1449), 1435-1446. Reprinted in Huppert, F.A., Keverne, B. and Baylis N.
(Eds.) (2005). The Science of Well-Being. London: Oxford University Press, 435-459. DOI:
10.1098/rstb.2004.1
Helliwell, J.F. and Wang, S. (2011). Trust and wellbeing. International Journal of Wellbeing 1(1), 42-
78. http://www.internationaljournalofwellbeing.org/index.php/ijow/article/view/3/85
Helliwell, J.F. and Wang, S. (2012). The state of world happiness. In Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and
Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report, 10-57.
http://www.earth.columbia.edu/sitefiles/file/Sachs%20Writing/2012/World%20Happiness%20Report.p
df
Helliwell, J.F. and Wang, S. (2013). World happiness: Trends, explanations and distribution. In
Helliwell, J., Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 8-37.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Helliwell, J.F. and Wang, S. (2014). Weekends and subjective well-being. Social Indicators Research
116(2), 389-407. DOI: 10.1007/s11205-013-0306-y.
Helliwell, J.F., Huang, H., Grover, S. and Wang, S. (2014). Good governance and national well-being:
What are the linkages? OECD Working Papers on Public Governance No 25.
DOI:10.1787/5jxv9f651hvj-en
Iyenger, S. and Lepper, R. (2000). When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good
thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79(6), 995-1006.
http://www.columbia.edu/~ss957/articles/Choice_is_Demotivating.pdf
Kaufmann, D. and Kraay, A. and Mastruzzi, M. (2009). Governance matters VIII: Aggregate and
                                                   21
individual governance indicators, 1996-2008. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4978.
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1424591
Kaufmann, D. Montiorol-Garriga, J. and Recanatini, F. (2008). How does bribery affect public service
delivery? Micro evidence from service users and public officials in Peru. World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper No. 4492. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1088550

Kenny, C. (2005). Does development make you happy? Subjective wellbeing and economic growth in
developing countries. Social Indicators Research 73(2), 199-219. http://www.jstor.org/stable/27522221
Knack, S. (2001) Trust, associational life and economic performance. In Helliwell, J. and Bonikowska,
A. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being.
Ottawa and Paris: HRSDC and OECD, 172-202.
https://www.researchgate.net/search.SearchPublications.html?query=the+contribution+of+human+and
+social+capital+to+sustained+economic+growth+and+well-being
Krueger, A.B. (Eds.) (2009). Measuring the Subjective Well-Being of Nations: National Accounts of
Time Use and Well-Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo6683637.html
Langbein, L. and Knack, S. (2010). The worldwide governance indicators: six, one, or none? Journal of
Development Studies 46 (2) Feb.: 350-370.
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00220380902952399#.U1AlYuJnDZM
OECD (2011) How’s Life? Measuring Well-Being. Paris: OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264121164-en
OECD. (2013). OECD Guidelines on Measuring Subjective Well-being. OECD Publishing.
http://www.oecd.org/statistics/Guidelines%20on%20Measuring%20Subjective%20Well-being.pdf
Ott, J.C. (2010). Good governance and happiness in nations: Technical quality precedes democracy and
quality beats size. Journal of Happiness Studies 11(3), 353-368.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10902-009-9144-7
Ott, J.C. (2011). Government and happiness in 130 nations: Good governance fosters higher level and
more equality of happiness. Social Indicators Research 102(1), 3-22.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3068254/
Pacek, A. and Radcliff, B. (2008). Welfare policy and subjective well-being across nations: An
individual-level assessment. Social Indicators Research 89(1), 179-191.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs11205-007-9232-1
Putnam, R. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York:
Simon & Schuster. http://books.simonandschuster.com/Bowling-Alone/Robert-D-
Putnam/9780743203043
Radcliff, B. (2013). The Political Economy of Human Happiness: How Voters’ Choices Determine the
Quality of Life. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
http://www.cambridge.org/us/academic/subjects/politics-international-relations/political-
economy/political-economy-human-happiness-how-voters-choices-determine-quality-life
Rodríguez-Pose, A. and Maslauskaite, K. (2012). Can policy make us happier? Individual
characteristics, socio-economic factors and life satisfaction in Central and Eastern Europe. Cambridge
Journal of Regions, Economy and Society 5(1), 77-96.
http://cjres.oxfordjournals.org/content/5/1/77.full
                                                  22
Sachs, J. (2013). Restoring virtue ethics in the quest for happiness. In Helliwell, J.F., Layard, R. and
Sachs, J. (Eds.) World Happiness Report 2013, 80-95.
http://unsdsn.org/files/2013/09/WorldHappinessReport2013_online.pdf
Sacks, D. W., Stevenson, B., and Wolfers, J. (2012). The new stylized facts about income and
subjective well-being, Discussion Paper Series. Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit, No. 710.
http://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/69372/1/733999808.pdf
Sen, A. (2003). Sraffa, Wittgenstein, and Gramsci. Journal of Economic Literature 43(4), 1240-1255.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3217460
Sethi-Iyengar, S., Jiang, W. and Huberman, G. (2004) How much choice is too much? Contributions to
401(k) retirement plans. In Mitchell, O. and Utkus, S.P. (Eds.) Pension Design and Structure: Lessons
from Behavioral Finance. New York: Oxford University Press, 83-95. http://pe.uni-
bayreuth.de/file/material/8631d082-e546-11e0-afba-
003005831ff3/IyengarJiangHuberman2003_HowMuchChoice.pdf
Stiglitz, J., Sen, A. and Fitoussi, J.P. (2009). Report of the Commission on the Measurement of
Economic Performance and Social Progress. Commission on the Measurement of Economic
Performance and Social Progress. http://www.stiglitz-sen-fitoussi.fr/en/index.htm
Tomaney, J., Pike, A., Torrisi, G., Tselios, V. and Rodríguez-Pose, A. (2011) Decentralisation outcomes:
A review of evidence and analysis of international data. Department for Communities and Local
Government. https://blogs.ncl.ac.uk/curds/files/2013/02/DecentralisationReport.pdf
Verme, P. (2009) Happiness, freedom and control. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
71(20), 146-161. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1499652
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
http://ca.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1444307975.html




                                                    23
Data Sources, Summary Statistics and Regression
                   Tables


                                    October 2014


1     Data Sources
    • Subjective well-being (SWB): A country-year panel of average survey measures
      of SWB derived from the October-2013 release of the Gallup World Poll (GWP)
      for the survey years from 2005 to 2012. The SWB measure, unless stated
      otherwise, is the national average response to the question of life evaluations.
      The English wording of the question is “Please imagine a ladder, with steps
      numbered from 0 at the bottom to 10 at the top. The top of the ladder represents
      the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents the worst
      possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you personally
      feel you stand at this time?” This measure is referred to as Cantril life ladder, or
      just life ladder in our analysis. The Oct-2013 GWP release also has observations
      from the on-going 2013 survey. But those observations from the incomplete
      surveys are not used in the analysis.

    • Quality of governance – Source 1: A country-year panel of governance indicators
      from the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) project (Kaufmann, Kraay
      and Mastruzzi). According to the source, the WGI “are a research dataset
      summarizing the views on the quality of governance provided by a large number
      of enterprise, citizen and expert survey respondents in industrial and developing
      countries. These data are gathered from a number of survey institutes, think
      tanks, non-governmental organizations, international organizations, and private
      sector firms.” The WGI project provides data for 215 economies over the period
      1996 - 2012. For our analysis we use observations that overlap with our panel of
      subjective well-being. There are six dimensions of governance in the WGI: Voice
      and Accountability, Political Stability and Absence of Violence, Government
      Effectiveness, Regulatory Quality, Rule of Law, Control of Corruption. The
      indicators are on a scale roughly with mean zero and a standard deviation of 1.
      In places where we need to further reduce the number of dimensions, we use the
      simple average of the first two measures as an indicator of democratic quality,
      and the simple average of the other four measures as an indicator of delivery
      quality, following Helliwell and Huang (2008).
    • Quality of governance – Source 2: Gallup’s National institutions Index and its
      components from the 2005-2012 Gallup World Poll (October 2013 release). We
      use primarily WP139, confidence in the national government. According to
      Gallup’s Worldwide Research Methodology and Codebook (June 2013), “[t]he
      national institutions index reflects citizens’ confidence in key institutions promi-
      nent in a country’s leadership: the military, the judicial system, the national
      government, and the honesty of elections.” The index questions are “Do you
      have confidence in each of the following, or not? How about the military?
      (WP137)”, “Do you have confidence in each of the following, or not? How
      about the judicial system and courts? (WP138)”, “Do you have confidence in
      each of the following, or not? How about the national government? (WP139)”
      and “Do you have confidence in each of the following, or not? How about hon-
      esty of elections? (WP144)”. Our analysis uses primarily WP139, confidence
      in the national government.

    • GDP per capita in purchasing power parity (PPP) and constant 2005 dollars
      from the September 2013 release of the World Development Indicators (WDI).
      The GDP figures for Taiwan and Zimbabwe are from the Penn World Table 7.1.
      A small number of observations are missing in the September-2013 WDI release
      but were present in the April-2013 release. In such cases, we use the numbers
      from the earlier release.

    • Life Expectancy and Healthy Life Expectancy. We took the data used in the
      World Happiness Report (WHR) 2013. The statistics of healthy life expectancy
      at birth are from the World Health Organization (WHO), and are available for
      most countries in the year of 2007. But the data are not available for other years,
      and are missing for some countries. To impute the missing values, we obtain
      the data of non-health adjusted life expectancy at birth from the WDI that
      has very good availability in terms of time and country coverage. We compute
      the ratio of healthy life expectancy to life expectancy in 2007 for countries with
      both data, and assign countries with missing data the world average of the ratio.
      We then use the ratio, together with the non-health adjusted life expectancy,
      to generate the healthy life expectancy data.


2     Sample Coverage and Summary Statistics
First the sample coverage. We use country-year observations for which:

    • a) the average life ladder is available, and

    • b) no missing information in any of the six dimensions of governance indicators,
      and

    • c) GDP data is available.

Sample coverage:
    • A total of 836 country-year observations between 2005 and 2012.

    • 157 countries over the 2005-2012 period.

Regions: Some of the analysis includes dummy indicator for regions, namely Western
Europe, Central and Eastern Europe, Commonwealth of Independent States, South-
east Asia, South Asia, East Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, North America and
ANZ, Middle East and North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa.

              Table 1: Summary Statistics for Key Variables - 2005-2012 Pooled Sample
                          Variable                     Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max.            N
    Life Ladder                                         5.46      1.11      2.81   8.02   836
    Per-capita GDP                                     12978 13526.97 275.84 72650.87     836
    Democratic quality                                 -0.14       0.86    -2.24   1.53   836
    Delivery quality                                    0.01       0.96    -1.69    2.2   836
    Confidence in the national government               0.48       0.19     0.07   0.98   734
    Healthy life expectancy                            58.95      10.94    28.05  75.39   834
    Freedom to make life choices                        0.71      0.15      0.26   0.97   821
    Generosity - adjusted for GDP                         0       0.16     -0.33   0.54   792
    Social support                                      0.82       0.12     0.29   0.98   829
    Control of Corruption                              -0.05      1.02     -1.64   2.55   836
    Government Effectiveness                            0.04       0.98    -1.77   2.43   836
    Regulatory Quality                                   0.1      0.94     -2.16   1.98   836
    Rule of Law                                        -0.07        1      -1.96     2    836
    Voice and Accountability                           -0.06       0.95    -2.21   1.77   836
    Political Stability, Absence of Violence/Terrorism -0.22       0.93    -2.81    1.5   836




     Table 2: Summary Statistics: Changes from 2005-07 to 2010-2012 period
                  Variable                  Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max.                        N
delta Life Ladder                            0.07     0.43     -1.07 1.27                  130
delta Log Per-capita GDP                     0.09     0.12     -0.53 0.41                  126
delta Democratic quality                     -0.01    0.21     -0.85 0.70                  129
delta Delivery quality                        0.02    0.14     -0.43 0.66                  130
delta Confidence in the national government -0.01     0.13     -0.39 0.25                  117
delta Healthy life expectancy                 1.13    0.67     -2.86 4.04                  130
delta Freedom to make life choices             0      0.08      -0.2 0.24                  126
delta Generosity                             -0.02    0.09      -0.3  0.2                  124
delta Social support                         -0.01    0.06     -0.27 0.23                  129



3      Regression Tables
Table 3: Focusing on the Governance-Quality Measures based on Data from the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI)
Project

                                                  c1          c2           c3          c4          c5          c6         c7           c8         c9
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)        (9)
      Democratic quality                        0.007        0.01         -.02        -.02        -.04        -.09       0.13         0.1        0.06
                                                 (0.14)      (0.12)      (0.11)      (0.13)      (0.11)       (0.1)      (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.15)

      Delivery quality                           0.81        0.25        0.06        0.62        0.31        0.24        0.84        0.74        0.57
                                                (0.13)∗∗∗    (0.14)∗     (0.12)     (0.14)∗∗∗   (0.14)∗∗    (0.11)∗∗    (0.23)∗∗∗   (0.23)∗∗∗   (0.23)∗∗

      Logged GDP                                             0.52        0.33                    0.41        0.32                    0.65        0.84
                                                            (0.06)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗               (0.08)∗∗∗   (0.07)∗∗∗               (0.27)∗∗    (0.26)∗∗∗

      Healthy life expectancy                                            0.02                               0.005                                 -.06
                                                                        (0.007)∗∗                            (0.01)                              (0.05)

      Freedom to make life choices                                       1.16                                0.66                                0.95
                                                                        (0.34)∗∗∗                           (0.29)∗∗                            (0.23)∗∗∗

      Generosity                                                         0.96                                0.55                                0.25
                                                                        (0.26)∗∗∗                            (0.29)∗                             (0.19)

      Social support                                                     2.12                                1.97                                1.46
                                                                        (0.44)∗∗∗                           (0.39)∗∗∗                           (0.33)∗∗∗

      Central and Eastern Europe                                                      -.95        -.96        -.67
                                                                                    (0.19)∗∗∗   (0.18)∗∗∗   (0.18)∗∗∗

      Commonwealth of Independent States                                              -.50        -.48        -.33
                                                                                     (0.33)      (0.29)∗     (0.24)

      Southeast Asia                                                                  -.55        -.35        -.43
                                                                                    (0.22)∗∗     (0.22)     (0.17)∗∗∗

      South Asia                                                                      -.91        -.49        -.24
                                                                                    (0.29)∗∗∗    (0.31)      (0.45)

      East Asia                                                                       -.91        -.92        -.79
                                                                                    (0.2)∗∗∗    (0.19)∗∗∗   (0.23)∗∗∗

      Latin America and Caribbean                                                    0.23        0.25        0.24
                                                                                     (0.23)      (0.22)      (0.19)

      North America and ANZ                                                          0.29        0.34         0.2
                                                                                    (0.1)∗∗∗    (0.12)∗∗∗    (0.11)∗

      Middle East and North Africa                                                    -.41        -.49        -.30
                                                                                     (0.25)     (0.23)∗∗     (0.22)

      Sub-Saharan Africa                                                             -1.27        -.70        -.48
                                                                                    (0.23)∗∗∗   (0.25)∗∗∗     (0.3)

      Obs.                                       836         836         776         836         836          776         836        836          776
      No. of countries (clusters)                157         157         154         157         157          154         157        157          154
      R2                                         0.51        0.63        0.74        0.72        0.76         0.8         0.1        0.11         0.2

Notes: 1). Columns (1) to (3) show estimates from pooled regressions with year fixed effects but without regional or country fixed
effects. Columns (4) to (6) are from the same pooled regressions but with the addition of regional fixed effects. Columns (7) to (9) are
from panel regressions with country fixed effects, in addition to the year fixed effects that are present in all the 9 regressions. For the
last three columns, within country r-squared are reported. 2). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels. All standard errors are cluster-adjusted at the country level.
             Table 4: Comparing Countries With High Delivery Quality and Countries With Low Delivery Quality

                                      HighDelivery     LowDelivery    HighDelivery     LowDelivery    HighDelivery     LowDelivery
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
      Democratic quality                  0.52            0.05            0.52            0.02            0.68            -.06
                                          (0.28)∗          (0.2)          (0.27)∗          (0.22)         (0.28)∗∗         (0.17)

      Delivery quality                     0.84            0.81            0.6             0.79            0.33            0.61
                                          (0.34)∗∗        (0.32)∗∗        (0.34)∗         (0.32)∗∗         (0.37)          (0.3)∗∗

      Logged GDP                                                           0.94            0.31            0.89            0.88
                                                                          (0.53)∗          (0.39)          (0.48)∗        (0.36)∗∗

      Healthy life expectancy                                                                               -.09            -.03
                                                                                                           (0.05)∗         (0.09)

      Freedom to make life choices                                                                         0.79            0.96
                                                                                                           (0.4)∗∗        (0.3)∗∗∗

      Generosity                                                                                           0.74            0.04
                                                                                                          (0.27)∗∗∗        (0.25)

      Social support                                                                                       1.52            1.45
                                                                                                          (0.53)∗∗∗       (0.38)∗∗∗

      Obs.                                 336             500             336             500             303             473
      No. of countries (clusters)           62              95              62              95              61              93
      R2                                   0.15            0.1             0.17            0.11            0.23            0.21

Notes: 1) The sample is split by whether the measure of delivery quality for a country, averaged across all years in the full sample, is
greater or lower than zero. 2). All estimates are from panel regressions with country fixed effects and year fixed effects. Within country
r-squared are reported. 3). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1
percent levels. All standard errors are cluster-adjusted at the country level.
                    Table 5: Focusing on Gallup World Poll’s Measure of Confidence in National Government

                                                     c1              c2              c3              c4              c5              c6
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
Confidence in the national government               0.74            0.68            0.58            0.45            0.44            0.51
                                                   (0.16)∗∗∗       (0.15)∗∗∗      (0.15)∗∗∗       (0.17)∗∗∗        (0.18)∗∗       (0.17)∗∗∗

Logged GDP                                                          1.46            1.36            1.25            1.17            1.31
                                                                   (0.29)∗∗∗      (0.27)∗∗∗       (0.24)∗∗∗       (0.25)∗∗∗       (0.27)∗∗∗

Democratic quality                                                                  -.32            -.22
                                                                                   (0.1)∗∗∗        (0.1)∗∗

Delivery quality                                                                    0.78            0.59             0.5
                                                                                  (0.22)∗∗∗        (0.25)∗∗        (0.23)∗∗

Healthy life expectancy                                                                             -.07            -.07            -.08
                                                                                                    (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)

Freedom to make life choices                                                                        0.52            0.56            0.54
                                                                                                   (0.26)∗∗        (0.25)∗∗        (0.26)∗∗

Generosity                                                                                          0.22            0.23            0.26
                                                                                                    (0.2)           (0.21)          (0.22)

Social support                                                                                      1.67            1.69            1.73
                                                                                                  (0.35)∗∗∗       (0.36)∗∗∗       (0.37)∗∗∗

Obs.                                                734             734             734             696             696             696
No. of countries (clusters)                         147             147             147             146             146             146
R2                                                  0.11            0.16            0.19            0.24            0.24            0.23

Notes: 1). All estimates are from panel regressions with country fixed effects and year fixed effects. Within country r-squared are
reported. 2). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent
levels. All standard errors are cluster-adjusted at the country level.
Table 6: Alternative Specifications: Cross-sectional Regressions of Levels (Columns
1 and 2) and Cross-sectional Regression of Changes (Column 3)

                                                     c1              c2            c3
                                                    (1)             (2)           (3)
    Democratic quality                              -.02            -.11          -.03
                                                    (0.1)          (0.11)         (0.18)

    Delivery quality                                0.06           0.26           0.79
                                                    (0.12)        (0.12)∗∗       (0.32)∗∗

    Logged GDP                                      0.29           0.29           0.25
                                                  (0.08)∗∗∗       (0.07)∗∗∗       (0.3)

    Healthy life expectancy                         0.02          0.003           -.04
                                                  (0.007)∗∗∗       (0.009)        (0.05)

    Freedom to make life choices                    1.15            0.6           1.46
                                                   (0.4)∗∗∗        (0.39)       (0.46)∗∗∗

    Generosity                                      1.13           0.67           0.51
                                                  (0.33)∗∗∗       (0.33)∗∗        (0.38)

    Social support                                  2.49           2.25           2.07
                                                  (0.51)∗∗∗       (0.46)∗∗∗     (0.65)∗∗∗

    Central and Eastern Europe                                      -.69
                                                                  (0.19)∗∗∗

    Commonwealth of Independent States                              -.36
                                                                   (0.23)

    Southeast Asia                                                  -.55
                                                                  (0.23)∗∗

    South Asia                                                      -.31
                                                                   (0.28)

    East Asia                                                       -.77
                                                                  (0.21)∗∗∗

    Latin America and Caribbean                                     0.2
                                                                   (0.18)

    North America and ANZ                                          0.18
                                                                   (0.24)

    Middle East and North Africa                                    -.36
                                                                   (0.2)∗

    Sub-Saharan Africa                                              -.59
                                                                  (0.26)∗∗

    Obs.                                            154            154            122
    R2                                              0.8            0.86           0.27

Notes: 1). Columns (1) and (2) show estimates from cross-sectional regressions that use
observations that are the 2005-2012 averages at the country level. Column (3), on the
other hand, is cross-sectional regression of changes, specifically changes from the 2005-07
period to the 2010-12 period. 2). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels.
