                                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOMOPHILY, GROUP SIZE, AND THE DIFFUSION OF POLITICAL INFORMATION IN SOCIAL NETWORKS:
                               EVIDENCE FROM TWITTER

                                                  Yosh Halberstam
                                                   Brian Knight

                                                Working Paper 20681
                                        http://www.nber.org/papers/w20681


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           November 2014




       We are particularly indebted to Zack Hayat for getting this project off the ground and providing continual
       advice. We thank seminar participants at UC-Berkeley, CU-Boulder, Michigan State, Stanford, Toronto,
       the National University of Rosario, the Central Bank of Colombia and the 2014 Media and Communications
       Conference at Chicago-Booth. Ashwin Balamohan, Max Fowler, Kristopher Kivutha and Somang
       Nam jointly created the infrastructure to obtain the Twitter data used in this paper, and Michael Boutros
       helped design the MTurk surveys we used to analyze the content in tweets. Dylan Moore provided
       outstanding research assistance. Special thanks to Darko Gavrilovic, the IT consultant at Toronto,
       who facilitated the data work for this project, and Pooya Saadatpanah for providing computing support.
       We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
       of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
       of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2014 by Yosh Halberstam and Brian Knight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
       two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
       is given to the source.
Homophily, Group Size, and the Diffusion of Political Information in Social Networks: Evidence
from Twitter
Yosh Halberstam and Brian Knight
NBER Working Paper No. 20681
November 2014
JEL No. D7,D8

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we investigate political communications in social networks characterized both by homophily–
a tendency to associate with similar individuals–and group size. To generate testable hypotheses, we
develop a simple theory of information diffusion in social networks with homophily and two groups:
conservatives and liberals. The model predicts that, with homophily, members of the majority group
have more network connections and are exposed to more information than the minority group. We
also use the model to show that, with homophily and a tendency to produce like-minded information,
groups are disproportionately exposed to like-minded information and the information reaches like-minded
individuals more quickly than it reaches individuals of opposing ideologies. To test the hypotheses
of our model, we analyze nearly 500,000 communications during the 2012 US elections in a social
network of 2.2 million politically-engaged Twitter users. Consistent with the model, we find that members
of the majority group in each state-level network have more connections and are exposed to more
tweets than members of the minority group. Likewise, we find that groups are disproportionately exposed
to like-minded information and that information reaches like-minded users more quickly than users
of the opposing ideology.


Yosh Halberstam
Department of Economics
150 St. George Street
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7, Canada
yosh.halberstam@utoronto.ca

Brian Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Brian_Knight@brown.edu
1      Introduction
A long tradition of scholarship, starting with Black (1958), Downs (1957), and Becker (1958),
has highlighted the key role of providing voters with a significant degree of information that is
useful in the selection of high quality candidates and in the monitoring the behavior of politicians
once in office. Further, it is often argued that information is most valuable to voters when it comes
from different sources (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2008). Naturally, if information is highly correlated
across sources, then it will provide little value to voters. Taken together, these two points emphasize
the importance of providing voters with an ideologically diverse set of high-quality information for
a well-functioning democracy (Putnam et al., 1994).
    At the same time, a literature investigating relationships between individuals has documented
(a) a significant degree of homophily–a tendency to develop relationships with similar individuals–
and (b) the fact that members of larger groups tend to have more relationships than members of
smaller groups (Currarini et al., 2009; Marsden, 1987). To the extent that communication of polit-
ical opinions and beliefs occurs within these social networks, then it is natural to hypothesize that
members of larger groups will be exposed to more information than members of smaller groups.
Moreover, if different types of individuals have different opinions and beliefs, then individuals may
also be disproportionately exposed to like-minded information. For example, if conservatives tend
to associate with other conservatives and have relatively negative opinions about Democratic politi-
cians, then conservatives will be disproportionately exposed to negative opinions about Democratic
politicians.
    In this paper, we investigate the role of ideological homophily and group size in determining
exposure to information on social media. Use of social media has grown dramatically during the
past decade, with 60 percent of American adults and over 20 percent of the worldwide population
currently using social networking sites (Rainie et al., 2012).1 In terms of exposure to information
on social media, 19 percent of all American adults reported regularly using social media as a
source of news in 2012, a substantial increase from 2 percent just four years earlier. In addition to
using social media to gather information, Americans also use social media to produce and transmit
information. Indeed, new survey data released by the Pew Research Center show that half of social
network users share or repost news stories, images or videos, while nearly as many discuss news
issues or events on social network sites.2 In particular, two thirds of American social media users,
or 39 percent of all American adults, have engaged in some form of civic or political activity using
social media, and 22 percent of registered US voters used social media to let others know how they
    1 The  worldwide statistic comes from a June 18, 2013, report by eMarketer Inc. The link to the report is:
http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Networking-Reaches-Nearly-One-Four-Around-World/1009976
    2 For more details, see: Pew Research Center, March, 2014, “State of the News Media 2014: Overview”. The link

to this report is: http://www.journalism.org/packages/state-of-the-news-media-2014/


                                                       2
voted in the 2012 elections.
    Three key features distinguish social media from other forms of communication, including tra-
ditional media outlets and social interactions. First, social media allow users to not only consume
but to also produce information, whereas the supply of information in traditional media markets is
typically concentrated in the hands of a small number of outlets. Second, the information to which
users are exposed depends upon self-chosen links among users. That is, users may be exposed
to significantly different information depending on the set of individuals with whom they are con-
nected and the content created by this set of individuals. Third, information on social media travels
more rapidly and broadly than in other forms of social interactions. For example, a tweet from a
user on Twitter is simultaneously transmitted to all of that user’s followers, and each time one of
these followers retweets this tweet, another set of followers is exposed to the information.
    Given these differences between social media and other forms of communication and its grow-
ing role, we are motivated to examine how ideological homophily and group size influence the
degree of exposure individuals have to information and its partisan composition. To this end, we
develop a simple model of the diffusion of political information in a social network character-
ized by homophily and two groups: conservatives and liberals. The model predicts that, with
homophily, members of the majority group have more network connections and are exposed to
more information than the minority group. We also use the model to show that, with homophily
and a tendency to produce like-minded information, groups are disproportionately exposed to like-
minded information and information reaches like-minded individuals more quickly than it reaches
individuals of opposing ideology.
    We investigate these hypotheses using data from Twitter, one of the leading social media web-
sites. As the model makes clear, measuring exposure to information on social networks requires
data on both links between users and the content produced and transmitted by them. To measure
links on Twitter, we begin by selecting politically-engaged users, defined as users who followed at
least one account associated with a candidate for the US House during the 2012 election period.
Among this population of over 2.2 million users, we identified roughly 90 million links. Using
these links, we construct a single national network and 50 state subnetworks comprising users who
follow candidates from the same state. To infer the ideology of these users, we use the political
party of the candidates they follow. We also collected and analyzed nearly 500,000 retweets of
candidate tweets as well as tweets that mention candidates. By combining the data on links and
content, we are able to measure whether or not users are exposed to a given candidate tweet or
mention via these political networks. Further, using the time associated with these retweets and
the information on network connections, we measure the speed of information transmission.
    We find that patterns of homophily in the political networks are similar to those documented in
other social networks, such as the offline high-school friendship networks analyzed by Currarini


                                                 3
et al. (2009). We also find that that followers of the majority party have more connections than
followers of the minority party. As predicted by our model, we next show that members of larger
groups have more connections and are exposed to more tweets on a per-capita basis than mem-
bers of smaller groups. Turning to exposure to like-minded information, we first show that a key
condition of the model–production of like-minded information–is satisfied. Given this, we then
show that groups are indeed disproportionately exposed to like-minded tweets, and that retweets
of candidate tweets flow through the national network more quickly to like-minded users than to
users of opposing ideology.
    The paper proceeds as follows: After reviewing the relevant literature, we provide a simple
model that yields the key hypotheses for our empirical investigation. Section 4 describes the data,
Section 5 develops the empirical framework for measuring ideological homophily and ideological
segregation, Section 6 presents the empirical results on network structure, and Section 7 examines
communications within the network. Section 8 concludes, and discusses the implications of our
findings.


2    Literature Review
This paper contributes to the literatures on homophily and group size in social networks, communi-
cation in social networks, and the role of the media sector in political mobilization and ideological
segregation.
   The first literature has documented that pairs of individuals with common characteristics are
more likely to associate with one another than pairs of individuals with differing characteristics.
This empirical regularity has come to be known as homophily, and applies to many different in-
dividual characteristics, including racial identity, gender, age, religion, and education (McPherson
et al., 2001). Recent contributions focusing on group size and homophily include Currarini et al.
(2009), who develop a theoretical model of network formation in which homophily can arise from
both biases in preferences and biases in opportunities for meetings. They use their model to ex-
plain three empirical findings from analyses of friendship networks in high schools: larger groups
have a larger fraction of same-type links, larger groups have more per-capita links, and the most
extreme bias towards own-type relationships occurs for medium-sized groups. Marsden (1987)
investigates similar issues in the context of advice networks, also finding that members of larger
groups tend to have more connections. We build upon these studies by examining, in addition to
network connections, the role of group size and homophily in the diffusion of information, in terms
of both overall exposure and exposure to like-minded information.
    Our paper is also related to a literature that has examined communications within networks,
typically taking network structure as given. This literature is summarized in Jackson and Yariv

                                                 4
(2010). Most relevant to our research are two key papers on the role of homophily in communi-
cations. In particular, Golub and Jackson (2012) examine how network structure, and homophily
in particular, impacts the speed of learning. The authors show that, in a model with average-based
updating (DeGroot, 1974), homophily tends to slow convergence in beliefs across groups since
it increases interactions within groups but decreases interactions across groups. By contrast, in
a model of direct diffusion, homophily does not impact the speed of convergence since the aver-
age distance between individuals in the network is unaffected. Turning to exposure, in Jackson
and Lopez-Pintado (2013) the authors explore how homophily influences whether or not an idea
can spread throughout an entire network. Relative to these studies, our analysis combines the
role of homophily in exposure to information and the tendency for individuals to be exposed to
like-minded information.3
    Third, there is also evidence that communications within social networks, and social media
in particular, have real effects on offline behavior and collective action in particular. Most re-
cently, communications on social media have been shown to precipitate protests during the Arab
Spring (Acemoglu et al., 2014). Relatedly, previous research has shown that political mobiliza-
tion is weaker among minority groups (Oberholzer-Gee and Waldfogel, 2005). At the same time,
media outlets are less likely to cover issues for which demand among its consumer base is low
(Oberholzer-Gee and Waldfogel, 2009). As a result, it has been suggested that politicians are more
likely to target larger groups because the infrastructure for transmitting information to them has
already been created by the media. We offer a new possible explanation that is based on the na-
ture of interactions in social networks: political mobilization among minority groups is lower than
among majority groups because they are exposed to less information through social interactions,
independent of media markets.
    Finally, our study is related to a literature that investigates the role of the media sector in
ideological segregation.4 Campante and Hojman (2013), for example, provide evidence that the
introduction of television in the United States led to a decline in political polarization. In contrast,
some have argued that the Internet is detrimental to democracy because it allows citizens to isolate
    3 Although not examining homophily specifically, Lerman and Ghosh (2010) find that information spreads on Twit-

ter slower but farther compared to a social news site that is denser and more interconnected, suggesting a connection
between the flow of information and network structure.
    4 More generally, there is also a related literature in economics on media bias and voter exposure to partisan infor-

mation in the media. This literature has examined both the causes and consequences of media bias. Possible causes of
media bias include consumer preferences (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010) and media ownership (Durante and Knight,
2012). Studies on the consequences of media bias have tended to focus on voting outcomes. DellaVigna and Kaplan
(2007) document that the introduction of Fox News increased support for Republican candidates. George and Wald-
fogel (2003) document the impact of the entry of the New York Times on local political outcomes. Chiang and Knight
(2011) document that surprising newspaper endorsements (e.g., those for Republican candidates from left-leaning pa-
pers) are more influential than unsurprising endorsements. Enikolopov et al. (2011) show that access to a partisan
television station in Russia increased support for the party affiliated with the station.



                                                           5
themselves within “echo chambers”, groups that share similar views and experiences (Sunstein,
2001). In a challenge to this view, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) document that users of online
media (e.g., www.nytimes.com) are as segregated as users of traditional (i.e., offline) media and are
less segregated than face-to-face (offline) social networks.5 Our paper contributes to this literature
by examining the quickly growing role of social media in contributing to ideological segregation.


3      Theoretical Model
This section develops a theoretical model of network structure under homophily and the diffu-
sion of partisan information through this network. In particular, we consider the canonical Bass
model of the diffusion of information but with two groups, conservatives and liberals, and biased
interactions between these groups.


3.1        Network Structure
We first define the network and examine the role of homophily in terms of interactions. More for-
mally, suppose individuals can be partitioned into two types, or groups, conservatives and liberals
(t 2 {C, L}). Group sizes are given by wt such that wC + wL = 1, and, without loss of generality, as-
sume that conservatives are the majority group and that liberals are the minority group (wC 0.5).
    In any given period, two randomly-selected individuals of the same group interact with proba-
bility ps and two randomly-selected members of different groups interact with probability pd , and
it will be natural to assume a bias in these interaction probabilities (i.e. ps > pd ). Then, in any
given period, a typical member of group t will have ps wt same-type interactions and pd (1 wt )
different-type interactions. Then defining homophily for group t as the fraction of interactions with
same type individuals, we have that:

                                                         ps wt
                                           Ht =
                                                  ps wt + pd (1    wt )

    Note that this basic index does not account for the distribution of types in the populations.
Specifically, if conservatives dominate the population and links are formed at random, then liberals
would appear to be homophilous and conservatives would appear heterophilous. To address this
issue, the literature has also focused on relative homophily. In particular, if the majority group
has a higher degree of homophily, then the network is said to satisfy relative homophily. Also,
    5 Ina recent working paper, Flaxman et al. (2013) use data on the browsing histories of Internet Explorer users
to show that these individuals are more ideologically fragmented when they read articles, most of which are opinion
articles, returned by search engines or on social media than when they read descriptive news on online media.



                                                        6
inbreeding homophily for group t is satisfied when Ht > wt , and heterophily for group t is satisfied
when Ht < wt .
    Given all of this, we have the following result with respect to group size and network structure.
    Proposition 1: With biased interactions (ps > pd ), an increase in the size of group t increases
total network interactions for group t. Moreover, an increase in group size increases homophily for
group t and thus relative homophily is satisfied. Finally, inbreeding homophily is satisfied.
    To see the result regarding total interactions, note that total interactions are given by ps wt +
pd (1 wt ), which is increasing in wt so long as ps > pd . That is, since interactions are biased
towards the own-group, an increase in group size leads to more total interactions. To see the
result regarding homophily, note that an increase in group size increases same-type interactions
but deceases interactions with the other group, leading to an increase in homophily. Finally, one
can show that inbreeding homophily is satisfied when ps > pd .
    Using these results, the relationship between group size and homophily is presented in Figure
1a, under the assumption of biased interactions. As shown, homophily is increasing in group
size. Further, all groups experience inbreeding homophily as homophily is greater than baseline
homophily for all groups.


3.2   Homophily, Group Size and the Diffusion of Information
Given these results with respect to network structure, we next consider the role of homophily in
terms of how information flows through the network. We begin by considering the role of group
size in exposure to information and then extend the model to two types of information, liberal and
conservative, to examine the role of homophily in exposure to like-minded information.
    In terms of the production of information, we consider a case in which each individual pro-
duces information with probability e at time t = 0. Given our empirical application to the spread
of information via retweets through Twitter, we abstract from the subsequent production of infor-
mation after t = 0, coined the rate of innovation (p) in the original Bass model, and thus set p = 0
after t = 0.
    We then consider how this information, once produced, spreads through the network. In partic-
ular, following the Bass model, we assume that, conditional on an interaction, previously exposed
individuals transmit information to previously unexposed individuals with probability q. Following
the Bass model, we define Ftt as the fraction of group t exposed to information at time t. This is
then linked to the fraction exposed at time t 1 as follows:

                                    Ftt = Ftt   1
                                                    + (1   Ftt   1
                                                                     ) ftt

where, ftt is the hazard rate, or the probability of group t exposure at time t, conditional on not

                                                     7
being exposed at time t     1:

                ftt = qwt ps Ftt   1
                                       + q(1   wt )pd F t t 1   q2 wt (1   wt )ps pd Ftt   1 t 1
                                                                                            F t

where    t refers to the other group. In this expression, the first term represents the likelihood of
being exposed to the information via the own group, the second term represents the likelihood of
being exposed to the information via the other group, and the third term represents the likelihood
of being exposed by both groups.
    Then, we have the following result with respect to group size and exposure to information.
    Proposition 2: With biased interactions (ps > pd ), members of the majority group are exposed
to more information than the minority group. That is, FCt > FLt for all times t. In the absence of
biased interactions (ps > pd ), there will be no difference between majority and minority groups in
exposure to information. Further, in the absence of differences in group size (wC = 0.5), there will
be no group-level difference in exposure to information.
    While the proof is relegated to an appendix, we provide an overview of the basic intuition here.
In particular, in the first period, total exposure to information for group t is given by:

                                         Ft1 = wt ps e + (1     wt )pd e

   That is, a typical conservative is exposed to a fraction of other conservatives equal to wC ps
and to a fraction of liberals equal to (1 wC )pd . A similar logic applies to a typical liberal, and
a comparison of these two groups shows that FC1 > FL1 so long as wC > 0.5 and ps > pd . Having
shown that the majority has higher initial exposure, the proof follows by induction, demonstrating
that FCt 1 > FLt 1 implies that FCt > FLt .
    The logic behind Proposition 2 is presented in Figure 1b. As shown, when group sizes are
equal, the relationship between the fraction of group t exposed to the information at time t is the
same and is given by the solid line for both groups, conservatives and liberals. The shape of the
curve is identical to that in the standard Bass model, with an initial slow rise due to a small fraction
of the population being exposed to the information, and thus a small fraction able to transmit,
followed by a steep rise, and finally a tapering off as most of the population has already been
exposed. Increasing the size of the conservative group and reducing the size of the liberal group
leads to an upward shift in exposure for conservatives, due to the fact that they have more network
interactions, and a downward shift in exposure for liberals, due to the fact that they have fewer
network interactions. This leads to a disparity in exposure levels between the two groups for all
times t.




                                                        8
3.3       Homophily and Exposure to Like-Minded Information
In order to examine the role of homophily in exposure to information, we next extend the model to
allow for two types of information, conservative and liberal. Let Ltt and Ctt denote the fraction of
group t exposed to conservative and liberal information, respectively, at time t and, as above, ltt and
ctt represent the group t hazard rates for liberal and conservative information, respectively. In terms
of the production of information of two types, we consider a case in which each individual produces
like-minded information with probability es and produces opposing information with probability
ed at time t = 0.6 That is, conservatives produce conservative information with probability es and
liberal information with probability ed . To the extent that partisan information is disproportionately
produced by like-minded individuals, then it will be natural to assume that es > ed . Given the focus
on the overall role of homophily and our extension to two types of information, we simplify the
model by abstracting from majority and minority differences and focus on a special case of the
model with equally sized groups (wC = 0.5). Then, we have the following result.
    Proposition 3: With biased interactions (ps > pd ) and the production of like-minded informa-
tion (es > ed ), groups are disproportionately exposed to like-minded information. That is, CCt > LCt
and LLt > CLt for all times t. In the absence of either biased interactions or the production of
like-minded information, groups are equally likely to be exposed to both conservative and liberal
information at any point in time t.
   While the reader is referred to Appendix for a proof, we begin by showing that both groups are
exposed to like-minded information in the first period:

                               CC1    LC1 = LL1    CL1 = 0.5(ps       pd )(es    ed ) > 0

Given this, we also show that a tendency to associate with similar members tends to reinforce these
initial differences in exposure to like-minded information. If either ps = pd or es = ed , it is clear
that there will not be initial differences in exposure rates.
    Finally, we consider the implication of Proposition 3 for the speed of the transmission of infor-
mation through the network.
    Proposition 4: With biased interactions (ps > pd ) and the production of like-minded informa-
tion (es > ed ), average time to exposure is lower for like-minded information than for opposing
information.
    Since, as shown in Proposition 3, groups are more likely to be exposed to like-minded in-
   6 We  have also considered an extension in which individuals may be more likely to transmit like-minded informa-
tion at higher rates. That is, for the case of conservative information, it may be the case that transmission rates for
conservatives (qs ) exceed transmission rates for liberals (qd ). This will tend to reinforce homophily, in the sense that
own-type transmissions now occur with probability wt qs ps and different-type transmissions occur with probability
(1-wt )qd pd .


                                                            9
formation at any given time period, it then follows that average time to exposure to conservative
information will be lower for same-type information than for opposing information.
    To summarize, the model predicts that members of the majority group will have more network
interactions, will have higher homophily, and will be exposed to more information on a per-capita
basis. Extending the model to conservative and liberal information, we have that groups are dis-
proportionately exposed to like-minded information and receive like-minded information more
quickly than opposing information.


4      Data
To test these hypotheses, our study uses data from Twitter, an internet platform through which users
connect and communicate with each other. We describe below the data on the political network,
voter ideology, and political communications.


4.1     The Political Network
Our goal is to construct a network of politically engaged users of social media. Given this and
lacking a direct measure of the ideology of Twitter users, we focus on Twitter users who follow
politicians, defined here as candidates for the House of Representatives in 2012, and we use the
party affiliation of these politicians to infer the ideology of the Twitter user. In November 2012,
there were 825 candidates for the House, and we found 751 candidates with at least one Twitter
account for a total of 976 candidate accounts.7
    A comprehensive list of these candidate accounts was used to retrieve the set of Twitter users
who followed at least one of the accounts on the list. In particular, on November 5th, one day
before the 2012 election, we downloaded information on all 2.2 million Twitter users who followed
a House candidate (henceforth, voters). These voters comprise our sample of Twitter users.
    To construct the network, we use information on links among voters, and this process is de-
picted in Figure 2. In particular, we downloaded the list of followers of each of the 2.2 million
voters.8 Using these links, we construct a national network of politically-engaged Twitter users
and, in some specifications, state-level networks based upon the state associated with candidates.
    To provide a sense of the geographic distribution of these voters in the network, we examine
    7 Multipleaccounts are especially common among incumbents, with one account serving as the official account
and another serving as the campaign account. In addition, some politicians have personal accounts that are followed
by voters.
   8 Following is unlike friendship or connections on other social media sites because the connection is not necessarily

mutual. Except for protected accounts, users do not approve who follow them, and they do not need approval to follow
other individuals.



                                                          10
user-supplied locations, which are provided by roughly one-quarter of voters.9 Figure 3 plots
the percent of Twitter voters from a given user-supplied state against the state’s percent of US
population. Remarkably, all states line up near the 45 degree line except for California, which has
a lower share of voters relative to its share in the US population.10 This finding suggests that our
set of Twitter voters closely reflect the distribution of actual voters in the United States.


4.2     Voter Ideology
We further characterize voters as either liberal or conservative based upon the party affiliation of
the candidates that they follow, and this process is depicted in Figure 4. In particular, voters who
follow more Democratic than Republican candidate are coded as liberal, and voters that follow
more Republican than Democratic candidates are coded as conservative. Given our desire to focus
on two groups of voters, conservatives and liberals, we exclude voters who follow an equal number
of candidates from the two parties. Among liberals and conservatives, we further distinguish is
some specifications between extremists, voters who only follow candidates from one party, and
moderates, voters who follow candidates from both parties.
   To shed light on the validity of these measures of voter ideology and geography, we correlated
our measures with survey responses from the latest Gallup State of the States political survey. In
Figure 5a, we compare our estimate of the share of liberals in each state, using both the user-
supplied location and the inferred ideology measures, to the share of liberals in each state in the
Gallup survey. As shown, our estimates for the liberal share of voters in each state are positively
correlated with the Gallup measure, and most states line up close to the 45 degree line.
    As further evidence on our proxies for ideology, we have also downloaded information on
Twitter accounts associated with significant media outlets and computed the fraction of liberal
voters following each media outlet.11 Using this information, Figure 5b plots, for the 25 outlets
with the most followers in our sample of voters, the likelihood that a liberal voter follows a given
outlet, relative to the likelihood that a conservative voter follows the same outlet. As shown, media
outlets and programs traditionally considered to be right leaning, such as Rush Limbaugh, The
Hannity Show, and Fox News, have very low likelihood ratios. On the other hand, media outlets
and programs traditionally considered to be left-leaning, such as the New York Times and the
Rachel Maddow show, have a likelihood ratio in excess of one. These results are also broadly
    9 While these location entries vary in specificity and format, we have used a simple procedure for inferring a user’s

state from the information he or she supplies, with a focus on two letter postal codes or full state names.
   10 The point above the reference line accounting for nearly zero percent of US population is Washington D.C.
   11 In particular, we downloaded followers of Twitter accounts associated with significant network television outlets

and shows (as defined by journalism.org), significant cable television outlets and shows (as defined by journalism.org),
the top 10 newspapers in terms of national circulation (as defined by www.stateofthemedia.org), the top 10 talk radio
hosts in terms of the number of listeners (as defined by www.stateofthemedia.org), and the top six political blogs (as
defined by http://technorati.com/blogs/directory/politics/ (accessed September 19, 2012).


                                                          11
consistent with the measures of media bias developed by Groseclose and Milyo (2005), who find
the New York Times as one of the most left-leaning outlets and Fox News as one of the most right-
leaning. In summary, these results suggest that our measures of voter ideology are reasonable and
do capture some underlying measure of political preferences.
   Finally, there is also support at the individual level for the validity of our ideology measure.
Using information on voter registration history, Barberá (2013) matches a sample of voters from
Ohio, a state that requires party registration to vote in a primary election, to their Twitter accounts
and finds a strong correlation between party registration and the parties these voters follow on
Twitter.


4.3          Political Communications
To examine how partisan information flows through the network, we have collected information
on tweets associated with candidate accounts and retweets of these candidate tweets by voters.
We also collected information on mentions of candidates by voters. We focus on the candidate
tweets and mentions produced during a six-week window centered around the 2012 Election Day:
October 15 through November 28.
   During this time period, House candidates produced over 22,000 unique tweets, with roughly
64 percent coming from Republican accounts and 36 percent from accounts associated with Demo-
cratic candidates. These candidate tweets were retweeted over 167,000 times by over 70,000 dif-
ferent voters. For mentions, we have over 308,000 mentions of candidates by voters, with 74
percent mentioning Republicans and 26 percent mentioning Democrats.12
    Turning to the speed of information transmission, we calculate the time associated with a given
voter being exposed to a given candidate tweet, and time is normalized so that it equals zero for
the first retweet. Using these measures, the average time to exposure is 102 minutes.


5       Empirical Framework
Based upon these Twitter data, we use the network structure to develop measures of the degree of
homophily and ideological segregation. Then, using network structure and communications within
the network, we develop measures of the exposure of voters to information.
    12 For
        mentions of multiple candidates, we focus on the party with the most candidates mentioned and exclude cases
in which a mention focused on an equal number of candidates from the two parties.




                                                        12
5.1    Measures of Homophily in Social Networks
For measures of homophily, we follow Currarini et al. (2009). Let I be the total number of voters
and It be the total number of type t voters. With two groups, conservatives and liberals, we have
that I = IC + IL . Then, wt = IIt is the fraction of type t in the voter population. Let vit denote the
number of type t voters followed by voter i. Then st = I1t Âi2It vit denotes the average number of
type t voters followed by type t voters (same) and dt = I1t Âi2It vi t denotes the average number of
non-type t voters followed by type t voters (different). With these in hand, we can then define the
homophily index for type t voters is as follows:

                                                        st
                                             Ht =            .
                                                     st + dt

This index measures the proportion of type t connections that are with voters of the same type t. We
then compare this to baseline homophily (Ht = wt ), which occurs under the assumption of random
links between voters. To examine the relationship between group size and overall connections, we
will also use the measure of connections per capita, st + dt , for group t.


5.2    Measuring Ideological Segregation
For comparison with existing measures of ideological isolation in different settings, we also com-
pute the isolation index following Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). This measure has been developed
by White (1986) and Cutler et al. (1999), and widely applied to study ethnic and urban segregation.
    For each voter j 2 J, let v jC denote the number of conservative followers and v jL the number
of liberal followers. We can then define the share conservative of voter j as the fraction of his or
her followers who are conservative:

                                                                     v jC
                                  share conservative j =                     .
                                                                 v jC + v jL

We can then define conservative exposure for each voter i as follows:

                                                 1
                 conservative exposurei =
                                             Â j2J fi j
                                                          Â fi j ⇥ share conservative j ,
                                                          j2J


where fi j 2 {0, 1} as an indicator equal to one if voter i follows voter j. Taking averages across vot-
ers within groups, we then have conservative exposure for conservatives and conservative exposure
among liberals. With these in hand, the isolation index is given by:

                  isolation = conservative exposureC             conservative exposureL ,


                                                    13
where conservative exposuret = I1t Âi2It conservative exposurei .
    This index varies between 0 and 1 and captures the degree to which conservatives, relative
to liberals, have a greater tendency to follow voters whose other followers are conservative. As
the index increases, both groups become increasingly isolated from each other, as measured by a
shrinking share of voters who have both conservative and liberal followers.
    Comparing these two measures, homophily captures within-group attributes, while segregation
measures captures cross-group attributes. That is, homophily captures the tendency of voters to
link to voters with the same ideology. Segregation captures the degree to which voters of different
types have distinct patterns of exposure, in terms of the set of voters they follow. The more these
sets of followers are distinct from one another, the more isolated are the voter types from each
other.


5.3      Measuring Exposure to Information
We next develop measures of exposure to like-minded information and isolation in exposure to
information. Let eis denote the total number of same-type tweets (or mentions) to which voter i is
exposed. Then ets = I1t Âi2It eis denotes the average number of same-type tweets to which voters
of type t are exposed (same) and etd = I1t Âi2It eid the average number of different-type tweets to
which they are exposed (different). We next define the exposure index paralleling the homophily
index. In particular, the exposure index for type t voters is as follows:

                                                         ets
                                              Et =             .
                                                     ets + etd

For comparison purposes, we next define baseline exposure as follows:

                                                    Âi2I eit
                                       et =
                                              Âi2I eit + Âi2I ei   t

This is equal to the share of type t tweets to which all voters are exposed.
                                                                       es
    Recall that, in the absence of homophily, the production shares es +e d
                                                                            determine the composition
of partisan exposure, which is group invariant. We approximate these shares using our baseline
measure, et . Thus, if Et > et then this would be evidence that homophily plays a role in partisan
exposure. The larger the exposure index is relative to baseline exposure, the greater the bias in
exposure to same-type information due to homophily. Finally, to measure the relationship between
group size and total exposure to information, we will use the measure of tweets per capita, ets + etd ,
for group t.




                                                     14
6     Results on Network Structure
Using the data described in Section 4 and the measures developed in Section 5, we next present
our results on network structure. We begin by describing our results on homophily and segregation
at the national level before turning to results at the candidate state level.


6.1   National Political Network
In Table 1, we first display the ideological composition of voter followees as a function of the
ideology of the voter. While liberals account for 36 percent of voters, 67 percent of their followees
are liberal, with just 33 percent conservative. Likewise, conservative voters make up 64 percent of
the sample, and 80 percent of their followees are also conservative, with just 20 percent liberal.
    Using these measures, Table 2 provides estimates of homophily at the national level. The
shares of each group in the population are identical to those in Table 1. As shown in the first row,
69 percent of followees of liberals are also liberal. This follows from Table 1, which shows that
liberals have 40 same-type links and 59 combined links, both on a per-capita basis. For conser-
vatives, homophily equals 84 percent, as they have, on average, 58 links to conservatives out of
68 links across both conservatives and liberals. Relative homophily thus holds since homophily is
higher for the larger group, conservatives in this case. Likewise, inbreeding homophily is satisfied
for both groups since the homophily index, as shown in the final column, exceeds the population
share for both groups.
   We next examine how isolation in our network compares to that in other settings, including
face-to-face social interaction and traditional media outlets. In the final three columns of Table
2, we report conservative exposure estimates for liberals and conservatives at the national level.
As shown, conservative exposure among conservatives is 0.776, and conservative exposure among
liberals is 0.372, implying an isolation index of 0.403.
    Note that this result differs from those in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), who find that the
internet is surprising unsegregated along ideological lines, with a baseline estimate of segregation
equal to 0.075. While their estimate of ideological segregation on the internet is close to their
estimated ideological segregation for traditional media outlets, our estimated segregation places
social media on par with those associated with face-to-face interactions with political discussants,
the second most segregated environment studied in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011).
    To attempt to reconcile these two sets of findings, high segregation when examining links
on Twitter and low segregation when examining consumption of news on the internet, we next
examine two differences between these studies. First, it is plausible that our sample, constructed
by selecting users who follow politicians, may tend to disproportionately include individuals with
strong preferences for linking to like-minded users. To investigate this issue, we split our sample

                                                 15
of voters into extremists, those who follow candidates from only one party, and moderates, those
who follow both parties. As shown in Table 2, and consistent with the view that extremists have
stronger preferences for linking to like-minded users, we find that both homophily and segregation
are higher for extremists than for moderates. Second, we use information on the followers of our
sample of media outlets described above to compute segregation in media consumption on Twitter.
Note that this measure does not use any information on links between voters, and, instead, we treat
users as if they are only consuming information from media outlets on Twitter. As shown in Table
3, isolation in media consumption (0.241) for our sample of voters is significantly higher than
the measures in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) but is significantly lower than our network-based
measure of isolation, which equals 0.394 in this subsample of voters. Thus, these same Twitter
users experience lower segregation when consuming news from media outlets on Twitter than
when using Twitter as a social network. Finally, we combine these two approaches by computing
isolation in media consumption for moderates. As shown, segregation in media consumption for
moderates equals 0.067, which is on par with the measure in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). Taken
together, these results suggest that the differences in results between these two studies may be
driven by differences between both the activities and types of individuals under consideration.


6.2   State Political Networks
Moving next to sub-networks at the state level, we investigate several characteristics of the po-
litical network we have constructed. In particular, using our state-level homophily estimates, we
investigate whether our data support the predictions in Proposition 1. In particular, we investigate
whether: (a) larger groups form a larger share of their friendships with people of their own type,
(b) groups inbreed and (c) larger groups form more friendships per capita.
    Using variation in group size across candidate states, Figure 6a plots the homophily index for
each type against their share in the population. Each point in this figure is an ideological group
at the state level. As shown, almost all observations lie above the 45 degree line, implying that
inbreeding homophily is satisfied. Thus, our results support the prediction that groups inbreed.
Also, consistent with the prediction of the model, homophily is broadly increasing in group size.
We have also verified that, in every state, homophily is larger for the majority group; thus relative
homophily is also satisfied. Again using state-level variation, Figure 6b presents scatter plots of
followees per capita for each group against the group’s share in the population. The linear fit is
presented as well to show the general trend. As shown, a move from 0 to 1 in the share of the
population increases the number of followees per capita from about 40 to 60. Thus, our data are
also consistent with the prediction that larger groups have more followees per capita.




                                                 16
7     Results on Network Communications
Having documented evidence of network structure consistent with the model and the existing liter-
ature on homophily, we next examine how information flows through this political network. That
is, as a result and homophily in the network, do members of larger groups receive more informa-
tion, are voters disproportionately exposed to like-minded content, and, conditional on exposure,
does political content reach like-minded voters more quickly?


7.1   Production of Information
Before turning to exposure to information, we first examine the degree to which users dispro-
portionately produce like-minded information, a key condition in the model for exposure to like-
minded information. As shown in Table 4, there is strong correlation between voter ideology and
candidate party in the production of retweets. In particular, 91 percent of retweets of tweets by
Democratic candidates are produced by liberal voters, and almost 99 percent of retweets of tweets
by Republicans candidates are produced by conservative voters. While this may reflect a preference
for producing like-minded information, it may also reflect the transmission mechanism, through
which voters retweeted the tweet after being exposed via another voter. That is, due to homophily,
it may be that liberal voters are disproportionately exposed to tweets from Democratic candidates
via other liberal voters and likewise for conservative voters and Republican candidates. To address
this issue, we next focus on the first retweet of a candidate tweet by a voter in our network. In
this case, voters could not have been previously exposed to the tweet via another voter. As shown,
a strong correlation between voter ideology and candidate party remains in the production of first
retweets, with 86 of retweets of tweets by Democratic candidates produced by liberal voters, and
almost 98 percent of retweets of tweets by Republicans candidates produced by conservative vot-
ers. Finally, we examine the production of mentions, and, as shown, 66 of retweets of mentions of
Democratic candidates are produced by liberal voters, and 77 percent of mentions of Republicans
tweets are produced by conservative voters. One possible difference between retweets of candi-
date tweets and candidate mentions involves sentiment. In particular, since candidates control the
sentiment of tweets but voters control the sentiment of mentions, it is possible that some mentions
of Democrats by conservative voters have negative sentiment and hence can be considered to have
conservative content and likewise for mentions of Republicans by liberal voters. We return to this
issue of sentiment later in this section.




                                                17
7.2    Communications in the National Political Network
Having established that production of information is like-minded in nature, we next present our
measures of exposure to like-minded information in terms of tweet exposure, retweet exposure,
and exposure to mentions, all at the national level. In particular, we develop analogues to our
homophily measures based upon the exposure to tweets and retweets from like-minded sources
(i.e conservative voters and Republican candidates and liberal voters and Democratic candidates).
As shown in Table 5, among voters exposed to at least one tweet, liberal voters are exposed to
around 58 tweets on average, and 52 of those, or roughly 90 percent, originate from Democratic
accounts. Likewise, exposure to like-minded information for conservative voters is also 90 percent,
with 63 out of 70 tweets originating from Republican accounts. Were voters exposed randomly to
tweets, liberal voters would have a like-minded exposure index of 48 percent, and conservatives
would have a like-minded exposure index of 51 percent. Note also that these exposure measures
of 90 percent are even larger than those in Table 2, which are based upon links between voters,
suggesting that communication serves to amplify an already significant degree of homophily in the
network structure.
    We next turn to exposure to like-minded information based upon retweets, which account for
multiple exposures to the same candidate tweet. Given that the Twitter interface separately identi-
fies all of the retweeters of a single tweet, it is natural that a candidate tweet may be more influential
when a voter is exposed to retweets from multiple accounts. As shown in Table 5, exposure to like-
minded information is even larger (92 percent for liberal voters and 93 percent for conservative vot-
ers) when measured using exposure to retweets. Were voters exposed randomly to retweets, liberal
voters would have an index of exposure to like-minded information of 31 percent and conservative
voters would have an index of 69 percent. Comparing the index based upon the tweets to the index
based upon retweets, the measures based upon retweets are somewhat larger. This is presumably
due to the fact that, conditional on being exposed to a tweet, the number of retweet exposures
is higher for tweets from like-minded sources (i.e. liberal voters and Democratic candidates and
conservative voters and Republican candidates).
    Results using data from candidate mentions are provided at the bottom of Table 5. As shown,
among exposure to mentions for liberal voters, 39 percent are mentions of Democratic candidates,
and, among exposure to mentions for conservative voters, 84 percent are mentions of Republican
candidates. While these results are also consistent with voters being exposed to like-minded in-
formation, the patterns are less strong than those regarding candidate tweets and retweets. One
natural explanation for this difference, as noted above, is that the production of mentions is less
like-minded in nature than the production of tweets and retweets.
    Finally, we consider measures of speed, or time to exposure, in the flow of information through
the network at the national level. In particular, the model predicts that information may reach like-

                                                   18
minded users more quickly. As noted above, we measure speed as, conditional on exposure, the
number of minutes that it takes for a voter to be exposed to a tweet, where the time associated with
the first retweet is normalized to zero, and the unit of observation in this analysis is the at the level
of the candidate tweet and exposed voter. To test this hypothesis, we first run a linear regression
with minutes to voter exposure to a given candidate tweet as the dependent variable. In this regres-
sion, we control for a set of tweet fixed effects, which incorporates candidate party, an indicator
for liberal voters, and an indicator for a mismatch between voter ideology and candidate party (i.e.
indicating either a Republican candidate tweet and a liberal voter or a Democratic candidate tweet
and a conservative voter). As shown in Table 6, liberal voters are exposed to tweets more slowly
than conservative voters on average and, more interestingly, a mismatch between voter ideology
and candidate party is associated with an increase in time to exposure of almost 10 minutes, rep-
resenting a roughly 10 percent increase when compared to the sample average of 102 minutes. To
provide results in percentage terms, we next run a similar regression but with the natural log of
minutes as the dependent variable.13 As shown, a mismatch between voter ideology and candidate
party is associated with a 14 percent increase in time to exposure. Finally, we estimate a Cox
survival model, again with candidate tweet fixed effects. As shown, a mismatch between voter ide-
ology and candidate party is associated with a decrease in the likelihood of exposure, conditional
on not being previously exposed, in any given time period. Note that a decrease in the likelihood
of exposure is associated with an increase in expected time to exposure, and thus the results are
consistent with those using linear regressions. In summary, and consistent with the predictions
of the theoretical model, this section provides evidence that, in social networks characterized by
homophily and the production of like-minded information, users are exposed to like-minded infor-
mation more quickly than they are exposed to information of opposing ideology.


7.3       Communications in the State Political Networks
Turning to political communications within state-level networks, we present our findings on the
role of group size in overall exposure to information on a per-capita basis and exposure to like-
minded information. In the former, we investigate whether group size influences how much in-
formation voters obtain. That is, given that members of larger groups have more connections per
capita, do these members of larger groups also receive more information on a per-capita basis? In
the latter, we examine whether our findings on ideological homophily in connections extend to the
ideological composition of communications to which voters are exposed.
    In Figure 7, we investigate how exposure to total information varies with group size. In panel
a), we show the relationship between per-capita retweets and group size, and, in panel b), the
  13 In
      this specification, we add one minute to all times in order to address the issue of immediate exposure, or zero
minutes.


                                                         19
relationship between per-capita mentions and group size. Consistent with the model, exposure to
information, in terms of both retweets and mentions, increases with group size. For example, a
one standard deviation increase in group size is associated with a 10 percent increase in exposure
to retweets and 19 percent increase in exposure to mentions.
    The measure of exposure to like-minded information is similar to the one used at the national
level. We examine communications within a state network using data on tweets produced and re-
ceived by voters in the state network. For the liberal group, for example, exposure is measured
by the share of retweets received that originate from (or mention) Democratic candidate accounts.
Baseline exposure is then defined as exposure for a voter that is randomly exposed to tweets pro-
duced in his state network. We illustrate the connection between exposure to like-minded informa-
tion and this baseline measure in Figure 8. In panel a), we show this relationship using retweets.
As shown, in all states, and for both conservative and liberal voters, exposure to like-minded infor-
mation exceeds baseline exposure. A second notable pattern is the positive relationship between
exposure to like-minded information and baseline exposure. In particular, increasing the produc-
tion of like-minded information results in higher exposure to like-minded information, as predicted
by the model. This relationship is analogous to the relationship between H and w, and we find that
relative exposure holds in the same sense that relative homophily holds. In panel b), we plot the
same relationship using mentions data. We find that exposure to like-minded mentions increases
in their share produced and exceeds baseline exposure. Yet, unlike retweets, exposure to mentions
is significantly less biased towards like-minded information. It is tempting to interpret the differ-
ence between mentions and retweets as resulting from a more limited effect of homophily on the
production rather than transmission of information. However, production bias in mentions is also
narrower that in retweets, suggesting that other differences between mentions and retweets may
driving the wedge in the exposure index.
    Finally, in Figure 9, we examine the relationship between group size and the ratio between
exposure and homophily (E/H). Focusing on retweets, we first note that the ratio E/H is strictly
decreasing in group size. In other words, a marginal increase in group size has a diminishing
effect on voter exposure to like-minded information relative to same-type connections. The trend
for mentions is similar but less pronounced than for retweets. In general, rates of homophily and
exposure to like-minded information are highly correlated as implied by the narrow range of values
that E/H takes around one, and this is particularly true for retweets.
    To summarize, our results suggest that group size influences both the degree and type of com-
munications within social networks characterized by homophily. Importantly, majority and minor-
ity group members have distinct patterns of interactions and communications. The majority is more
homophilous and has higher exposure to information in general and to like-minded information in
particular.


                                                 20
7.4       Content Analysis
In this section we examine heterogeneity in our data on communications according to the content
of the tweet. For retweets of candidate tweets, we distinguish between political and non-political
information and investigate whether the patterns of exposure to like-minded information and the
speed of diffusion differs between these two types of information. For mentions, we investigate
differences between positive mentions of candidates and negative mentions since, as noted above,
it is natural that mentions by conservative voters, for example, of Republican candidates might tend
to be positive and mentions of Democratic candidates might tend to be negative. We categorized
the full set of candidate tweets and, given the large sample, a 10% random sample of candidate
mentions.14
    Starting with the production of information, we find some evidence in Table 7 that production
of political information tends to be more like-minded than the production of non-political infor-
mation, although some of the differences are small in magnitude. In particular, while liberal voters
account for over 92 percent of retweets of political tweets by Democratic candidates, they account
for less than 85 percent of retweets of non-political tweets. Differences for retweets of tweets
by Republican candidates are small, with conservative voters accounting for almost 99 percent
of political information and 98 percent of non-political information. Turning to mentions, we do
find significant differences in the like-minded production of mentions depending upon whether the
mention was positive or negative. For example, while liberal voters are responsible for a majority
of positive mentions of Democratic candidates, conservative voters are responsible for a majority
of negative mentions.
    In Table 8, we next investigate whether these differences in production translate into differences
in exposure. In panel a), we do find that exposure to like-minded information is higher for political
tweets than for non-political tweets. In terms of magnitudes, however, the differences between
political and non-political retweets are relatively small. The fact that differences are small is not
surprising given, as noted above, that differences between political and non-political production of
retweets is relatively small.
    Turning to mentions, as shown in panel b), we find significant differences in homophily and
segregation between positive and negative sentiment, with high exposure to like-minded infor-
mation for positive sentiment mentions and low exposure for negative sentiment mentions. This
is consistent with the fact, as documented in Table 8, that the production of mentions is more
like-minded in nature for positive mentions, whereas, for negative mentions, voter ideology and
  14 To  classify candidate tweets, we designed two surveys on MTurk that asked workers to categorize our sample.
The workers were asked to choose one of three responses to each tweet that we presented, where indifference was the
third category. In the survey aimed to distinguish between political and non-political retweets we asked “Is the content
of this tweet related to politics?”. Each retweet was rated by two separate workers and the ratings are correlated at
0.683. In the survey on sentiment for mentions we asked “What is the sentiment expressed in this tweet?”.


                                                          21
candidate party are less correlated.
    Finally, in Table 9, we present regression results analogous to those we presented earlier on
the speed of information diffusion. As documented above, the production of political retweets is
somewhat more like-minded in nature than the production of non-political retweets. Given this,
we investigate whether political tweets reach like-minded users more quickly than non-political
tweets. To do so, we estimate augmented versions of the previously-discussed regression models
with time to exposure as the dependent variable and also estimate Cox survival models. Most
importantly, we now allow the coefficient on mismatch between candidate party and voter ideology
to vary depending upon whether the tweet is political or non-political in nature. As shown, in all
three specifications, we find that non-political tweets do reach like-minded users more quickly but
that the difference in time to exposure is larger for political tweets. That is, non-political tweets
reach like-minded users 7 minutes faster and political tweets reach like-minded users almost 11
minutes faster, a difference of roughly 4 minutes, and this difference is statistically significant at
conventional levels.


8    Conclusion
While scholars have long argued that voters should have access to high quality information from
a diverse set of sources, a separate literature has documented a tendency towards homophily, a
preference for associating with like-minded individuals. While it has previously been established
that groups tend to inbreed and that members of large groups have more network connections, we
investigate the role of these patterns in the context of exposure to information.
     In particular, we begin by developing a model in which larger groups are exposed to more in-
formation and all groups are disproportionately exposed to like-minded information. To test these
hypotheses, we use data from a large network of politically engaged Twitter users. Using informa-
tion on links between voters within this network, we find strong evidence of inbreeding homophily,
within group associations that are disproportionate to group size. We also find that members of
larger groups have more connections on a per-capita basis. Taking the network structure as given,
we then examine the flow of information through the network. Consistent with larger groups having
more network connections, we find that larger groups are exposed to more information. Also, con-
sistent with inbreeding homophily, we find that voters of all groups are disproportionately exposed
to like-minded information. Finally, we present evidence suggesting that, conditional on exposure,
information reaches like-minded users more quickly. Taken together, these results suggest that so-
cial networks in general, and social media in particular, may be a force for increasing differences
in exposure to information between majority and minority groups and may also increase exposure
to like-minded information for all groups.

                                                 22
References
Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and A. Tahoun (2014). The power of the street: Evidence from
  egypt’s arab spring. Working paper.

Barberá, P. (2013). Birds of the same feather tweet together. bayesian ideal point estimation using
  twitter data. Proceedings of the Social Media and Political Participation, Florence, Italy, 10–11.

Becker, G. S. (1958). Competition and democracy. Journal of Law & Economics 1, 105.

Black, D. (1958). The theory of committees and elections. Cambridge: Cambridge University
  Press.

Campante, F. R. and D. A. Hojman (2013). Media and polarization: Evidence from the introduction
  of broadcast tv in the united states. Journal of Public Economics.

Chiang, C.-F. and B. Knight (2011). Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper endorse-
  ments. The Review of Economic Studies 78(3), 795–820.

Currarini, S., M. O. Jackson, and P. Pin (2009). An economic model of friendship: Homophily,
  minorities, and segregation. Econometrica 77(4), 1003–1045.

Cutler, D. M., E. L. Glaeser, and J. L. Vigdor (1999). The rise and decline of the american ghetto.
  Journal of Political Economy 107(3), 455–506.

DeGroot, M. H. (1974). Reaching a consensus. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
  tion 69(345), 118–121.

DellaVigna, S. and E. Kaplan (2007). The fox news effect: Media bias and voting. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 122(3), 1187–1234.

Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of democracy.

Durante, R. and B. Knight (2012). Partisan control, media bias, and viewer responses: Evidence
  from berlusconi’s italy. Journal of the European Economic Association 10(3), 451–481.

Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova, and E. Zhuravskaya (2011). Media and political persuasion: Evidence
  from russia. The American Economic Review 101(7), 3253–3285.



                                                23
Flaxman, S., S. Goel, and J. M. Rao (2013). Ideological segregation and the effects of social media
  on news consumption. Available at SSRN.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2008). Competition and truth in the market for news. The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 22(2), 133–154.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010). What drives media slant? evidence from us daily news-
  papers. Econometrica 78(1), 35–71.

Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2011). Ideological segregation online and offline. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 126(4), 1799–1839.

George, L. and J. Waldfogel (2003). Who affects whom in daily newspaper markets? Journal of
  Political Economy 111(4), 765–784.

Golub, B. and M. O. Jackson (2012). How homophily affects the speed of learning and best-
  response dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3), 1287–1338.

Groseclose, T. and J. Milyo (2005). A measure of media bias. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 120(4), 1191–1237.

Jackson, M. O. and D. Lopez-Pintado (2013). Diffusion and contagion in networks with heteroge-
  neous agents and homophily. Network Science 1(01), 49–67.

Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2010). Diffusion, strategic interaction, and social structure. Handbook
  of Social Economics, edited by J. Benhabib, A. Bisin and M. Jackson.

Lerman, K. and R. Ghosh (2010). Information contagion: An empirical study of the spread of
  news on digg and twitter social networks. ICWSM 10, 90–97.

Marsden, P. V. (1987). Core discussion networks of americans. American sociological review,
 122–131.

McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
 networks. Annual review of sociology, 415–444.

Oberholzer-Gee, F. and J. Waldfogel (2005). Strength in numbers: Group size and political mobi-
  lization*. Journal of Law and Economics 48(1), 73–91.

Oberholzer-Gee, F. and J. Waldfogel (2009). Media markets and localism: Does local news en
  español boost hispanic voter turnout? The American Economic Review, 2120–2128.



                                                24
Putnam, R. D., R. Leonardi, and R. Y. Nanetti (1994). Making democracy work: Civic traditions
  in modern Italy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton university press.

Rainie, L., A. Smith, K. L. Schlozman, H. Brady, and S. Verba (2012, October 19). Social media
  and political engagement. Pew Internet & American Life Project.

Sunstein, C. (2001). Republic.com. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

White, M. J. (1986). Segregation and diversity measures in population distribution. Population
 index, 198–221.




                                               25
A     Appendix (Not for Publication)
Proof of Proposition 2: We have shown in the text that FC1 > FL1 , and we now show that FCt                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                          >
FLt 1 implies that FCt > FLt . Note first that:

                              FCt         FLt = FCt        1
                                                                    FLt       1
                                                                                  + (1            FCt    1
                                                                                                             ) fCt     (1         FLt     1
                                                                                                                                              ) fLt

which can be re-written as:

    FCt     FLt = FCt      1
                                    FLt    1
                                                + [(1       FLt       1
                                                                          )       (FCt       1
                                                                                                       FLt    1
                                                                                                                  )][ fLt + ( fCt            fLt )]       (1    FLt       1
                                                                                                                                                                              ) fLt

expanding the terms in brackets and re-arranging, we have that:

                              FCt     FLt = (FCt           1
                                                                     FLt      1
                                                                                  )(1            fLt ) + [1          FCt    1
                                                                                                                                ]( fCt           fLt )

Thus, FCt         FLt is positive if fCt              fLt is positive. This latter difference can be written as:



            fCt     fLt = qwC ps FCt                  1
                                                          + q(1            wC )pd FLt              1
                                                                                                             q(1       wC )ps FLt            1
                                                                                                                                                      qwC pd FCt      1

                         = qFCt             1
                                                wC (ps         pd ) + qFLt               1
                                                                                             (1         wC )(pd            ps )
                         = q(ps                 pd )[FCt        1
                                                                    wC        FLt        1
                                                                                             (1        wC )]

This is positive under the maintained assumptions that FCt     > FLt 1 , wC > 0.5, and ps > pd .                 1

    Proof of Proposition 3: Due to the symmetry of the model, it is the case that CCt = LLt and that
LCt = CLt for all t. Given this, we focus on exposure to conservative information, and, in particular,
show that CCt > CLt for all t. Note first that

                               CCt        CLt = CCt        1
                                                                     CLt      1
                                                                                  + (1            CCt 1 )cCt           (1        CLt     1
                                                                                                                                             )ctL

    which can be re-written as:

      CCt         CLt = CCt    1
                                     CLt        1
                                                    + [1       CLt    1
                                                                                  (CCt       1
                                                                                                   CLt       1
                                                                                                                 )][ctL + (cCt           ctL )]          (1    CLt   1
                                                                                                                                                                         )ctL

    re-arranging, we have that:

                              CCt         CLt = (CCt        1
                                                                     CLt      1
                                                                                  )(1            cCt ) + [1          CLt    1
                                                                                                                                ](cCt         ctL )

Thus, the sign of CCt              CLt involves a comparison of cCt and ctL , which can be written as:


                                                                                    26
               cCt   ctL = q0.5psCCt     1
                                             + q0.5pd CLt         1
                                                                              q0.5psCLt   1
                                                                                                  q0.5pd CCt   1

                        = q0.5(ps       pd )(CCt   1
                                                            CLt       1
                                                                          )

This is positive under the maintained assumption that CCt                        1
                                                                                     > CLt    1
                                                                                                  , and thus CCt   CLt is also
positive. Finally, we show that CC1 > CL1 , which is implied by:



                                     CC1 = q0.5ps es + q0.5pd ed
                                     CL1 = q0.5pd es + q0.5ps ed

   Taking the difference, we have that:

                               CC1    CL1 = q0.5(ps          pd )(es             ed ) > 0

    Proof of Proposition 4: Focusing again on conservative information (without loss of gener-
ality), let expected time to exposure for conservatives and for liberals be given, respectively, by
T C = Ât t(CCt CCt 1 ) and for liberals T L = Ât t(CLt CLt 1 ). Using summation by parts, the dif-
ference in expected time to exposure can be written as: T C T C = Ât (CCt CLt ), which, as shown
in Proposition 3, is negative.




                                                       27
    Ht
1

                      Ht




                                     Ht=wt




0                                                              wt
                                                           1


                 (a) Homophily and Group Size




    Ft
1



                           FC




                           FL

0



         (b) Group Size and the Diffusion of Information

              Figure 1: Theoretical Figures


                                28
                                  candidate(accounts




                     voters:(users(who(
                    follow(at(least(one(
                    candidate(account




                        (a) Selecting sample of users (voters)




                                  candidate(accounts




         poli%cal(network:(the(network(of(
                 connected(voters




                 (b) Connecting selected users (political network)

Figure 2: Constructing the Network of Politically-Engaged Twitter Users




                                           29
                15
state percent of Twitter voters
                       10
                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                TX


      5                                                                NY
                                                                      FL



                                                        GA OH
                                                        NC
                                                     VA      IL
                                                            PA
                                                   WA
                                                  TN
                                                MN
                                                WI
                                               CO MA MI
                                                  AZ
                                               AL IN NJ
                                              SC
                                             OR
                                              KY MO
                                                 MD
                                             OK
                                              LA
                                           IACT
                                           UT
                                           MS
                                           AR
                                           KS
                                          NV
                                       ME
                                       RI
                                       NH
                                      DE
                                      AK NE
                                         WV
                                        ID
                                       HINM                                  state population (45 degree line)
                                      SD
                                       MT
                                      WY
                                      ND
                                      VT
                0




                                  0                             5                       10                       15
                                                             state percent of U.S. population



                                  Figure 3: Spatial Representation of Twitter Voters




                                             Democra3c+candidates           Republican+candidates




                                                 liberal+
                                                 voters
                                                                                  conserva3ve+
                                                                                     voters




                                              Figure 4: Inferring Voter Ideology




                                                                       30
                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                          k                      likelihood ratio (liberal to conservative)                                                                                                                                                            percent state Twitter voters liberal
                                                                                                                      ru lev
                                                                                                                        sh in                0       1        2          3        4         5                                                                                                    0                                                       20           40             60                                 80
                                                                                                                             lim sh




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                   ba ow
                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                    In han heb ugh
                                                                                                                      gr n la

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             WY
                                                                                                                        ah ity z

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AL
                                                                                                                              a sh e
                                                                                                                           gl mA ow
                                                                                                                        or enn ngl                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ND LA



                                                                                                                            ei b e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UT



                                                                                                                                ll e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ID




                                                                                                                            Br yfac ck
                                                                                                                                 e t
                                                                                                                            Fo tBa or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MT




                                                                                                                                  xN ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TN




                                                                                                                                       ew r                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GA




                                                                                                                     Jo               W    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OKSCARAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE




                                                                                                                        hn              SJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IN




                                                                                                                        U Kin GM
                                                                                                                           SA gC A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NC




                                                                                                                          to TO NN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AZ



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KY




31
                                                                                                                              da D
                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TX SD OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VA




                                                                                                                      Po wo ysh Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FL




                                                                                                                    w lit lfb ow
                                                                                                                      as ic li
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NV




                                                                                                                        hi alT tze
                                                                                                                            ng ic r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NM




                                                                                                                          N ton ker
                                                                                                                              ew p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MI




                                                                                                                                    sH ost
                                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ME




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              percent state population liberal




                                                                                                                                      C ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MN




                                                                                                                                 la NN
                                                                                                                                     tim
                                                                                                                                ny e
                                                                                                                                     tim s
                                                                                                                                   m e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE




                                                                                                                               da snbs




                                                                  (b) Likelihood Ratio of Following Media Outlets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MD




                                                                                                                      ha m ily c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NJWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA NY




                                                                                                                        rd a ko
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OR




                                                                                                                            ba dd s
                                                                                                                                                                                                (a) Share of State Liberal Voters and Liberal Twitter Users
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 state population liberal (45 degree line)




                                                                                                                                  ll_ ow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CT




                                                                                                                                      ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50




                                                                                                                                         ris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RI




     Figure 5: Validation of Ideology Measure for Twitter Users
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MA
              1
              .8
              .6
H_t
              .4
              .2




                                                                   liberal                        conservative
                                                                   w_t (45 degree line)
              0




                             0                 .2            .4            .6                .8                  1
                                                                   w_t


                                                    (a) Homophily in Connections
              150




                                                                                liberal           conservative
                                                                                linear fit
per capita voters followed
   50         0     100




                             0                 .2            .4            .6                .8                  1
                                                                   w_t
                             (beta=26.96, p-value=0.004)


                                        (b) Group Size and Per Capita Connections

                                            Figure 6: Network Connections




                                                                  32
                         400
                                                                                                  liberal           conservative
                                                                                                  linear fit




 per capita exposure to candidate RTs
     100         200     0   300




                                                 0                 .2            .4          .6                .8                  1
                                                                                       w_t
                                                 (beta=46.92, p-value=0.106)


                                                                 (a) Per Capita Exposure to Retweets
                                           800




                                                                                                  liberal           conservative
 per capita exposure to candidate mentions




                                                                                                  linear fit
        200         400  0      600




                                                 0                 .2            .4          .6                .8                  1
                                                                                       w_t
                                                 (beta=126.323, p-value=0.040)


                                                                 (b) Per Capita Exposure to Mentions

Figure 7: Group Size and Per Capita Exposure to Information




                                                                                      33
        1
        .8
        .6
  E_t
        .4
        .2




                                              liberal               conservative
                                              45 degree line
        0




             0     .2         .4                .6             .8                  1
                                        ε_t


                 (a) Exposure to Like-Minded Retweets
        1
        .8
        .6
  E_t
        .4
        .2




                                              liberal               conservative
                                              45 degree line
        0




             0     .2         .4                .6             .8                  1
                                        ε_t


                 (b) Exposure to Like-Minded Mentions

Figure 8: Homophily and Exposure to Like-Minded Information




                                   34
                                                  2.5
                                                                                                           liberal           conservative




       E_t/H_t (exposure relative to connections)
                                                                                                           linear fit




       .5         1         1.5          2




                                                          0                 .2            .4          .6                .8                  1
                                                                                                w_t
                                                          (beta=-1.121, p-value=0.000)


                                                                                   (a) RTs and Connections
                                                    2.5




                                                                                                           liberal           conservative
         E_t/H_t (exposure relative to connections)




                                                                                                           linear fit
       .5          1         1.5          2




                                                          0                 .2            .4          .6                .8                  1
                                                                                                w_t
                                                          (beta=-0.128, p-value=0.313)


                                                                                 (b) Mentions and Connections

Figure 9: Group Size and Relative Exposure to Like-Minded Information




                                                                                               35
                        Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Political Network


                                      Percent Followed               Voters Followed
                          Percent   Liberal Conservative      Average Same-Type Per Capita
  Liberal voters           36.06     67.11      32.89               40.416          58.756
  Conservative voters      63.94     20.25      79.75               57.828          68.486


                      Table 2: Group Homophily and Ideological Segregation


                                Liberals              Conservatives      Conservative Exposure of
                            Share H Index            Share H Index       Conservatives Liberals Isolation
Baseline                    0.361    0.688           0.639   0.844          0.776         0.372   0.403
Followers of both parties   0.337    0.599           0.663   0.783          0.716         0.499   0.217
Followers of one party only 0.361    0.695           0.639   0.849          0.776         0.358   0.417


                         Table 3: Isolation in Media and Social Networks


                                    Network Segregation                         Media Segregation
                             Conservative Exposure of                   Conservative Exposure of
Followers of                 Conservatives Liberals Isolation           Conservatives Liberals Isolation
Media and candidates            0.780         0.387     0.394              0.789         0.547    0.241
Media and both parties          0.717         0.489     0.228              0.723         0.656    0.067


                          Table 4: Production of Information by Voters


                              Percent of RTs             Percent of First RTs       Percent of Mentions
Candidate party           Democrat Republican           Democrat Republican        Democrat Republican
Liberal voters             90.91         1.29            85.68          2.16        65.87       23.23
Conservative voters         9.09         98.71           14.32         97.84        34.13       76.77




                                                36
                   Table 5: Group Exposure to Like-Minded Ideological Information


               Fraction of Tweets                Same-type Tweets received              Per capita Tweets E index
 Liberal              0.484                               52.462                              58.368        0.899
 Conservative         0.516                               63.449                              70.351        0.902
                Fraction of RTs                   Same-type RTs received                 Per capita RTs    E index
 Liberal              0.312                               74.856                              81.443        0.919
 Conservative         0.688                              103.280                             110.949        0.931
              Fraction of mentions              Same-type mentions received            Per capita mentions E index
 Liberal              0.230                               59.014                             152.981        0.386
 Conservative         0.770                              165.746                             197.344        0.840


                         Table 6: Diffusion of Information and Time to Exposure


                                       Linear Regression                        Cox Survival Analysis
                                     minutes    ln(minutes)
                                    1.4502*** 0.0287***                               -0.0147***
            Liberal voter
                                     (0.1000)     (0.0008)                              (0.0006)
                                    9.9670*** 0.1418***                               -0.0776***
            Ideology mismatch
                                     (0.1000)     (0.0008)                              (0.0006)
            Tweet FE                    Yes          Yes                                   Yes
            N                       48,443,770 48,443,770                             48,443,770
            Dependent variable mean   102.04        2.57                                 102.04
Notes: *** denotes significance at the 99 percent level, ** denotes significance at the 95 percent level, and * denotes
significance at the 90 percent level, The dependent variable is minutes to exposure in column 1 and the natural log of
minutes to exposure in column 2. Column 3 estimates a Cox survival model, using data on minutes to exposure. In
all specifications, the unit of observation is an exposed voter-candidate tweet. Ideology mismatch indicates either a
conservative voter and a Democratic candidate tweet or a liberal voter and a Republican candidate tweet.




                                                         37
           Table 7: Information Production by Type of Content
                           (a) Percent of RTs by Type


                             Political RTs                   Non-Political RTs
Candidate party         Democrat Republican                Democrat Republican
Liberal voters           92.45           1.20               84.55        2.04
Conservative voters       7.55          98.80               15.45        97.96

                        (b) Percent of Mentions by Type


                          Positive Mentions                  Negative Mentions
Candidate party         Democrat Republican                Democrat Republican
Liberal voters           84.60       10.54                  42.71       32.42
Conservative voters      15.40       89.46                  57.29       67.58



            Table 8: Voter Exposure to Information by Content
                          (a) RTs by Information Type


                                      Fraction of       Per Capita
     Content           Ideology          RTs               RTs       E index
                        Liberal         0.470            58.108       0.919
     Political
                      Conservative      0.530            80.178       0.937
                        Liberal         0.521            13.018       0.910
     Non-Political
                      Conservative      0.479            16.007       0.889

                       (b) Mentions by Information Type


                                     Fraction of        Per Capita
      Content       Ideology          Mentions          Mentions     E index
                     Liberal           0.268              7.421       0.678
      Positive
                   Conservative        0.732             10.780       0.896
                     Liberal           0.200             18.803       0.195
      Negative
                   Conservative        0.800             20.860       0.798
      Full sample    Liberal           0.232             22.927       0.376
      (10 percent) Conservative        0.768             29.138       0.836




                                      38
                    Table 9: Diffusion of Political versus Non-Political Information


                                        Linear Regression                       Cox Survival Analysis
                                      minutes    ln(minutes)
            Liberal voter           3.4773*** 0.0445***                               -0.0205***
                                      (0.2995)     (0.0023)                             (0.0016)
            Ideology mismatch       7.1990*** 0.1131***                               -0.0672***
                                      (0.2995)     (0.0023)                             (0.0016)
            Liberal*political       -3.6740*** -0.0264***                              0.0093***
                                      (0.3270)     (0.0025)                             (0.0018)
            Ideology mismatch*      3.8548*** 0.0519***                               -0.0217***
            political                 (0.3270)     (0.0025)                             (0.0018)
            Tweet FE                     Yes          Yes                                  Yes
            N                       34,428,571 34,428,571                             34,428,571
            Dependent variable mean    103.71        2.61                                103.71
Notes: *** denotes significance at the 99 percent level, ** denotes significance at the 95 percent level, and * denotes
significance at the 90 percent level, The dependent variable is minutes to exposure in column 1 and the natural log
of minutes to exposure in column 2. Column 3 estimates a Cox survival model, using data on minutes to exposure.
In all specifications, the unit of observation is an exposed voter-candidate tweet. Ideology mismatch indicates either
a conservative voter and a Democratic candidate tweet or a liberal voter and a Republican candidate tweet. Political
indicates whether a tweet is political in nature, as opposed to non-political in nature.




                                                         39
