                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOW DOES TAX PROGRESSIVITY AND HOUSEHOLD HETEROGENEITY AFFECT
                          LAFFER CURVES?

                                          Hans A. Holter
                                           Dirk Krueger
                                         Serhiy Stepanchuk

                                        Working Paper 20688
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20688


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




We thank Per Krusell and Kjetil Storesletten for helpful comments and Hakki Yazici and Hitoshi Tsujiyama
for excellent discussions of earlier versions of this paper. We also thank seminar participants at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Greater Stockholm Macro Group at Sveriges Riksbank,
Statistics Norway, the 2014 Barcelona GSE Summer Forum; Working Group on Micro and Macro
Evidence on Taxation, the 2014 Nordic Symposium in Macroeconomics (Iceland), the 2014 Mannheim
Workshop in Quantitative Macroeconomics, the 2014 SEEK Conference (Mannheim), the 2014 OFS
Annual Conference (Oslo) and the 2013 UCFS Annual Conference (Uppsala). Hans A. Holter is grateful
for financial support from Handelsbanken Research Foundations and the Nordic Tax Research Council
and Dirk Krueger acknowledges financial support from the NSF. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hans A. Holter, Dirk Krueger, and Serhiy Stepanchuk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does Tax Progressivity and Household Heterogeneity Affect Laffer Curves?
Hans A. Holter, Dirk Krueger, and Serhiy Stepanchuk
NBER Working Paper No. 20688
November 2014
JEL No. E62,H20,H60

                                               ABSTRACT

How much additional tax revenue can the government generate by increasing labor income taxes?
In this paper we provide a quantitative answer to this question, and study the importance of the progressivity
of the tax schedule for the ability of the government to generate tax revenues. We develop a rich overlapping
generations model featuring an explicit family structure, extensive and intensive margins of labor supply,
endogenous accumulation of labor market experience as well as standard intertemporal consumption-savings
choices in the presence of uninsurable idiosyncratic labor productivity risk. We calibrate the model
to US macro, micro and tax data and characterize the labor income tax Laffer curve under the current
choice of the progressivity of the labor income tax code as well as when varying progressivity. We
find that more progressive labor income taxes significantly reduce tax revenues. For the US, converting
to a flat tax code raises the peak of the Laffer curve by 6%, whereas converting to a tax system with
progressivity similar to Denmark would lower the peak by 7%. We also show that, relative to a representative
agent economy tax revenues are less sensitive to the progressivity of the tax code in our economy.
This finding is due to the fact that labor supply of two earner households is less elastic (along the intensive
margin) and the endogenous accumulation of labor market experience makes labor supply of females
less elastic (around the extensive margin) to changes in tax progressivity.


Hans A. Holter                                         Serhiy Stepanchuk
Department of Economics                                École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
University of Oslo                                     College of Management
P.O. Box1095 Blindern                                  ODY 2 17, Station 5
0851 Oslo                                              CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Norway                                                 sstepanchuk@gmail.com
hans_holter@hotmail.com

Dirk Krueger
Economics Department
University of Pennsylvania
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu
1         Introduction

How much additional tax revenue can the government generate by increasing labor income
taxes? That is, how far are we from the peak of the Laffer curve? Alternatively, and of
special relevance given the recent explosion in public debt-to-GDP ratios, how much more
public debt can the government sustain?
        In this paper we provide quantitative answers to these questions, and argue that they
are highly dependent on the progressivity of the tax code and on certain types of house-
hold heterogeneity. Since the shape of the labor income tax schedule varies greatly across
countries1 , a fact which we document empirically in Section 2, Laffer curves are likely to
be country-specific. In the last part of the paper we verify this claim by presenting a case
study, comparing the Laffer curves for the U.S. and Germany.
        In order to arrive at our conclusions, we develop an overlapping generations model with
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, endogenous human capital accumulation as well as labor sup-
ply decisions along the intensive and extensive margins. In the model households make a
consumption-savings choice and decide on whether or not to participate in the labor market
(the extensive margin), how many hours to work conditional on participation (the intensive
margin), and thus how much labor market experience to accumulate (which in turn partially
determines future earnings capacities).
        We calibrate the model to U.S. macroeconomic, microeconomic wage, and tax data,
but use country-specific labor income tax data, wage data and debt-to-output ratios when
applying the model to Germany. For a given country we construct the Laffer curve by varying
the level of labor income taxes, but holding their progressivity constant. Because of the cross-
national differences in tax progressivity (and factors shaping household heterogeneity) the
resulting Laffer curves will vary across countries.
        The idea that total tax revenues are a single-peaked function of the level of tax rates
    1
    We take the cross-country differences in tax progressivity, which might have emerged due to country-
specific tastes for redistribution and social insurance, as exogenously given in this project.



                                                   1
dates back to at least Arthur Laffer. This peak and the associated tax rate at which it is
attained are of great interest for two related reasons. First, it signifies the maximal tax
revenue that a government can raise. Second, allocations arising from tax rates to the right
of the peak lead to Pareto-inferior allocations with standard household preferences, relative
to the tax rates to the left of the peak that generate the same tax revenue for the government.
Thus the peak of the Laffer curve constitutes the positive and normative limit to income
tax revenue generation by a benevolent government operating in a market economy, and its
value is therefore of significant policy interest.
   Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) in a recent paper characterize Laffer curves for the US and
the EU 14 in the context of a model with an infinitely lived representative agent, flat taxes
and a labor supply choice along the intensive margin. They find that the peak of the labor
income tax Laffer curve in both regions is located between 50% and 70% tax depending
on parameter values. The authors also show that the Laffer curve remains unchanged,
with the appropriate assumptions, if one replaces the representative agent paradigm with a
population that is ex-ante heterogeneous with respect to their ability to earn income and
allows for progressive taxation. We here argue that in a quantitative life cycle model with
realistically calibrated wage heterogeneity and risk, extensive margin labor supply choice
as well as endogenous human capital accumulation, the degree of tax progressivity not only
significantly changes the level and location of the peak of the Laffer curve for a given country,
but also strongly affects the differences in that location across countries, relative to Trabandt
and Uhlig (2011)’s analysis.
   Why and how does the degree of tax progressivity matter for the ability of the gov-
ernment to generate labor income tax revenues in an economy characterized by household
heterogeneity and wage risk? In general, the shape of the Laffer curve is closely connected
to the individual (and then appropriately aggregated) response of labor supply to taxes. In
his extensive survey of the literature on labor supply and taxation Keane (2011) argues that
labor supply choices both along the intensive and extensive margin, life-cycle considerations


                                                2
and human capital accumulation are crucial modeling elements when studying the impact
of taxes on labor supply. With such model elements present the progressivity of the labor
income tax schedule can be expected to matter for the response of tax revenues to the level
of taxes, although the magnitude and even the direction are not a priori clear.
   There are several, potentially opposing, effects of the degree of tax progressivity on the
response of tax revenues to the level of taxes. Keeping hours worked constant, with higher
tax progressivity one can expect to collect more taxes from the high-earners and less taxes
from the low-earners. However, one can also expect that changes in tax progressivity will
affect hours worked. In a representative agent model, making the tax schedule progressive
will reduce hours worked, due to an increase in the wedge the labor income tax creates in
the household’s intratemporal optimality condition (see Section 2). In a model with rich
household heterogeneity, tax progressivity will have a differential impact on hours worked
by high- and low-earners. First, increasing tax progressivity induces differential income and
substitution effects on the workers in different parts on the earnings distribution (which we
will illustrate in section 2). In addition, the presence of an extensive margin typically leads
to a higher labor supply elasticity for low wage agents who are deciding about whether or
not to participate in the labor market. A more progressive tax system with relatively low
tax rates around the participation margin where the labor supply elasticity is high may in
fact help to increase revenue if more agents decide to participate in the labor force.
   In a life cycle model the presence of labor market risk will lead to higher labor sup-
ply elasticity for older agents due to a strong precautionary motive for younger agents, see
Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger (2009). Because of more accumulated labor market experience,
older agents have higher wages. Due to this effect a more progressive tax system may dis-
proportionately reduce labor supply for high earners and lead to a reduction in tax revenue.
Furthermore, when agents undergo a meaningful life-cycle, more progressive taxes will re-
duce the incentives for young agents to accumulate labor market experience and become high
(and thus more highly taxed) earners. This effect will reduce tax revenues from agents at all


                                              3
ages as younger households will work less and older agents will have lower wages (in addition
to working less). When human capital accumulation is modeled as years of labor market
experience (learning by doing), as we do in Section 3, the life-cycle human capital effect is,
however, counteracted by a greater short term benefit (higher net wages in the short run)
from accumulating human capital. Thus the question of how the degree of tax progressivity
impacts the tax level - tax revenue relationship (i.e. the Laffer curve) is a quantitative one,
and the one we take up in this work.
      We find, first, that the US could raise approximately 56% more tax revenue if the average
tax rate is raised to 58%. Second, this peak of the Laffer curve (in terms of maximal tax
revenues) rises by another 6% if the current tax code is replaced with a flat labor income
tax, whereas converting to a tax system with progressivity similar to Denmark2 would lower
this peak by 7%3 . Third, we show that, relative to a representative agent economy tax
revenues are less sensitive to the progressivity of the tax code in our economy with household
heterogeneity. This finding is primarily due to the fact that labor supply of two earner
households is less elastic (along the intensive margin) and the endogenous accumulation of
labor market experience makes labor supply of females less elastic (around the extensive
margin) to changes in tax progressivity. Forth, we find that in simple infinite horizon and
life-cycle economies, inequality modeled as variance in permanent ability or idiosyncratic
shocks has little impact on the Laffer curve. Finally, we find that the U.S. can maximally
sustain a debt level which is 330% of today’s GDP through raising the labor income tax level
and that this amount is decreasing in the progressivty of the tax schedule.
      The paper by Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) has sparked new interest in the shape and
international comparison of the Laffer curve. Another paper that computes this curve in
a heterogeneous household economy very close to Aiyagari (1994) is the work by Feve,
Matheron, and Sahuc (2013). In addition to important modeling differences their focus
is how the Laffer curve depends on outstanding government debt, whereas we are mainly
  2
      We find Denmark to have the most progressive taxes in the OECD.
  3
      In Section 7 we find that the impact of progressivity is even larger in Germany.


                                                       4
concerned with the impact of the progressivity of the labor income tax code on the Laffer
curve. Two closely related papers are also Guner, Lopez-Daneri, and Ventura (2014) and
Badel and Huggett (2014). The focus of these papers is how much more revenue can be
raised by starting from the current US tax system and making it more progressive. In line
with our findings there is a limited potential for increasing revenues through increasing the
progressivity of the tax system. Another related paper is Chen and Imrohoroglu (2013)
who study the relationship between tax levels and the US debt. Finally, Kindermann and
Krueger (2014) characterize the optimal top marginal tax rate in a model fairly similar to
ours, but are not concerned with deriving Laffer curves for overall labor income tax revenue.
        Our paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we discuss our measure of tax progres-
sivity and develop a progressivity index by which we rank OECD countries. In Section 3 we
describe our quantitative OLG economy with heterogeneous households and define a com-
petitive equilibrium. Section 4 is devoted to the calibration and country-specific estimation
of the model parameters, and Section 5 describes the computational Laffer curve thought
experiments we implement in this paper. The main quantitative results of the paper with
respect to the impact of tax progressivity and household heterogeneity are presented in Sec-
tion 6. Section 7 extends the analysis to Germany. We conclude in Section 8. The appendix
discusses the transformation of a growing economy with extensive labor supply margin into
a stationary economy, as well as details of the estimation of the stochastic wage processes
from micro data.



2         Tax Progressivity in OECD Countries

Labor income taxes in the OECD are generally progressive and differ by household composi-
tion. To approximate country tax functions, we use the labor income tax function proposed
by Benabou (2002) and also recently employed by Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante
(2012) who argue that it fits the U.S. data well.4 Let y denote pre-tax (labor) income and
    4
        see Appendix 9.3 for more details.

                                                 5
ya after tax income. The tax function is implicitly defined by the mapping between pre-tax
and after-tax labor income:
                                              ya = θ0 y 1−θ1                                            (1)

We use labor income tax data from the OECD to estimate the parameters θ0 and θ1 for
different family types, under the assumption that married couples are taxed on their joint
earnings. Table 4 in the Appendix summarizes our findings.
       There are many ways to measure tax progressivity. We summarize the progressivity of
the tax code by the following concept of the progressivity tax wedge between income y1 and
income y2 > y1 :


                                                            1 − τ (y2 )
                                     P W (y1 , y2 ) = 1 −                                               (2)
                                                            1 − τ (y1 )

where τ (y) is the average tax rate a household with income y pays. Wedge based measures
of progressivity are common in the literature, for example, similar progressivity measures
have been used by Guvenen, Kuruscu, and Ozkan (2009) and Caucutt, Imrohoroglu, and
Kumar (2003). As long as the tax code is weakly progressive and thus τ (y2 ) ≥ τ (y1 ) this
measure takes a value between 0 and 1. It is equal to zero for a proportional tax code for all
income levels y1 and y2 and increases with the increase in the average tax rate τ as earnings
increases from y1 to y2 .
       Guvenen, Kuruscu, and Ozkan (2009) define the tax progressivity wedge using the
marginal tax rate function in place of τ (y). Using the average tax rate instead has the
advantage5 that in our tax function tax progressivity is uniquely determined by the parame-
ter θ1 and independent of the scale parameter θ0 , see Section 9.3. By varying θ0 we can then
increase the tax level while at the same time keeping tax progressivity (as measured by the
wedge) constant for all levels of y1 and y2 .
   5
    Using the average tax function also makes the measure more robust. Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura
(2012) show that the actual average tax function in the U.S. is approximated relatively well by a polynomial
whereas the stepwise linear marginal tax function is not.



                                                     6
                        Table 1: Tax Progressivity in the OECD 2000-2007

                  Country         Progressivity Index       Relative Progressivity (US=1)
                  Japan                 0.101                            0.74
                  Switzerland           0.133                            0.97
                  Portugal              0.136                            0.99
                  US                    0.137                            1.00
                  France                0.142                            1.03
                  Spain                 0.148                            1.08
                  Norway                0.169                            1.23
                  Luxembourg            0.180                            1.31
                  Italy                 0.180                            1.31
                  Austria               0.187                            1.37
                  Canada                0.193                            1.41
                  UK                    0.200                            1.46
                  Greece                0.201                            1.47
                  Iceland               0.204                            1.49
                  Germany               0.221                            1.61
                  Sweden                0.223                            1.63
                  Ireland               0.226                            1.65
                  Finland               0.237                            1.73
                  Netherlands           0.254                            1.85
                  Denmark               0.258                            1.88


       To obtain an index of tax progressivity across countries, we fit the tax function in equation
(1) for singles without children6 and married couples with zero, one and two children (the
household types which we will have in the model in Section 3). We then take the sum of the
estimated θ1 ’s weighted by each family type’s share of the population in the U.S. Table 1
displays the progressivity index for the U.S., Canada, Japan, and all the countries in Western
Europe.
       We observe that there is considerable cross-country variation in tax progressivity in the
OECD. As measured by the tax progressivity wedge Japan has the least progressive taxes,
whereas the most progressive tax code can be found in Denmark. As measured by the index,
taxes in Denmark are about 2.5 times more progressive than in Japan7 . The U.S. is among
   6
     In the model we assume that singles do not have children and that the maximum number of children is 2.
We therefore give θ1 for singles without children the population weight of all singles and θ1 for married couples
the population weight of married couples with 2 or more children. We use U.S. population shares to avoid
conflating cross-county differences in tax progressivity with cross-country differences in family structures.
   7
     In Section 6 below we find that countries raise more revenue and sustain more debt with flatter taxes.
This is consistent with the observation that Japan not only has the flattest taxes in the OECD but also the


                                                       7
the countries with least progressive tax codes.

                                    Tax wedge                                  Tax rate, τ
                    0.6                                        0.3



                    0.5                                        0.2


                                                                                             Flat tax
                    0.4                                        0.1                           US prog.
                                                                                             2 x US prog.

                    0.3                                         0



                    0.2                                       −0.1



                    0.1                                       −0.2



                     0                                        −0.3



                   −0.1                                       −0.4
                          0   0.5       1       1.5   2              0   0.5        1        1.5            2
                                     (wh)/AE                                    (wh)/AE



                                    Figure 1: Changing tax progressivity


    The right panel of figure 1 shows the average tax rate function that we obtain for U.S.
singles (green line), plotted against labor earnings relative to average earnings, AE, and
how it changes as we multiply θ1 in that function by 0 (converting it to a flat tax) or by 2
(approaching the progressivity of the Danish tax system).
    The entity that determines the distortionary effect of progressive taxes on labor supply
                                                                                         wh 0
is the tax wedge 8 in the households’ intratemporal first order condition,9 given by τ + AE τ.
The left panel of figure 1 plots this tax wedge against labor earnings. As we discussed in
section 1, changes in tax progressivity introduce opposite income and substitution effects
on high- and low-earners. The right panel shows that increasing tax progressivity raises
average tax rates and thus introduces a positive income effect on the hours worked of the
high-earners, with the opposite effect on the low-earners. The left panel shows that the same
highest debt-to-GDP ratio.
    8
      This is a different concept than the previously defined tax progressivity wedge, our summary measure
of the progressivity of the tax code, and summarizes the distortions of the labor supply decisions from any
labor income tax, progressive or not.
    9
      With a flat labor income tax, the first-order condition which characterizes the choice of hours worked is
                                                                                              wh 0
given by u0c w(1 − τ ) = −u0h , whereas with progressive taxation, it becomes u0c w(1 − (τ +     τ )) = −u0h .
                                                                                        |    AE
                                                                                             {z    }
                                                                                                       tax wedge




                                                          8
experiment raises the tax wedge, thereby introducing a negative substitution effect on the
high-earners (as well as most of the workers), but has an opposite effect on the workers in
the lowest part of the earnings distribution.



3     The Model

In this section we describe the model we will use to characterize the shape of the Laffer curve
for different countries, and specifically discuss the model elements that sets our heterogeneous
household economy apart from the representative agent model employed by Trabandt and
Uhlig (2011).

3.1   Technology

There is a representative firm which operates using a Cobb-Douglas production function:


                                  Yt (Kt , Lt ) = Ktα [Zt Lt ]1−α

where Kt is the capital input, Lt is the labor input measured in terms of efficiency units,
and Zt is the labor-augmenting productivity. The evolution of capital is described by:


                                    Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It


where It is the gross investment, and δ is the capital depreciation rate. We assume that Zt ,
the labour-augmenting productivity parameter, grows deterministically at rate µ:


                                       Zt = Z0 (1 + µ)t .


The production function and the accumulation of capital equation imply that on the balanced
growth path, capital, investment, output and consumption will all grow at the same rate




                                                9
µ10 . For convenience, we will set Z0 = 1. Each period, the firm hires labor and capital to
maximize its profit:
                                     Πt = Yt − wt Lt − (rt + δ)Kt .

In a competitive equilibrium, the factor prices will be equal to their marginal products:

                                                               α                             α
                                                           Kt                          Kt /Zt
                  wt = ∂Yt /∂Lt = (1 −     α)Zt1−α                   = (1 − α)Zt                         (3)
                                                           Lt                           Lt

                                                          1−α                        1−α
                                                      Lt                        Lt
                 rt = ∂Yt /∂Kt − δ =     αZt1−α                   −δ =α                         −δ       (4)
                                                      Kt                       Kt /Zt

       We restrict our analysis to balanced growth equilibria (in which long-run growth is gen-
erated by an exogenous technological progress). Following King, Plosser, and Rebelo (2002)
and Trabandt and Uhlig (2011), we need to impose some restrictions on the production
technology, preferences, as well as government policy functions that allow us to transform
the growing economy into a corresponding stationary one, using straightforward variable
transformation.
       To start, along a balanced growth path (BGP) K z = Kt /Zt will be constant. We fur-
thermore define wtz = wt /Zt , and note that both wtz and rt will also remain constant on the
BGP, so we drop the time subscript for these variables as well.

3.2      Demographics

The economy is populated by J overlapping generations of finitely lived households. We
model heterogeneity in family structure explicitly since in the data family type is an impor-
tant determinant of the income tax code, something we wish to capture in our model. There
are 5 types of households; single males, single females, and married couples with x ∈ {0, 1, 2}
children11 . We assume that within the same married household, the husband and the wife
  10
    See King, Plosser, and Rebelo (2002).
  11
    In our model, children only influence the labor income tax code that a household faces. Given that family
structure is exogenous and that we will assume logarithmic utility from consumption, modeling consumption
needs of children explicitly via household equivalence scales would not change the household maximization
problem.



                                                      10
are of the same age. All households start life at age 20 and enter retirement at age 65.
We follow Cubeddu and Rios-Rull (2003) and Chakraborty, Holter, and Stepanchuk (2012)
in modeling marriage and divorce as exogenous shocks. Let j denote the household’s age.
Single households face an age-dependent probability, M (j), of becoming married whereas
married households face an age-dependent probability, D(j), of divorce. Single individuals
who enter marriage have rational expectations about the type of a potential partner and
face an age-dependent probability distribution, Ξ(x, j), over the number of children in the
household. Married households face age-dependent transition probabilities, Υ(x, x0 , j), be-
tween 0,1, and 2 children in the households. We assume for simplicity that single households
do not have children and that children ”disappear” when a divorce occurs.12
       The probability of dying while working is zero; retired households, on the other hand,
face an age-dependent probability of dying, π(j), and die for certain at model age J = 76,
corresponding to a real world age of 100. By assumption a husband and a wife both die
at the same age. A model period is 1 year, so there are a total of 45 model periods of
active work life. We assume that the size of the population is fixed (there is no population
growth). We normalize the size of each new cohort to 1. Using ω(j) = 1 − π(j) to denote the
age-dependent survival probability, by the law of large numbers the mass of retired agents
of age j ≥ 65 still alive at any given period is equal to Ωj = q=j−1
                                                              Q
                                                               q=65 ω(q).

       In addition to age, marital status, and number of children, households are heterogeneous
with respect to asset holdings, exogenously determined ability of its members, their years of
labor market experience, and idiosyncratic productivity shocks (market luck). We assume
that men always work some positive hours during their working age. However, a woman can
either work or stay at home. Married households jointly decide on how many hours to work,
how much to consume, and how much to save. Females who participate in the labor market,
accumulate one year of labor market experience. Since men always work, they accumulate
an additional year of working experience every period. Retired households make no labor
  12
    Again, given our utility function the consumption requirements these children may have would not affect
the household decision problem.


                                                    11
supply decisions but receive a social security payment, Ψt .
   There are no annuity markets, so that a fraction of households leave unintended bequests
which are redistributed in a lump-sum manner between the households that are currently
alive. We use Γt to denote the per-household bequest.

3.3     Labor Income

The wage of an individual depends on the aggregate wage per efficiency unit of labor, wz ,
and the number of efficiency units the individual is endowed with. The latter depends on the
individual’s gender, ι ∈ (m, w), ability, a ∼ N (0, σι2 ), accumulated labor market experience,
e, and an idiosyncratic shock, u, which follows an AR(1) process which is common to all
individuals of the same gender (but of course the realization of this shock is not common to
all households). Thus, the wage of an individual with characteristics (a, e, u, ι) is given by:


               log(wz (a, e, u, ι)) = log(wz ) + a + γ0ι + γ1ι e + γ2ι e2 + γ3ι e3 + u          (5)

                                u0 = ρι u + ,    ∼ N (0, σ2ι )                               (6)


γ0ι here captures the gender wage gap. γ1ι , γ2ι and γ3ι capture returns to experience for
women and the age profile of wages for men.

3.4     Preferences

We assume that married couples jointly solve a maximization problem where they put equal
weight on the utility of each spouse. Their momentary utility function, U M , depends on
work hours of the husband, nm ∈ (0, 1], and the wife, nw ∈ [0, 1], and takes the following
form:

                                                      m                 w
                                1     (nm )1+η   1 M w (nw )1+η  1
        U (c, n , n ) = log(c) − χM m
         M      m   w
                                             m
                                               −   χ          w
                                                                − F M w · 1[nw >0]              (7)
                                2      1+η       2      1+η      2

where F M w ∼ N (µF M w , σF2 M w ) is a fixed disutility from working positive hours. The indicator
function, 1[n>0] , is equal to 0 when n = 0 and equal to 1 when n > 0. The momentary utility


                                                 12
function for singles is given by:

                                                                  ι
                                                            (n)1+η
                             U S (c, n, ι) = log(c) − χSι           − F Sι · 1[n>0]             (8)
                                                             1 + ηι

We allow the disutility of work to differ by gender and marital status and the fixed cost of
work for women to differ by marital status.
      King, Plosser, and Rebelo (2002) show that in a setup with no participation decision, the
above preferences are consistent with balanced growth. In the appendix, we demonstrate
that this continues to hold with fixed disutility from working positive hours and operative
extensive margin.

3.5      Government

The government runs a balanced social security system where it taxes employees and the
employer (the representative firm) at rates τss and τ̃ss and pays benefits, Ψt , to retirees. The
government also taxes consumption, labor and capital income to finance the expenditures
on pure public consumption goods, Gt , which enter separable in the utility function, inter-
est payments on the national debt, rBt , lump sum redistributions, gt , and unemployment
benefits Tt . We assume that there is some outstanding government debt, and that the gov-
ernment debt to output ratio, BY = Bt /Yt , is constant over time. Spending on pure public
consumption is also assumed to be proportional to GDP so that, GY = Gt /Yt is constant.
Consumption and capital income are taxed at flat rates τc , and τk . To model the non-linear
labor income tax, we use the functional form proposed in Benabou (2002) and recently used
in Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2012):


                                                ya = θ0 y 1−θ1


where y denotes pre-tax (labor) income, ya after-tax income, and the parameters θ0 and θ1
govern the level and the progressivity of the tax code, respectively.13 . Heathcote, Storeslet-
 13
      A further discussion of the properties of this tax function is provided in the appendix


                                                      13
ten, and Violante (2012) argue that this fits the U.S. data well. We fit family type specific
tax schedules. In addition, the government collects social security contributions to finance
the retirement benefits.
      On a BGP with constant tax rates, the ratio of government revenues to output will
remain constant. Gt , gt , Ψt and Tt must also remain proportional to output.
      We define the following ratios:


   Rz = Rt /Zt ,     Rssz = Rtss /Z,         g z = gt /Zt ,       Gz = Gt /Zt ,   Ψz = Ψt /Zt ,   T z = Tt /Zt


where Rt are the government’s revenues from the labor, capital and consumption taxes and
Rtss are the government’s revenues from the social security taxes. Denoting the fraction of
women14 that work 0 hours by ζt , we can write the government budget constraints (normal-
ized by GDP) as:

                                                  !
                                     X                    45 z
                        gz   45 +            Ωj       +      T ζt + Gz + (r − µ)B z = Rz
                                    j≥65
                                                           2
                                         !
                             X
                         z
                       Ψ            Ωj       = Rssz .
                             j≥65


      The second equation assures budget balance in the social security system by equating
per capita benefits times the number of retired individuals to total tax revenues from social
security taxes. The first equation is the regular government budget constraint on a balanced
growth path. The government spends resources on per capita transfers (times the number
of individuals in the economy), on unemployment benefits for women that work zero hours,
on government consumption and on servicing the interest on outstanding government debt,
and has to finance these outlays through tax revenue.
 14
      Recall that we assume that men always work.




                                                             14
3.6     Recursive Formulation of the Household Problem

At any given time, a married household is characterized by (k, em , ew , um , uw , am , aw , x, j),
where k is the household’s savings, em and ew are the husband’s (“man”) and the wife’s
(“woman”) experience level, um and uw are their transitory productivity shocks, while am
and aw are their permanent ability levels. Finally, x is the household’s number of children
and j is the household’s age. Recall that we assumed that the male’s experience is always
equal to his age, em = j, and we can therefore drop em from the state space for married
couples. The state space for a single household is (k, e, u, a, ι, j).
    To formulate the household problem along the BGP recursively, we first define:


                                         czj = ct,j /Zt ,           kjz = kt,j /Zt .


where ct,j and kt,j are the household’s consumption and savings.
    Since on the BGP the ratio of aggregate consumption and savings to output (and thus
to Zt ) remains constant over time, we also conjecture that household-level czj and kjz will not
depend on calendar time, so that we can omit the time subscript for them as well. For the
same reason, Γz = Γt /Zt will not change over time. We can then formulate the optimization
problem of a married household recursively:

                                                               h
V M (k z , ew ,um , uw , am , aw , x, j) =       max
                                                 z 0 m
                                                                   U (c, nm , nw )
                                             cz ,(k ) ,n ,nw

               + β(1 − D(j))E(um )0 ,(uw )0 ,x0 V M ((k z )0 , (ew )0 , (um )0 , (uw )0 , am , aw , x0 , j + 1)
                                                                                                               

                 1                    S z 0            0                          S      z 0        w 0    0
                                                                                                                  i
               + βD(j)E(um )0 ,(uw )0 V ((k ) /2, u , a, m, j + 1) + V ((k ) /2, (e ) , u , a, w, j + 1)
                 2
       s.t.:
                                    
                                    (k z + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + 2g z + Y L ,
                                    
                                                                                      if j < 65
 cz (1 + τc ) + (k z )0 (1 + µ) =
                                    (k z + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + 2g z + 2Ψ z , if j ≥ 65
                                    
                                    




                                                               15
               Y L = Y L,m + Y L,w              1 − τss − τlM (x) Y L,m + Y L,w
                                                                                                        
                                                                                             + 1 − 1[nw >0] T
                       ni wz,ι (aι , eι , uι )
            Y L,ι =                            , ι = m, w
                            1 + τ̃ss
            (em )0 = j + 1,        (ew )0 = ew + 1[nw >0] ,

               nm ∈ (0, 1],       nw ∈ [0, 1],       (k z )0 ≥ 0,     cz > 0,

               nι = 0         if j ≥ 65, ι = m, w.


Y L is the household’s labor income composed of the labor incomes of the two spouses,
which they receive during the active phase of their life, τss and τ̃ss are the social security
contributions paid by the employee and by the employer. The problem of a single household
can be written:

                               h
   S    z
  V (k , e,u, a, ι, j) = zmax
                           z 0
                                U (c, n)
                               c ,(k ) ,n

               + β(1 − M (j))Eu0 V S ((k z )0 , e0 , u0 , a, ι, j + 1)
                                                                             

                                                                                                                             i
               + βM (j)E(kz )0 ,e−ι ,(um )0 ,(uw )0 ,a−ι ,x0 V M ((k z )0 , (ew )0 , (um )0 , (uw )0 , am , aw , x0 , j + 1)
                                                            


       s.t.:
                                       
                                       (k z + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + g z + Y L , if j < 65
                                       
                                       
 cz (1 + τc ) + (k z )0 (1 + µ) =
                                       (k z + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + g z + Ψ z ,
                                       
                                                                                               if j ≥ 65

         Y L = Y L,ι          1 − τss − τlS Y L,ι
                                                                      
                                                           + 1 − 1[nw >0] T
                  nι wz,ι (aι , eι , uι )
       Y L,ι =                            , ι = m, w
                       1 + τ̃ss
       (em )0 = em + 1,          (ew )0 = ew + 1[nw >0] ,

         nm ∈ (0, 1],         nw ∈ [0, 1],        (k z )0 ≥ 0,     cz > 0,

            nι = 0      if j ≥ 65, ι = m, w.




                                                              16
3.7       Recursive Competitive Equilibrium

We call an equilibrium of the growth adjusted economy a stationary equilibrium.15 Let
ΦM (k z , ew , um , uw , am , aw , x, j) be the measure of married households with the corresponding
characteristics and ΦS (k z , e, u, a, ι, j) be the measure of single households. We now define
such a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium as follows:
       Definition:

   1. The value functions V M (ΦM ) and V S (ΦS ) and policy functions, cz (ΦM ), k z (ΦM ),
         nm (ΦM ), nw (ΦM ), c(ΦS ), k(ΦS ), and n(ΦS ) solve the consumers’ optimization problem
         given the factor prices and initial conditions.

   2. Markets clear:
                                                              Z                         Z
                                            z            z            z        M
                                        K +B =                    k dΦ              +       k z dΦM
                                        Z                                                      Z
                                z               m        zm       w       zf           M
                                                                                                   (nwz ) dΦS
                                                                               
                             L =                n w           +n w                 dΦ      +
                        Z                   Z
                            z
                            c dΦ    M
                                        +       cz dΦS + (µ + δ)K z + Gz = (K z )α (Lz )1−α


   3. The factor prices satisfy:

                                                                                            α
                                                                                       Kz
                                                                                   
                                                     z
                                                 w    = (1 − α)
                                                                                       Lz
                                                           z α−1
                                                            K
                                                    r = α          −δ
                                                            Lz
  15
    the associated BGP can of course trivially be constructed by scaling all appropriate variables by the
growth factor Zt .




                                                               17
    4. The government budget balances:

                           Z             Z           !       Z                                Z
               z                 M               S                            z       M
           g           2       dΦ    +       dΦ          +                   T dΦ         +              T z dΦS + Gz + (r − µ)B z
                                                             j<65,n=0                         j<65,n=0
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                         nm wmz + nw wwz
                                                  Z                                               
                                             =            τk r(k z + Γz ) + τc cz + τl                                          dΦM
                                                                                                1 + τ̃ss
                                                 Z                                           z
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                          nw
                                             +            τk r(k z + Γz ) + τc cz + τl                 dΦS
                                                                                         1 + τ̃ss


    5. The social security system balances:

                   Z               Z                  !                           Z                                        Z                 !
                                                            τ̃ss + τss
      Ψz                         M
                               dΦ +             dΦS       =                               (nm wmz +nw wwz )dΦM +                   nwz dΦS
                       j≥65              j≥65                1 + τ̃ss              j<65                                     j<65



    6. The assets of the dead are uniformly distributed among the living:

                           Z                     Z                   !       Z                                   Z
                   z                     M                       S                                z      M
           Γ                   ω(j)dΦ        +        ω(j)dΦ             =        (1 − ω(j)) k dΦ            +       (1 − ω(j)) k z dΦS




4     Calibration

This section describes the calibration of the model parameters. We calibrate our model
to match the appropriate moments from the U.S. data. We use data from 2001 - 2007,
because our tax data start in 2001 and we want to avoid the business cycle effects during
the great recession starting in 2008. Many parameters can be calibrated to direct empirical
counterparts without solving the model. They are listed in Table 2. The 10 parameters
in Table 3 below are, however, calibrated using an exactly identified simulated method of
moments (SMM) approach.

4.1    Preferences

The momentary utility functions are given in equations 7 and 8. The discount factor, β,
the means and variances of the fixed costs of working, µF M w , µF Sw , σF2 M w and σF2 Sw , and


                                                                             18
the disutility parameters of working more hours, χM m , χM w , χSm and χSw , are among the
parameters found through SMM. The corresponding data moments are the ratio of capital
to output, K/Y , taken from the BEA, the employment rates of married and single females
(age 20-64), taken from the CPS, the persistence of labor force participation of married and
single females (age 20-64)16 , taken from the PSID, and hours worked per person aged 20-64
by marital status and gender, taken from the CPS.
      There is considerable debate in the economic literature about the Frisch elasticity of
labor supply, see Keane (2011) for a thorough survey. However, there seem to be consensus
that female labor supply is much more elastic than male labor supply. We set 1/η m = 0.4
which is in line with contemporary literature, see for instance Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura
(2011). 1/η w we set to 0.8. Note that 1/η f is here to be interpreted as the intensive margin
Frisch elasticity of female labor supply, while 1/η m is the Frisch elasticity of male labor
supply. The 1/η parameters should generally not be interpreted as the macro elasticity of
labor labor supply with respect to tax rates, see Keane and Rogerson (2012).

4.2      Technology

In line with contemporary literature, we set the capital share parameter, α, equal to 1/3.
The depreciation rate is set to match an investment-capital ratio of 9.88% in the data.

4.3      Wages

We estimate the age profile for male wages, the experience profile for female wages, and the
processes for the idiosyncratic shocks exogenously, using the PSID from 1968-1997. After
1997, it is not possible to get years of actual labor market experience from the PSID. Ap-
pendix 9.4 describes the estimation procedure in more detail. We use a 2-step approach
to control for selection into the labor market, as described in Heckman (1976) and Heck-
man (1979). After estimating the returns to age/experience for men/women, we obtain the
residuals from the estimations and use the panel data structure of the PSID to estimate the
parameters for the productivity shock processes, ρι and σι , and the variance of individual
 16
      Measured as the R2 from regressing this year’s participation status on last year’s participation status.


                                                       19
abilities, σαι , by fixed effects estimation. We normalize the parameter, γ0w to 1 and calibrate
the parameter γ0m , internally in the model. The corresponding data moment is the ratio
between male and female earnings.

4.4   Taxes and Social Security

As described in Section 2 we apply the labor income tax function in 1, proposed by Benabou
(2002). We use U.S. labor income tax data provided by the OECD to estimate the parameters
θ0 and θ1 for different family types. Table 4 in the Appendix summarizes our findings for
different countries. Table 6 displays the share of labor income taxes paid by different income
deciles in our US benchmark economy.
   We assume that the social security contributions for the employee, τSS , and the employer,
τ̃SS are flat taxes, which is close to true. We use the rate from the bracket covering most
incomes, 7.65% for both τSS and τ̃SS . We follow Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) and set τk = 36%
and τc = 5%.

4.5   Transition Between Family Types

We assume that there are four family types: (1) single individuals with no children, (2)
married couples with no children; (3) married couples with 1 child; (4) married couples
with 2 children. To calculate age-dependent probabilities of transitions between married
and single, we use the US data from the CPS (March supplement) covering years 1999 to
2001. We assume a stationary environment where the probabilities of transitioning between
the family types does not change over time. More precisely, we allow these probabilities
to depend on the individual’s age, but not on her cohort. Denoting the shares of married
and divorced individuals at age j by M̄ (j) and D̄(j), we compute the probability of getting
married at age j, M (j), and the probability of getting divorced, D(j), from the following




                                              20
                                                      Table 2: Parameters Calibrated Outside of the Model

     Parameter                       Value                               Description                                                       Target
                                                                                                                    m )1+η    m
          m         w                                                      M        m       w
     1/η , 1/η                       0.4, 0.8                            U (c, n , n ) = log(c) −            χM m (n1+η m         −        Literature
                                                                                 )w 1+η w
                                                                                                 Mw
                                                                         χM w (n1+η w        −F        · 1[nw >0]
                                                      −3           −6                              ai +γ0m +γ1m ei +γ2m e2i +γ3m e3i +ui
     γ1m , γ2m , γ3m                 0.109, −1.47 ∗ 10 , 6.34 ∗ 10       wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt e                                         PSID (1968-1997)
                                                                                                                        2        3
     γ1w , γ2w , γ3w                 0.078, −2.56 ∗ 10−3 , 2.56 ∗ 10−5   wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt eai +γ0w +γ1w ei +γ2w ei +γ3w ei +ui
     σm , σw ,                       0.319, 0.310                        u0 = ρjg u + 
                                                                                         2
     ρm , ρw                         0.396, 0.339                         ∼ N (0, σjg      )
     σam , σaw                       0.338, 0.385                        aι ∼ N (0, σa2m )
     θ0S , θ1S , θ0M 0 , θ1M 0       0.8177, 0.1106, 0.8740, 0.1080      ya = θ0 y 1−θ1                                                    OECD tax data
     θ0M 1 , θ1M 1 , θ0M 2 , θ1M 2   0.9408, 0.1585, 1.0062, 0.2036      ya = θ0 y 1−θ1




21
     τk                              0.36                                Capital tax                                                       Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     τss , τ̃ss                      (0.0765, 0.0765)                    Social Security tax                                               OECD
     τc                              0.05                                Consumption tax                                                   Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     T                               0.2018 · AW                         Income if not working                                             CEX 2001-2007
     G/Y                             0.0725                              Pure public consumption goods                                     2X military spending (World Bank)
     B/Y                             0.6185                              National debt                                                     Government debt (World Bank)
     ω(j)                            Varies                              Survival probabilities                                            NCHS
     M (j), D(j)                     Varies                              Marriage and divorce probabilities                                CPS
     Ξ(x, j)                         Varies                              Distribution of children                                          NLSY
     Υ(x, x0 , j)                    Varies                              Transition probabilities # of children                            NLSY
     k0                              0.4409 · AW                         Savings at age 20                                                 NLSY97
     µ                               0.0200                              Output growth rate                                                Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     δ                               0.0788                              Depreciation rate                                                 I/K − µ (BEA)
transition equations:


                        M̄ (j + 1) = (1 − M̄ (j))M (j) + M̄ (j)(1 − D(j)),

                        D̄(j + 1) = D̄(j)(1 − M (j)) + M̄ (j)D(j).


As mentioned above, we assume that only married couples have children. To compute the
probabilities of transitioning between 0, 1 and 2 children, we use the NLS data that follows
individuals over the period from 1979 to 2010. Since it is a panel data set, we can compute the
age-dependent probabilities of switching between 0, 1 and 2 children as households age over
this period. Newly wed households draw their number of children from the unconditional
age-dependent distribution.

4.6   Death Probabilities and Transfers

We obtain the probability that a retiree will survive to the next period from the National
Center for Health Statistics.
   People who do not work have other source of income such as unemployment benefits,
social aid, gifts from relatives and charities, black market work etc. They do also have
more time for home production (not included in the model). Pinning down the consumption
equivalent of income when not working is a difficult task. The number we land on will also
clearly affect the size of the fixed costs of working, which we calibrate to hit the employment
rate for women by marital status. As an approximation for income when not working, we
take the average value of non-housing consumption of households with income less than $5000
per year from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. When we perform policy experiments we
keep income when not working as a constant fraction of the income of those who work.
   To determine the spending on pure public consumption G we follow Prescott (2004)
and assume that government expenditure on pure public consumption goods is equal to
2 times expenditure on national defense. In addition the government must pay interest
on the national debt before the remaining tax revenues can be redistributed lump sum to


                                               22
                                 Table 3: Parameters Calibrated Endogenously
      Parameter   Value    Description                                                    Moment                                  Moment Value
                                                                          2       3
      γ0m         -1.188   wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt eai +γ0w +γ1w ei +γ2w ei +γ3w ei +ui   Gender earnings ratio                   1.569
      β           1.008    Discount factor                                                K/Y                                     2.640
      µF M w      -0.056   F M w ∼ N (µF M w , σF2 M w )                                  Married fem employment                  0.676
                                                                       m )1+η m
      σF M w      0.197    U M (c, nm , nw ) = log(c) − χM m (n1+η           m   −        R2 from 1[nt >0] = ρ0 + ρ1 1[nt−1 >0]   0.553
                                   w 1+η w
      χM w        4.140    χM w (n1+η
                                   )
                                      w      − F M w · 1[nw >0]                           Married female hours                    0.224   (1225 h/year)
      χM m        20.500                                                                  Married male hours                      0.360   (1965 h/year)
      µF Sw       -0.029   F Sw ∼ N (µF Sw , σS2 M w )                                    Single fem. employment                  0.760
                                                            1+η ι
      σF Sw       0.227    U S (c, n, ι) = log(c) − χSι (n)
                                                         1+η ι
                                                                                          R2 from 1[nt >0] = ρ0 + ρ1 1[nt−1 >0]   0.463
      χSw         8.700    −F Sι · 1[n>0]                                                 Single female hours                     0.251   (1371 h/year)
      χSm         66.000                                                                  Single male hours                       0.282   (1533 h/year)



households.

4.7    Estimation Method

Ten model parameters are calibrated using an exactly identified simulated method of mo-
ments approach. We minimize the squared percentage deviation of simulated model statistics
from the ten data moments in column 3 of Table 3. Let Θ = {γ0m , β, µF M w , σF M w , χM w , χM m ,
µF Sw , σF Sw , χSw , χSm } and let V (Θ) = (V1 (Θ), . . . , V10 (Θ))0 denote the vector where Vi (Θ) =
(m̄i − m̂i (Θ))/m̄i is the percentage difference between empirical moments and simulated
moments. Then:
                                                            V̂ = min V (Θ)0 V (Θ)                                                                         (9)
                                                                         Θ


Table 3 summarizes the estimated parameter values and the data moments. We match all
the moments exactly so that V (Θ)0 V (Θ) = 0.



5     Computational Experiments

This section concisely describes our counterfactual experiments in Sections 6 and 7. We
start by calibrating the model to data from the U.S. (and in Section 7 Germany). We then
perform the following exercises, in order to make the points that a) the progressivity of the
tax code is a key determinant of the shape of the Laffer curve, and that b) the precise form of
household heterogeneity present in the model is crucial for the quantitative magnitude of the
impact of tax progressivity on the Laffer curve. The latter point is important since coutries


                                                                               23
differ significantly along this dimension and therefore the extent to which progressivity is
crucial for tax revenues (and thus the Laffer curve) will vary across countries as well.
   The quantitative analysis therefore proceeds in the following steps:


  1. For a given model and given progressivity of the tax code defined by the parameter θ1
     we derive the Laffer curve by scaling up the tax level (which can be adjusted by θ0 ) for
     all family types by the same constant and plotting BGP tax revenue against the level
     of taxes. We study the importance of the progressivity of the income tax code for the
     Laffer curve by tracing out Laffer curves for different degrees of progressivity θ1 . In
     section 6.1 we trace out U.S. Laffer curves under the assumption that additional tax
     revenue is transfered back to households in a lump-sum fashion (we call them g-Laffer
     curves). Section 6.2 does the same, but under the assumption that the additional
     tax revenue is used to service a larger stock of outstanding government debt (we call
     them b-Laffer curves), thereby also characterizing the maximal sustainable stock of
     government debt.

     One should note that while in the representative agent setting, g- and b-Laffer curves
     coincide (see Feve, Matheron, and Sahuc (2013)), in a model with heterogeneous agents
     and incomplete asset markets, they are different. Going from g-Laffer curves to b-Laffer
     curves, one can expect two effects on the tax revenues: i) Smaller lump-sum transfers
     from the government back to the households mean smaller negative income effect on
     the labor supply (this can lead to larger effects on tax revenues from the changes
     in the tax level and / or tax progressivity). ii) An increase in public debt crowds
     out physical capital, raising the equilibrium interest rate and lowering the equilibrium
     wages, thereby reducing the tax base (this can lead to smaller effects on tax revenues
     from the change in the tax level in or tax progressivity).

  2. We then investigate the importance of the form and size of household heterogeneity
     for the impact of tax progressivity on tax revenues. In a first step, carried out in


                                              24
      section 6.3, we show, for a fixed degree of tax progressivity θ1 , what forms of household
      heterogeneities impact Laffer curves the most, in a quantitative sense. To do so we
      display Laffer curves for a sequence of models, starting with Trabandt and Uhlig’s
      (2011) representative agent model and ending with our benchmark life cycle economy
      with ex-ante and ex-post heterogeneity as well as explicit family structure and extensive
      margin labor supply margin of females. In a second step, in section 6.4 we then study
      the interaction between tax progressivity and household heterogeneity by displaying
      how maximal tax revenue and debt levels depend on the progressivity of the tax code
      in a selection of models that differ in the way and the degree to which households are
      heterogeneous.

    3. Finally, we draw out the implications of these findings for Laffer curves across coun-
      tries. Cross-country differences in the tax code (especially its progressivity, but also
      its structure - labor, capital and consumption taxes) and the magnitude of house-
      hold heterogeneity are the key drivers of cross-country differences in Laffer curves.
      We demonstrate this claim in section 7 by comparing Laffer curves for the U.S. and
      Germany, decomposing the importance of both factors by first subjecting our model
      calibrated to the U.S. data to a tax code with German progressivity level, and then by
      re-calibrating the model fully to German micro data and drawing Laffer curves for a
      tax code with U.S. progressivity level.



6     The Impact of Tax Progressivity and Household Het-

      erogeneity on the Laffer Curve

In this section we display the main quantitative results of our paper, with respect to the
impact of tax progressivity and household heterogeneity on the Laffer curve. We trace out
the Laffer curve under two different assumptions about the use of revenues. In the first
specification (g-curves), we assume that the increase in revenue is redistributed evenly to all

                                                25
households. In the second specification (b-curves), we assume that the increase in revenue
is spent on paying interest on debt.
   We find that more progressive taxes significantly shift the Laffer curve downwards and
reduce the maximum sustainable debt level. We also find that various types of heterogeneity
is important for the maximal revenue that can be raised and the location of the peak of the
Laffer curve.

6.1   The Impact of Tax Progressivity

In this subsection we characterize U.S. Laffer curves under the assumption that the increase
in revenue is redistributed uniformly to all households. This is similar to Trabandt and Uhlig
(2011), and we denote these Laffer curves g-curves. We vary the progressivity of the labor
income tax schedule, as defined by 2, by multiplying θ1 for all family types by the same
constant and we change the tax level while holding progressivity constant by multiplying θ0
for all family types by the same constant.



                                                 160
                   Tax revenue, % of benchmark




                                                 140

                                                                                                         Flat tax
                                                                                                         1 x US prog.
                                                 120                                                     2 x US prog.
                                                                                                         3 x US prog.
                                                                                                         Dk prog.

                                                 100


                                                 80

                                                   0.0   0.1   0.2     0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6       0.7   0.8
                                                                     Labor income tax rate

Figure 2: The Impact of Tax Progressivity the Laffer Curve (holding debt to GDP constant)


   In Figure 2, we plot Laffer curves for our simulated US economy for varying degrees of
progressivity. At the moment the US is relatively far from the peak of its Laffer curve. With
the current progressivity of the tax system, tax revenues can be increased by about 56% if

                                                                                26
the average tax rate on labor income is raised from 17% today to about 58%. Figure 11 in
the Appendix provides a break down of the revenue from labor, consumption and capital
taxes along the Laffer curve.
       We observe that the design of the tax system has considerable impact on the Laffer curve.
The maximal revenue that can be raised with a flat tax system is about 6% higher than the
maximal revenue that can be raised when the tax schedule exhibits a progressivity similar to
the current US system. A tax schedule with the current US progressivity can again raise 7%
more revenue than a tax system which is twice as progressive, or similar to the tax system
in Denmark17 .
       Figure 2 also allows us to assess how important is tax progressivity relative to the tax
level in achieving the maximum labor income tax revenues. Let T Rcur be the tax revenues
that correspond to the current labor income tax level in the US (marked by a red dot in the
figure), T Rlevel be the maximum tax revenues that can be attained by changing the tax level
but keeping the progressivity as it is now in the US (which corresponds to the top of the “1 x
US prog.” curve), and finally let T Rprog be the maximum tax revenues one can achieve with
flat taxes (which corresponds to the top of the “Flat tax” curve in the figure). Then the total
maximum change in tax revenues is ∆Total = T Rprog − T Rcur = (1.56 · 1.06 − 1)T Rcur , while
the change that is due to modifying the tax progressivity is ∆P rog = T Rprog − T Rlevel =
T Rprog − T Rlevel = (1.56 · 1.06 − 1.56)T Rcur . This means that the potential changes due
to modifying the progressivity of the tax code, ∆Prog, can account for up to 14.3% of all
additional tax revenues one could achieve when changing the current US labor tax system
to the one that results in the highest tax revenues, changing both the tax level and tax
progressivity.18
       Table 7 displays different model statistics for 3 different levels of progressivity at 17.5%19 ,
  17
      Note that the Danish tax system is generally more progressive than the US tax system, however, as we
scale the progressivity of the US system we will never obtain a system exactly equal to the Danish system
since the U.S. and Danish systems also differ in the relative tax burdens of different family types.
   18
      Imposing the restriction that the tax system remains in the class of tax functions that we consider in
this paper.
   19
      The benchmark tax level


                                                    27
25% and 35% average labor income tax rate. As one can can see from the table, for a
given tax level, a more progressive tax schedule leads to lower aggregate labor supply and
savings. This is the reason for why a more progressive tax system gives smaller revenues.
It is interesting to note that the progressivity of the tax system has a strong impact on
female labor force participation and that this impact is completely opposite for married and
single women. Women are often low earners and for single women a more progressive tax
system increases the benefits from work. Married women are on the other hand taxed jointly
with their husbands. If the husband is a high earner, the additional benefits from the wife
participating in the labor force will be smaller with a more progressive tax system.
      Table 8 displays different model statistics for 3 different progressivity levels while holding
θ0 in the tax function constant at the levels which give 17.5%, 25% and 35% average tax
with US tax progressivity. As can be seen from the table, starting at a given average tax
level there is some but limited potential for raising more revenues by making the tax system
more progressive. Starting from a 35% average labor income tax rate and the same tax
progressivity as in the US and then making the tax system twice as progressive does for
instance reduce tax revenues even if the average tax rate increases to 38%.
      In Figure 2 one may notice that the there are some non-monotone areas on the Laffer
curves. This happens because of the extensive margin for women. Relatively large chunks of
women leave the labor force around the same tax rate and this causes a drop in revenue20 .
With more heterogeneity in the fixed costs (but also higher computational cost) it is possible
to get smoother Laffer curves. In Figure 9 we plot the Laffer curve for US progressivity (the
green line in Figure 2), using 15 different discrete costs of labor force participation instead
of 3. This Laffer curve is almost smooth.

6.2      The Impact of Tax Progressivity on Sustainable Debt

In the left panel of Figure 3, we plot Laffer curves for our simulated US economy under the
assumption that the increase in revenue (again brought about by an increase in θ0 ) is spent
 20
      Figure 10 in the Appendix plots female LFP along the Laffer curve.


                                                    28
on paying interest on debt. We call these b-Laffer curves. Government spending, G, and
lump sum transfers, g are kept at their benchmark levels in this exercise.
   The peak of the Laffer curve is higher when we instead of redistributing revenues spend
them on paying off debt. The positive income effect on labor supply is dominating the effect
of debt crowding out productive capital. For the current choice of progressivity, the US
can increase it’s revenue by about 95% if the average labor income tax rate is increased to
about 55%. Also for the b-laffer curves, a more progressive tax system significantly reduces
revenue. The maximal revenue that can be raised with a flat tax system is about 7% higher
than the maximal revenue that can be raised when the tax schedule exhibits a progressivity
similar to the current US system. A tax schedule with the current US progressivity can
again raise 10% more revenue than a tax system which is twice as progressive


                    220
                                           Tax revenue
                                                                                                     400             Sustainable gov. debt

                    200                                                                              350

                                                                                                     300
                    180
                                                                                % of benchmark GDP




                                                                                                     250
                                                                                                                                                                 Flat tax
   % of benchmark




                    160
                                                                                                                                                                 US prog.
                                                                                                     200                                                         US prog. x 2
                    140
                                                                                                                                                                 US prog. x 3
                                                                                                                                                                 DNK prog.
                                                                                                     150
                    120
                                                                                                     100

                    100                                                                               50

                     80                                                                                0
                      0.1   0.2   0.3       0.4      0.5      0.6   0.7   0.8                          0.1   0.2   0.3       0.4      0.5      0.6   0.7   0.8
                                        Labor income tax rate                                                            Labor income tax rate


Figure 3: Tax Revenue and Maximum Sustainable Debt Level by Tax Level and Progressivity


   In the right panel of Figure 3 we plot the maximum sustainable debt level as a func-
tion of the average tax rate for varying degrees of progressivity. For it’s current choice of
progressivity, the US can sustain a debt burden of about 3.3 times it’s benchmark GDP by
increasing the average tax rate to 42%. This is consistent with the fact that the interest
rate on US debt in international bond markets is still relatively low, although in recent years
(after the calibration period) the US debt has risen to 120% of GDP. We observe that one

                                                                                29
also can sustain more debt with a less progressive tax system. Converting to a flat tax
system increases the maximum sustainable debt by 8% whereas converting to a twice as
progressive tax system reduces the maximum sustainable debt by 11%. The tax rate, which
maximizes debt is substantially lower than the tax rate which maximizes revenue. This is
due to general equilibrium effects. As the debt level increases, the capital stock becomes
smaller, the interest rate increases and it becomes more expensive to hold debt.

6.3       The Impact of Household Heterogeneity

In this section we analyze how the shape of the Laffer curve depends on different types of
household heterogeneity. To do this, we consider several alternative models. We start with
our model from section 3, and then remove some of its key features, such as participation
margin, returns to experience, life-cycle profiles, and agent heterogeneity in permanent abili-
ties and idiosyncratic productivity shocks, finally arriving at the representative agent model
analyzed by Trabandt and Uhlig (2011).
       To facilitate comparison between models with infinitely lived agents and models with a
life-cycle, in this section we consider Laffer curves for which the tax revenue includes the
revenue from the social security taxes and we focus on g-curves21 . This allows us to compare
our findings to Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) who use the same approach. We also assume that
taxes are flat (no progressivity) in all models in this section.
       In the left Panel of Figure 4 we graph 6 g-Laffer curves. The green line is the Laffer curve
from our original model. The green dashed line is from the full model without the extensive
margin and human capital accumulation for women. The green dotted line is from the full
model with extensive margin, however, instead of endogenous experience accumulation there
is an exogenous age-dependent wage profile. The blue dashed line and the blue solid line
are from the representative agent model of Trabandt and Uhlig (2011). In the solid line
we use their code but parameter values similar to those used in our study. In particular
  21
    In the previous sections we kept social security taxes separate, because in reality they are a separate
system. They are not part of the government budget and cannot be spent on paying down government debt.




                                                    30
                              150                                                                                                                    150

                              140                                                                                                                    140
Tax revenue, % of benchmark




                                                                                                                       Tax revenue, % of benchmark
                              130                                                                                                                    130

                              120                                                                                                                    120

                              110                                                                                                                    110

                              100                                                                                                                    100

                              90                                                                                                                     90

                              80                                                                                                                     80
                               0.2        0.3        0.4      0.5        0.6       0.7           0.8        0.9                                       0.2   0.3    0.4        0.5        0.6        0.7    0.8   0.9
                                                           Labor income tax rate                                                                                           Labor income tax rate
                                     Full model               Life cycle                 Rep. agent                                                               Life cycle              Inf.-lived HHs
                                     Exog. human capital      No extens. margin          Rep. agent                                                               Life cycle, no het.     Rep. agent
                                                                                         (UT calibration)



                                                       Figure 4: Laffer Curves for Different Models With Flat Taxes


we set the parameter η which governs the Frisch elasticity of labor supply equal to 1/0.6,
the average of what we use for men and women in the full model. The dotted blue line is
from Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)’s original calibration with η = 1. The red dashed line is
the Laffer curve from a single-household life-cycle model with heterogeneity in permanent
abilities and idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
                               Among the Laffer curves with η = 1/0.6, the one for the full model stands out as by
far the lowest. This is as expected because it has both extensive margin labor supply and
human capital for females. Between these two model elements the human capital effect is,
however, the main driver of the level of the Laffer curve. Higher taxes reduce female labor
force participation, which again lowers their productivity due to the loss of human capital.
Introducing an extensive margin in female labor supply while keeping the age-profile of
female wages constant also lowers the Laffer curve due to more elastic labor supply, however,
the effect is much larger when female wages depend on experience.
                               Whether one uses an infinite horizon model or a single household life-cycle model with or
without heterogeneity in shocks and permanent abilities has very little effect on the Laffer
curve, see the right panel of Figure 4. This is in line with Trabandt and Uhlig (2011), who
found that augmenting their representative agent with household heterogeneity did not have



                                                                                                                  31
much of an effect on the Laffer curve.
       As one would expect, the η parameter, which in the representative agent model is equal to
the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, has a large impact on the Laffer curve, see
the left panel of Figure 13 in the Appendix. In the representative agent model with η = 1/0.4,
which would be considered relatively conservative, the US can increase it’s revenue to almost
160% of benchmark by increasing the average tax rate to about 78%. With η = 1/1.5, the
Laffer curve peaks at 58% and the maximum revenue is only 120% of benchmark. In the left
panel of Figure 4 the difference between the the blue dotted line and blue solid line is due
to increasing this parameter from 1 to 1/0.6. The fact that our heterogeneous agent model,
which is calibrated with ηm = 1/0.4 and ηf = 1/0.8 produce a Laffer curve close to the same
level as the representative agent model with η = 1, illustrates that ”macro” and ”micro”
elasticities of labor supply are two different concepts22 , although the main explanation is the
human capital effect.
       In Figure 14 in the Appendix we plot b-Laffer curves and maximal sustainable debt
levels from different models. We only display results for life-cycle models, which has a social
security system. The results are relatively similar to the ones for g-curves. The full model
with endogenous human capital and extensive margin labor supply for females generates
less revenue and can sustain less debt compared to benchmark GDP. Income heterogeneity
matters slightly more for the maximum sustainable debt level than for revenue, although the
effect is small. The sustainable debt level is lower in the single household life-cycle model
with heterogeneity in permanent abilities and idiosyncratic shocks than in the life-cycle
model without other heterogeneity than age.
  22
    Micro estimates of the Hicksian or Marshallian elasticity of labor supply have usually been based on
the change in individual intensive margin labor supply from one year to the next. The ”macro” elasticity
between two steady states also takes into account the change in the population’s labor force participation
due to a tax change.




                                                   32
6.4      The Interaction Between Heterogeneity and Progressivity

In the left panel of Figure 5 we plot the peak of the Laffer g-curves as a function of tax
progressivity in different models; our benchmark heterogeneous agents model, a model which
is identical to the benchmark model except that female human capital is age-dependent and
exogenous, a model which is identical to the exogenous human capital model except that it
lacks extensive margin labor supply for females, a representative agent model, and a single
household life-cycle model.
       The negative impact of progressivity on tax revenue is the smallest in our full model
and the largest in the single household life-cycle and representative agent models. Adding
family-type heterogeneity (No extensive margin) reduces the impact of progressivity. This
is driven by progressive taxation being less distortionary on the intensive margin of labor
supply for 2-earner households, when they are taxed jointly23 , which is the case in the US. To
see this, compare the first order condition for a married individual (in this case the female)
to the first order condition for a single individual. For a married female, the first order
condition with respect to labor would read:


                                                     wm nm + wf nf −θ1
                          u0c wf (1 − (τ + θ0 θ1 (                ) )) = −u0n                        (10)
                                      |                 {zAE           }
                                                     tax wedge

       The first order condition for a single female would read:


                                                        wf nf −θ1
                               u0c wf (1 − (τ + θ0 θ1 (      ) )) = −u0n                             (11)
                                           |          {zAE        }
                                                     tax wedge

       Thus the distortionary tax wedge is smaller for married couples under joint taxation.
Adding an extensive margin of female labor supply (Exog. human capital) increases the
impact of progressivity, as some women are pushed over the margin. However, introducing
endogenous human capital accumulation again (Full model) significantly reduces the impact
  23
   This may be an argument for joint taxation of married couples if the tax system is highly progressive.
However, it should be noted that the effect on the extensive margin tends to go in the opposite direction.


                                                       33
of tax progressivity. This is because labor supply becomes much more inelastic around the
extensive margin. From figure 10 one can see that female LFP tend to be slightly higher
when taxes are more progressive in the full model.


                               150                                                                                                             150
                               145                                                                                                             145
                               140                                                                                                             140
 Tax revenue, % of benchmark




                                                                                                                 Tax revenue, % of benchmark
                               135                                                                                                             135
                               130                                                                                                             130
                               125                                                                                                             125
                               120                                                                                                             120
                               115                                                                                                             115
                               110                                                                                                             110
                               105                                                                                                             105
                                 0.0     0.5        1.0          1.5          2.0        2.5          3.0                                        0.0   0.5         1.0          1.5        2.0        2.5   3.0
                                                          Tax progressivity                                                                                              Tax progressivity
                                       Full model     No extens. margin         Exog. human capital                                                          Life-cycle              Inf.-lived HHs
                                       Life-cycle     Rep. agent                                                                                             Life-cycle, no het.     Rep. agent



                               Figure 5: The Impact of Tax Progressivity on Maximum Revenue in Different Models


                                It should be noted here that the finding that introducing endogenous human capital
accumulation reduces the impact of tax progressivity may depend crucially on how human
capital accumulation is modeled. When human capital is modeled as years of labor market
experience, making taxes more progressive increases the short term benefit of acquiring
human capital. This effect counteracts the effect from progressive taxes reducing the longer
time returns to human capital. Progressive taxation in this context only affects the human
capital accumulation decisions of those on the margin between working and not working.
These are usually low earners and will get a higher net wage (at least in the short run) when
taxes become more progressive. If human capital was rather modeled as an investment of
money in education quality or as a time-investment in learning, the introduction of human
capital may instead increase the importance of tax progressivity24 .
                                We conjecture that one may approximate the level of the Laffer curve relatively well with
                  24
    See Holter (2014) for a model where human capital accumulation is modeled as a continuous investment
of money in education quality and Badel and Huggett (2014) for a model where human capital accumulation
is modeled as investment of time in learning. Both of these studies apply a Ben-Porath (1967) human capital
production technology.


                                                                                                            34
a representative agent model, which has the ”right” elasticity of labor supply. By ”right”
in this context we mean that labor supply must be made sufficiently elastic to make up for
the human capital effect which is not present in the representative agent model25 . However,
as figure 5 shows, the effect of changing the progressivity of the tax system would not be
captured very well by a representative agent model, no matter the elasticity of labor supply.
Since tax progressivity differs among countries, the representative agent model with a fixed
η would also not be well-suited for cross-country comparisons of Laffer curves.
       The right panel of Figure 13 in the Appendix illustrates how the impact of progressivity
changes when changing the elasticity of labor supply in a representative agent model. We
observe that the negative impact of progressivity on revenue is greater when the elasticity of
labor supply is higher. However, even for low labor supply elasticity going from a flat tax to a
tax system which is 3 times more progressive than the current US system, lowers the peak of
the Laffer curve by an amount equal to 30% of benchmark revenue. The impact of changing
the elasticity of labor supply on the cost of tax progressivity is relatively small compared
to the impact of introducing model elements such as 2-earner households, extensive margin
labor supply and human capital.
       There is very little interaction between the impact of tax progressivity on revenue and
income inequality modeled as variation in permanent abilities or idiosyncratic shocks, see
the right panel of figure 5. This may imply that societies with higher ex-ante inequality
should choose a more progressive tax system because the gains from redistribution would
be higher in such a society. This conclusion would as we have seen also hold up if higher
inequality was due to greater returns to experience but perhaps not if inequality was due to
higher returns to education.
       In Figures 16 and 17 in the Appendix we conduct a sensitivity analysis with respect to
the interaction between income heterogeneity and progressivity. We plot maximum revenue,
  25
    In figure 12 we plot Laffer curves for the benchmark model and a representative agent model wit η set
to generate the same implied labor supply elasticity after a productivity shock. As can be seen from the
figure the resulting Laffer curve in the representative agent model is far higher than in the full model.



                                                   35
the revenue maximizing tax rate, labor supply in hours at the revenue maximizing point and
labor supply in efficiency units of labor at the revenue maximizing point in a single household
life-cycle model with and without heterogeneity in abilities and idiosyncratic shocks. We
perform the exercise using log utility with very low, medium and very high elasticity of
labor supply, constant relative risk aversion utility with σ = 4 and η = 1/0.6, Cobb-Douglas
utility, and Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman utility.26 With all these specifications, income
heterogeneity has very little impact on the Laffer curve.
       Figure 15 in the Appendix displays the impact of tax progressivity on maximum revenue
and maximum sustainable debt in different models27 . The results are qualitatively similar
to the results for g-curves. The impact of progressivity is the largest in the single-household
life-cycle model. Progressivity matters less when we model family-type heterogeneity, more
when we introduce extensive margin labor supply and less when we introduce endogenous
human capital. Heterogeneity plays some but limited impact for the level of debt that can be
sustained. With more heterogeneity, agents on average increase savings relatively less as the
interest rate increases along the Laffer curve. The result is that the interest rate increases
relatively faster in the economy with more heterogeneity and less debt can be sustained.



7        International Laffer Curves

In this section we derive the implications of our previous findings for the international com-
parison of tax revenues and maximally sustainable debt levels. Cross-country differences
in the tax code (labor income tax progressivity, but also capital and consumption taxes)
and the magnitude of household heterogeneity and thus inequality are the key drivers of
cross-country differences in Laffer curves. In this section we demonstrate this by example;
specifically, we compare the Laffer curves for the U.S. and Germany. We choose Germany
for two reasons: first, it offers micro wage data (through the German Socio-Economic Panel,
  26
     Since all utility specifications do not admit a balanced growth path we abstract from technological
progress in this analysis.
  27
     Again we only display results for life-cycle models.

                                                  36
GSOEP) that are directly comparable to the American PSID, and second, the differences
in the structure of the tax and transfer system between the U.S. and Germany are very
substantial, making this cross-country comparison an ideal test case for our theory.

7.1   What if the U.S. Switches to German Labor Income Taxes?

In a first step we now introduce a tax system with German progressivity in our U.S. cali-
brated economy. In Figure 6, we draw Laffer curves (with extra revenues transferred back
to households, i.e. g-curves) for U.S. labor income tax progressivity (the benchmark model)
and German labor income tax progressivity. The dots on the curves marks the current tax
level in the two countries. As expected, the Laffer curve for the more progressive tax system
with progressivity similar to Germany lays below our Laffer curve with U.S. progressivity
level. With U.S tax progressivity one can increase tax revenues to 156% of the benchmark
value in the U.S., whereas with German tax progressivity (applied to the U.S. economy) one
can only raise 150% of benchmark revenue.




                       Figure 6: Laffer Curves With German Taxes


   To investigate the impact of the wage distribution, in a second step we substitute the
exogenously estimated U.S. wage process from the PSID with its German equivalent from
the GSOEP and we replace the U.S. calibration target for the ratio between male and female
wages with its German equivalent, see Tables 9 and 10. The tax system and all the other
data moments are left unchanged during the calibration. In Figure 7 we plot Laffer curves

                                             37
for this economy with U.S. tax progressivity and German tax progressivity. The difference
between the two Laffer curves is similar to the benchmark economy. Both Laffer curves
are, however, shifted down by about five percentage points. With U.S. tax progressivity
and German wages one can raise 152% of benchmark revenue, whereas with German tax
progressivity one can only raise 145% of benchmark revenue. One reason for why the Laffer
curve shifts down with a German wage structure is the larger gender wage gap in Germany,
which causes women to drop out faster from the labor force as one increases the level of
taxes.




         Figure 7: g-Laffer Curves from a Calibration with German Wage Distribution



7.2      What if Germany Switches to U.S. Labor Income Taxes?

Now we re-calibrate the entire model to German data. Relative to U.S. fiscal policy, the
German tax system is characterized by different family specific labor income taxes (see
Table 4), a 23% capital tax, compared to 36% for the U.S., and a 15% consumption tax,
compared to 5% for the U.S. The employee and employer social security taxes, τss , and τ̃ss
are approximated as flat taxes, with a rate that is equal to the contribution by a person
with average income. The German social security rates are τss = 17.1%, and τ̃ss = 17.6%,
compared to τss = τ̃ss = 7.7% for the U.S. Germany also has different marriage and divorce
rates, fertility rates and different labor market calibration targets. Tables 10 and 9 in the
Appendix summarize the German calibration.

                                             38
              Figure 8: g-Laffer Curves from a Model Calibrated to Germany


    In Figure 8 we plot Laffer curves for our German economy with German labor income
tax progressivity and with U.S. progressivity. As can be seen from the figure, Germany
has a much smaller potential for raising revenue through increased labor income taxation
than the U.S. The main reason is that Germany already has much higher consumption- and
social security taxes and therefore cannot raise that much more additional revenue through
increasing the labor income tax level. Changing to a less progressive tax system increases
revenue even more in Germany than in the U.S., however. With U.S. tax progressivity,
Germany can maximally raise 127% of their current revenue through increasing labor income
taxes. With German progressivity level, the corresponding number is 119%. Thus, an
important lesson from the cross-country analysis is that countries (such as Germany) with
higher social security and consumption taxes face substantially tighter limits to their ability
for generating extra revenue from labor income tax reform.



8     Conclusion

In this paper we quantified how much revenue the U.S. can raise and how much debt it can
sustain through increasing labor income taxes, and we studied the impact of tax progressivity
and household heterogeneity on the Laffer curve. The U.S. is currently far from the peak of



                                              39
it’s Laffer curve and could increase revenue by about 56% if the average labor income tax
rate is increased to about 58%.
       More progressive taxation significantly reduces tax revenue. Because, as we document,
there is substantial variation in tax progressivity across countries, tax progressivity is im-
portant for international comparisons of Laffer curves. To quantify the effect of tax progres-
sivity on the Laffer curve it is important to model family-heterogeneity, extensive margin
labor supply and endogenous human capital accumulation. These model elements also sig-
nificantly affect the level of the Laffer curve. Relative to simple life-cycle or representative
agent models, with joint taxation, the labor supply of couples is less elastic to changes in
tax progressivity along the intensive margin. Adding an extensive margin and endogenous
accumulation of labor market experience also reduces the elasticity of labor supply to tax
progressivity.
       Income heterogeneity, modeled as permanent abilities or idiosyncratic wage shocks, have
very little impact on the Laffer curve in simple life-cycle and representative agent models28 .
From a welfare perspective this may imply that countries with more ex-ante heterogeneity
should choose a more progressive tax system,as the re-distributive benefits will be larger and
the cost approximately equal.



9        Appendix

9.1      Balanced growth with labor participation margin

As is well-known29 , for balanced growth we need to assume labor-augmenting technological
progress. In this case, consumption, investment, output and capital all grow at the rate of
labor-augmenting technical progress, while hours worked remain constant. King, Plosser,
and Rebelo (2002) show that the momentary preferences that deliver first-order optimality
  28
     In the full model there would be more complex interactions between these model elements and for
instance the extensive margin of labor supply.
  29
     See King, Plosser, and Rebelo (2002) for details




                                                40
conditions consistent with these requirements can take one of the following two forms:



                                                1 1−ν
                              U (c, n) =           c v(n) if 0 < ν < 1 or ν > 1,
                                               1−ν
                              U (c, n) = log(c) + v(n) if ν = 1.


     To reformulate the household problem recursively, one replaces consumption with its
growth-adjusted version in both the household’s budget constraint and the household’s ob-
jective function (see the next subsection for the details). With the second version of the
momentary utility function, such “adjustment terms” drop out into a separate additive term
which can be ignored:

     100−J
      X                                              100−J
                                                      X
              j
                                                           β j log(ct,j /Zt ) + v(nj ) − F 1[nj >0] + log(Zt )
                                                                                                           
Et           β log(ct,j ) + v(nj ) − F 1[nj >0] = Et
     j=J                                                   j=J
             100−J
              X                                               X
                     β j log(czj ) + v(nj ) − F 1[nj >0] + Et   β t log(Zt )
                                                       
     = Et
              j=J                                                t=j



where czj = ct,j /Zt .
     This procedure would not work with the first version of the momentary utility function.
Proceeding the same way, we would obtain:

                               100−J                                    
                                X
                                       j     1 1−ν
                           Et       β            ct,j v(nj ) − F 1[nj >0] =
                               j=J
                                           1 − ν
                              100−J                                  100−J
                               X
                                       j     1      z 1−ν
                                                                        X
                           Et       β̃           (cj ) v(nj ) − Et           β j F 1[nj >0]
                               j=J
                                           1 − ν                        j=J



where β̃ = βZ 1−ν . This means that as time passes by, fixed participation costs become
“more important” for the houshold (since it uses the original discount factor, β).




                                                          41
9.2   Recursive formulation of the household problem

Households of age J in period t maximize

                     100−J
                                                 (nm
                                                   t,j )
                                                        1+η
                                                               (nw
                                                                 t,j )
                                                                      1+η
                      X                                                                 
            U = Et           ω(j) log(ct,j ) − χ            −χ            − F · 1[nw >0]
                      j=J
                                                  1+η           1+η                t,j




where the expectation is taken with respect to the evolution of ut , subject to the sequence
of budget constraints:
                                         
                                                                                        L
                                         
                                         (k
                                         
                                               t,j   + Γt ) (1 + rt (1 − τk )) + gt + Wt,j , if j < 65
         ct,j (1 + τc ) + kt+1,j+1 =
                                         
                                         (kt,j + Γt ) (1 + rt (1 − τk )) + gt + Ψt ,
                                                                                                   if j ≥ 65


where W L is the household labor income (and unemployment benefits in case wife doesn’t
work):

                                                                                                      
           L      L,m     L,w                  L,m     L,w
         Wt,j = Wt,j  + Wt,j    1 − τss − τl Wt,j  + Wt,j    + 1 − 1[nw                                      ] Tt ,
                                                                                                    t,j >0




  L,m       L,w
Wt,j  and Wt,j  are the labor incomes of the two household memebers:

                                                       i         i   2 +γ (ei )3 +ui
                    L,i     nit,j wt eai +γ0ι +γ1ι et,j +γ2ι (et,j )     3ι t,j    t,j
                  Wt,j    =                                                              ,   i = m, w
                                                    1 + τ̃ss

which depend on the individual’s fixed type ai , experience eit,j (which we assume equals age
for men) and productivity shock uit,j .
   To reformulate this household problem recursively, we divide the budget constraints by
the technology level Zt . Recall that with our normalization of Z0 and K0 , we have Zt = Yt .
Also, recall that on the balanced growth path, Γz = Γt /Zt , g z = gt /Zt , Ψ z = Ψt /Zt , T z =
Tt /Zt , wz = wt /Zt and rt must remain constant. We define czj = ct,j /Zt and kjz = kt,j /Zt and
conjecture that they do not depend on the calendar time t either. This allows us to rewrite




                                                            42
the budget constraints as:
                                        
                                        (kjz + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + g z + WjL , if j < 65
                                        
                                        
       czj (1 + τc ) + kj+1
                        z
                            (1 + µ) =
                                        (kjz + Γz ) (1 + r(1 − τk )) + g z + Ψ z ,
                                        
                                                                                     if j ≥ 65


Substituting ct,j = czj Zt into the objective function, we get an additive term that depends
only on the sequence of Zt and drops out of the maximization problem, and finally get the
recursive formulation stated in the main text.

9.3   Tax function

Given the tax function


                                             ya = θ0 y 1−θ1

   we employ, the average tax rate is defined as


                                           ya = (1 − τ (y))y


and thus
                                        θ0 y 1−θ1 = (1 − τ (y))y

and thus


                               1 − τ (y) = θ0 y −θ1

                                    τ (y) = 1 − θ0 y −θ1

                                   T (y) = τ (y)y = y − θ0 y 1−θ1

                                   T 0 (y) = 1 − (1 − θ1 )θ0 y −θ1




                                                   43
Thus the tax wedge for any two incomes (y1 , y2 ) is given by

                                                                             −θ1
                                          1 − τ (y2 )                    y2
                                       1−             =1−                                      (12)
                                          1 − τ (y1 )                    y1

and therefore independent of the scaling parameter θ0 . Thus by construction one can raise
average taxes by lowering θ0 and not change the progressivity of the tax code, since (as
long as tax progressivity is defined by the tax wedges) the progressivity of the tax code30
is uniquely determined by the parameter θ1 . Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2012)
estimate the parameter θ1 = 0.18 for all households. Above we let θ1 vary by family type.

9.4          Estimation of Returns to Experience and Shock Processes From the PSID

We take the log of equation 5 and estimate a log(wage) equation using data from the non-
poverty sample of the PSID 1968-1997. Equation 6 is estimated using the residuals from
5.
          To control for selection into the labor market, we use Heckman’s 2-step selection model.
For people who are working and for which we observe wages, the wage depends on a 3rd
order polynomial in age (men), t, or years of labor market experience (women), e, as well as
dummies for the year of observation, D:


                       log(wit ) = φi (constant + Dt0 ζ + γ1 eit + γ2 e2it + γ3 e3it + uit )   (13)


Age and labor market experience are the only observable determinants of wages in the
model apart from gender. The probability of participation (or selection equation) depends
     30
          Note that
                                                      1 − T 0 (y)
                                        1 − τ (y) =               > 1 − T 0 (y)
                                                        1 − θ1
and thus as long as θ1 ∈ (0, 1) we have that

                                                   T 0 (y) > τ (y)

and thus marginal tax rates are higher than average tax rates for all income levels.




                                                          44
on various demographic characteristics, Z:


                               Φ(participation) = Φ(Zit0 ξ + υit )                                (14)


The variables included in Z are marital status, age, the number of children, years of schooling,
time dummies, and an interaction term between years of schooling and age. To obtain the
parameters, σι , ρι and σαι we obtain the residuals ui t and use them to estimate the below
equation by fixed effects estimation:


                                      uit = αi + ρuit−1 + it                                     (15)


The parameters can be found in Table 2.

9.5   Additional Tables and Figures

          Table 4: Tax Functions by Country and Family Type, OECD 2000-2007
                      Married 0C           Married 1C          Married 2C           Single 0C
      Country
                     θ0        θ1         θ0        θ1        θ0        θ1        θ0         θ1
      Austria     0.926427 0.150146   1.003047 0.198779   1.076124 0.23796    0.854448 0.175967
      Canada      0.901481 0.155047   0.981109 0.228148   1.066354 0.296329   0.789222 0.147083
      Denmark     0.787587 0.229954   0.874734 0.305302   0.920347 0.331685   0.690296 0.220311
      Finland     0.868634 0.223116    0.92298 0.261043   0.976928 0.293236   0.763024 0.207634
      France      0.917449 0.119957   0.944289 0.133912   1.019455 0.174277   0.85033 0.137575
      Germany     0.892851 0.203455   0.956596 0.238398   1.022274 0.272051    0.77908 0.198354
      Greece      1.060959 0.161687   1.088914 0.178131   1.127027 0.19963    1.019879 0.228461
      Iceland     0.872072 0.194488   0.932844 0.243148   0.990471 0.287094   0.784118 0.153982
      Ireland     0.946339 0.162836   1.101397 0.282089   1.187044 0.326003   0.85533 0.188647
      Italy       0.900157 0.15939    0.949843 0.198573    1.00814 0.241968   0.822067 0.153275
      Japan       0.948966 0.073769   0.971621 0.086518   0.992375 0.097036   0.916685 0.121497
      Luxembourg 0.947723 0.15099     1.024163 0.190363   1.113409 0.231438   0.849657 0.163415
      Netherlands 0.958121 0.219349   1.004174 0.245393   1.025102 0.256418   0.863586 0.272312
      Norway      0.838322 0.148316   0.894721 0.194368   0.932718 0.218213    0.76396 0.146082
      Portugal    0.948209 0.119169   0.97794 0.138682    1.009808 0.157309   0.882183 0.132277
      Spain       0.923449 0.130171    0.93517 0.134039   0.949941 0.14052    0.862569 0.164186
      Sweden      0.782747 0.166797   0.865716 0.240567   0.919471 0.276415   0.717018 0.217619
      Switzerland 0.925567 0.116475   0.968531 0.136431   1.008289 0.15569    0.878904 0.128988
      UK          0.908935 0.165287   0.994826 0.233248   1.049323 0.273376   0.836123 0.168479
      US          0.873964 0.108002   0.940772 0.158466   1.006167 0.203638   0.817733 0.1106




                                                45
Table 5: Distribution of households (with a head between 20 and 64 years of age) by the
number of children and marital status, IPUMS USA, 2000-2007

                                                       Marital status
                                                 Single Married Total
                                           0     29.28    20.86      50.15
                                           1      7.49    13.27      20.76
                                           2      4.41    14.26      18.67
                         # of children

                                           3      1.65     5.81       7.46
                                           4      0.50     1.61       2.11
                                           5      0.14     0.42       0.56
                                           6      0.04     0.14       0.18
                                           7      0.01     0.05       0.07
                                           8      0.00     0.02       0.03
                                          9+      0.00     0.02       0.02
                                         Total   43.54    56.46     100.00




      Table 6: Labor Income Taxes Paid by Income Deciles (benchmark calibration)

                   Income Decile             Share of Total    Cumulative Share
                         1                       0.000             0.000
                         2                       0.011             0.012
                         3                       0.024             0.035
                         4                       0.037             0.073
                         5                       0.053             0.126
                         6                       0.072             0.198
                         7                       0.098             0.295
                         8                       0.136             0.432
                         9                       0.201             0.632
                        10                       0.368             1.000




                                                      46
Table 7: Selected Statistics for Different Tax Progressivity at 17.5%, 25% and 35% Average
Tax Rate as % of the US Benchmark
                                                  τ̄ (y) = 17.5%                                τ̄ (y) = 25%                               τ̄ (y) = 35%
                                  Flat tax        US Prog. 2X US Prog.                Flat tax US Prog. 2X US Prog.           Flat tax    US Prog. 2X US Prog.
                                  Flat tax        US Prog. 2X US Prog                 Flat tax US Prog. 2X US Prog            Flat tax    US Prog. 2X US Prog
 Tax Revenue                       104.8              100.0       93.9                 123.1      117.9      110.3             143.8         136.5      127.5
 θ0                                0.927              1.000      1.056                 0.843      0.907      0.955             0.729         0.783      0.822
 Labor Supply                      103.8              100.0       94.9                  97.2       94.7       89.6              89.5          86.0       81.9
 Labor supply in Efficiency Units  104.7              100.0       93.9                  99.8       95.7       89.6              93.7          89.1       83.3
 Male Labor Supply                 103.6              100.0       95.5                 101.7       98.0       93.6              98.7          95.3      90.8
 Single Male Labor Supply          102.8              100.0       96.5                 100.8       98.0       94.6              97.6          95.1      91.8
 Married Male Labor Supply         104.0              100.0      95.0                  102.2       98.1       93.1              99.2          95.4      90.3
 Female Labor Supply               104.2              100.0       94.1                  90.7       89.9       84.1              76.5          73.0       69.2
 Single Female Labor Supply         90.7              100.0      110.3                  73.5       88.4       98.1              59.9          68.8       80.0
 Married Female Labor Supply       113.6              100.0      82.8                  102.7       91.0       74.3              88.1          75.9      61.7
 Female LFP                         97.6              100.0      101.8                  88.1       93.3       94.4              77.5          79.5       82.4
 Single Female LFP                  87.0              100.0      116.1                  73.7       92.1      107.3              63.5          76.0       92.6
 Married Female LFP                105.0              100.0       91.7                  98.1       94.2       85.4              87.3          82.0       75.2
 Female Intensive Margin           106.7              100.0       92.4                 103.0       96.3       89.0              98.7          91.8      84.0
 Single Female Intensive Margin    104.2              100.0       95.0                  99.8       96.0       91.4              94.3          90.5       86.4
 Married Female Intensive Margin   108.1              100.0      90.2                  104.7       96.6       87.0             100.9          92.6       82.0
 Savings                           106.7              100.0       92.3                  98.4       92.8       85.8              88.6          83.3       77.1

       Column 3 is the US bechmark calibration.

Table 8: Selected Statistics for Different Tax Progressivity at Fixed θ0 as % of the US
Benchmark
                                                   θ0 = θ0U S                                 θ0 = 0.907 ∗ θ0U S                         θ0 = 0.7825 ∗ θ0U S
                                  Flat tax        US Prog. 2X US Prog.                Flat tax US Prog. 2X US Prog.           Flat tax     US Prog. 2X US Prog.
 Average Tax Rate                  11.1%           17.5%      21.7%                    19.3%     25.0%          28.6%          30.3%         35.0%         38.0%
 Tax Revenue                        86.0           100.0      103.4                    109.3      117.9          117.2         134.5         136.5          131.5
 Labor Supply                      108.5           100.0       92.1                    102.4       94.7           86.9          93.0          86.0           79.3
 Labor supply in Efficiency Units  108.3           100.0       91.6                    103.6       95.7           87.4          96.6          89.1           35.2
 Male Labor Supply                 105.3           100.0       94.5                    103.2       98.0           92.6         100.2          95.3           77.7
 Single Male Labor Supply          104.6           100.0       95.5                    102.3       98.0           93.6          99.2          95.1          114.2
 Married Male Labor Supply         105.6           100.0       94.0                    103.6       98.1           92.1         100.7          95.4           89.5
 Female Labor Supply               113.0           100.0       88.8                    101.2       89.9           78.8          82.9          73.0           64.3
 Single Female Labor Supply        100.9           100.0      104.2                     86.9       88.4           91.6          65.9          68.8           73.3
 Married Female Labor Supply       121.4           100.0       78.0                    111.2       91.0           84.3          94.7          75.9           57.9
 Female LFP                        102.5           100.0       98.0                     95.7       93.3           90.2          82.0          79.5           78.0
 Single Female LFP                  92.9           100.0      112.0                     84.2       92.1          102.0          67.8          76.0           86.4
 Married Female LFP                109.3           100.0       88.2                    103.7       94.2           81.9          92.0          82.0           72.1
 Female Intensive Margin           110.2           100.0       90.6                    105.8       96.3           87.4         101.1          91.8           82.4
 Single Female Intensive Margin    108.6           100.0       93.0                    103.2       96.0           89.8          97.2          90.5           84.9
 Married Female Intensive Margin   111.1           100.0       88.4                    107.2       96.6          102.9         103.0          92.6           80.4
 Savings                           113.7           100.0       88.7                    104.7       92.8           82.6          93.2          83.3           74.5

      Column 3 is the US bechmark calibration.

                       Table 9: Parameters Calibrated Endogenously (Germany)
       Parameter   Value   Description                                                    Moment                                  Moment Value
                                                                          2       3
       γ0m                 wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt eai +γ0w +γ1w ei +γ2w ei +γ3w ei +ui   Gender earnings ratio                   2.081
       β                   Discount factor                                                K/Y                                     2.640
       µF M w              F M w ∼ N (µF M w , σF2 M w )                                  Married fem employment                  0.540
                                                                       m )1+η m
       σF M w              U M (c, nm , nw ) = log(c) − χM m (n1+η           m   −        R2 from 1[nt >0] = ρ0 + ρ1 1[nt−1 >0]   0.512
                                   w 1+η w
       χM w                χM w (n1+η
                                   )
                                      w      − F M w · 1[nw >0]                           Married female hours                    0.171   (933 h/year)
       χM m                                                                               Married male hours                      0.340   (1855 h/year)
       µF Sw               F Sw ∼ N (µF Sw , σS2 M w )                                    Single fem. employment                  0.586
                                                            1+η ι
       σF Sw               U S (c, n, ι) = log(c) − χSι (n)
                                                         1+η ι
                                                                                          R2 from 1[nt >0] = ρ0 + ρ1 1[nt−1 >0]   0.420
       χSw                 −F Sι · 1[n>0]                                                 Single female hours                     0.239   (1303 h/year)
       χSm                                                                                Single male hours                       0.296   (1616 h/year)



                                                                                47
                                                Table 10: Parameters Calibrated Outside of the Model (Germany)

     Parameter                       Value                             Description                                               Target
                                                                                                              m )1+η   m
          m         w                                                    M       m       w
     1/η , 1/η                       0.4, 0.8                          U (c, n , n ) = log(c) −        χM m (n1+η m        −     Literature
                                                                               w 1+η w
                                                                               )             Mw
                                                                       χM w (n1+η w −F       · 1[nw >0]
                                                               −5                        ai +γ0m +γ1m ei +γ2m e2i +γ3m e3i +ui
     γ1m , γ2m , γ3m                 0.067, -0.003, 3.7 ∗ 10    wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt e                                        GSOEP (1984-1997)
                                                            −5                                                 2       3
     γ1w , γ2w , γ3w                 0.167, -0.003, 2.5 ∗ 10    wt (ai , ei , ui ) = wt eai +γ0w +γ1w ei +γ2w ei +γ3w ei +ui
     σm , σw ,                       0.253, 0.264               u0 = ρjg u + 
                                                                                2
     ρm , ρw                         0.036, 0.061                ∼ N (0, σjg      )
     σam , σaw                       0.546, 0.366               aι ∼ N (0, σa2m )
     θ0S , θ1S , θ0M 0 , θ1M 0       0.779, 0.198, 0.892, 0.203 ya = θ0 y 1−θ1                                                   OECD tax data
     θ0M 1 , θ1M 1 , θ0M 2 , θ1M 2   0.957, 0.238, 1.022, 0.272 ya = θ0 y 1−θ1




48
     τk                              0.23                       Capital tax                                                      Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     τss , τ̃ss                      0.171, 0.176               Social Security tax                                              OECD
     τc                              0.15                       Consumption tax                                                  Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     T                               0.2018 · AW                Income if not working
     G/Y                             0.0725                     Pure public consumption goods                                    2X military spending (World Bank)
     B/Y                             0.4124                     National debt                                                    Government debt (World Bank)
     ω(j)                            Varies                     Survival probabilities                                           NCHS
     M (j), D(j)                     Varies                     Marriage and divorce probabilities                               IPUMS
     Ξ(x, j)                         Varies                     Distribution of children                                         GSOEP
     Υ(x, x0 , j)                    Varies                     Transition probabilities # of children                           GSOEP
     k0                                                         Savings at age 20
     µ                               0.0200                     Output growth rate                                               Trabandt and Uhlig (2011)
     δ                               0.0788                     Depreciation rate                                                I/K − µ (BEA)
                                                            160



                                                            155

                              Tax revenue, % of benchmark
                                                            150



                                                            145



                                                            140



                                                            135


                                                                                                                               1 x US prog.
                                                            130
                                                              0.30        0.35   0.40    0.45   0.50    0.55     0.60   0.65       0.70      0.75
                                                                                            Labor income tax rate



Figure 9: The g-Laffer Curve for US Tax Progressivity (using 15 different fixed costs of labor
force participation)




                                    120              Hours              120      Efficiency labor units
                                    110                                 110
                                    100                                 100
                  % of benchmark




                                     90                                  90
                                     80                                  80
                                     70
                                     60                                  70
                                     50                                  60
                                     40                                  50
                                     30                                  40
                                      0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
                                    120         Labor earnings          120 Women participation rate
                                    110                                 100
                                    100
                  % of benchmark




                                     90                                  80
                                     80                                  60
                                     70                                  40
                                     60
                                     50                                  20
                                     40                                   0
                                      0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
                                                  Labor tax rate                      Labor tax rate
                                                                     Flat tax     1 x US prog.     2 x US prog.     3 x US prog.          Dk prog.


            Figure 10: LFP by Tax Progressivity and Level for g-Laffer Curves




                                                                                                   49
            110       Capital tax revenue       120 Consumption tax revenue
            100                                 110
             90                                 100
             80                                  90
                                                 80
             70                                  70
             60                                  60
             50                                  50
             40                                  40
              0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8

                            250         Labor tax revenue
                            200
                            150
                            100
                             50
                               0
                               0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
              Flat tax   1 x US prog.     2 x US prog.   3 x US prog.   Dk prog.

Figure 11: The Impact of Tax Progressivity on Revenue From Labor Income Taxes, Con-
sumption Taxes and Capital Income Taxes




Figure 12: Laffer Curves for the Full Model and a Rep. Agent Model With Equivalent Labor
Supply Elasticity After a 1-Period Productivity Shock (1/η = 0.491).



                                                  50
                               160                                                                                                                                  160
                               150
                                                                                                                                                                    150
                               140
 Tax revenue, % of benchmark




                                                                                                                                      Tax revenue, % of benchmark
                                                                                                                                                                    140
                               130
                                                                                                                                                                    130
                               120
                                                                                                                                                                    120
                               110

                               100
                                                                                                                                                                    110

                                90                                                                                                                                  100

                                80                                                                                                                                   90

                                70                                                                                                                                   80
                                 0.2          0.3          0.4            0.5        0.6             0.7       0.8        0.9                                         0.0            0.5            1.0            1.5            2.0             2.5          3.0
                                                                       Labor income tax rate                                                                                                                Tax progressivity
                                                    Rep. agent                   Rep. agent, 1/η =0.4                                                                            Rep. agent          Rep. agent, 1/η =0.4               Rep. agent, 1/η =1.5
                                                    Rep. agent                   Rep. agent, 1/η =1.5.
                                                    (UT calibration)



Figure 13: Laffer Curves for the Rep. Agent Model with Different Labor Supply Elasticities
(left). The Impact of Progressivity on Maximum Revenue in the Rep. Agent Model with
Different Labor Supply Elasticites (right).


                               220
                                                                          Tax revenue                                                                               500                                   Sustainable debt

                               200
                                                                                                                                                                    450
                                                                                                                                                                    400
                               180
                                                                                                                                     % of benchmark GDP


                                                                                                                                                                    350
% of benchmark




                               160                                                                                                                                  300
                               140                                                                                                                                  250
                                                                                                                                                                    200
                               120
                                                                                                                                                                    150
                               100
                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                80                                                                                                                                   50
                                 0.2          0.3          0.4            0.5        0.6             0.7       0.8        0.9                                         0.2          0.3        0.4            0.5        0.6             0.7         0.8        0.9
                                                                       Labor income tax rate                                                                                                              Labor income tax rate
                                       Full model                        Life cycle                   No extens. margin                                                     Full model                      Life cycle                   No extens. margin
                                       Exog. human capital               Life cycle, no het.                                                                                Exog. human capital             Life cycle, no het.



Figure 14: Laffer Curves and Maximum Sustainable Debt for Flat Taxes in Different Models


                               210
                                                                          Tax revenue                                                                               500                                   Sustainable debt
                               200
                                                                                                                                                                    450
                               190
                                                                                                                                     % of benchmark GDP
% of benchmark




                               180                                                                                                                                  400
                               170

                               160                                                                                                                                  350

                               150
                                                                                                                                                                    300
                               140

                               130                                                                                                                                  250
                                 0.0            0.5              1.0            1.5            2.0            2.5         3.0                                         0.0            0.5            1.0            1.5        2.0                 2.5          3.0
                                                                         Tax progressivity                                                                                                                  Tax progressivity
                                            Full model            Life-cycle, no het.                No extensive marg.                                                          Full model          Life-cycle, no het.                No extensive marg.
                                            Life-cycle            Exog. human capital                                                                                            Life-cycle          Exog. human capital



Figure 15: The Impact of Progressivity on Maximum Revenue and Sustainable Debt in
Different Models


                                                                                                                                51
         90
                                 Hours                      85
                                                                        Effective labor units
         85                                                 80
         80                                                 75
         75                                                 70
         70                                                 65
         65
         60                                                 60
         55                                                 55
         50                                                 50
         45                                                 45
          0.0    0.5      1.0     1.5      2.0   2.5     3.0 0.0     0.5   1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5      3.0
       0.85
                                Tax rate                   200
                                                                            Tax revenue
       0.80                                                180
       0.75                                                160
       0.70                                                140
       0.65
       0.60                                                120
       0.55                                                100
       0.50                                                 80
       0.45                                                 60
          0.0    0.5      1.0     1.5      2.0   2.5     3.0 0.0     0.5   1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5      3.0


                CD                       CRRA                      GHH                  Log
                CD, no het.              CRRA, no het.             GHH, no het.         Log, no het.

    Figure 16: The Impact of Tax Progressivity for Different Utility Functions


                                 Hours                                Efficiency labor units
         90                                                 90
         85                                                 85
         80                                                 80
         75                                                 75
         70                                                 70
         65                                                 65
         60                                                 60
         55                                                 55
         50                                                 50
         45                                                 45
          0.0    0.5      1.0     1.5      2.0   2.5     3.0 0.0     0.5   1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5      3.0
                                Tax rate                                    Tax revenue
       0.90                                                220
       0.85                                                200
       0.80                                                180
       0.75                                                160
       0.70
                                                           140
       0.65
       0.60                                                120
       0.55                                                100
       0.50                                                 80
       0.45                                                 60
          0.0    0.5      1.0     1.5      2.0   2.5     3.0 0.0     0.5   1.0    1.5   2.0    2.5      3.0

                η =1/3                            η =1/0.1                        η =1/3,   het. in u
                η =1/3,   no het.                 η =1/0.1,   no het.             η =1/3,   het. in a

Figure 17: The Impact of Tax Progressivity for Different Labor Supply Elasticities


                                                         52
References
Aiyagari, R., 1994, Uninsured Risk and Aggregate Saving, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  109, 659–684.
Badel, Alejandro, and Mark Huggett, 2014, Taxing Top Earners: A Human Capital Per-
  spective, Working Paper.
Ben-Porath, Yoram, 1967, The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,
  Journal of Political Economy 75, 352–365.
Benabou, R, 2002, Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy: What
  Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?, Econometrica 70, 481–517.
Caucutt, Elizabeth M., Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Krishna B. Kumar, 2003, Growth and
  Welfare Analysis of Tax Progressivity in a Heterogeneous-Agent Model, Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics pp. 546–577.
Chakraborty, Indraneel, Hans A. Holter, and Serhiy Stepanchuk, 2012, Marriage Stability,
  Taxation and Aggregate Labor Supply in the U.S. vs. Europe, Working Paper.
Chen, Kaiji, and Ayse Imrohoroglu, 2013, Debt in the US Economy, Working Paper.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger, 2009, Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea
  After All!, American Economic Review 99, 25–48.
Cubeddu, Luis, and Jose Victor Rios-Rull, 2003, Families as Shocks, Journal of the European
  Economic Association pp. 671–682.
Feve, P., J. Matheron, and J.G. Sahuc, 2013, The Laffer Curve in an Incomplete-Market
  Economy, Working paper.
Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura, 2011, Taxation and Household Labor
 Supply, Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura, 2012, Income Taxation of US House-
 holds: Facts and Parametric Estimates, CEPR Discussion Paper 9078.
Guner, Nezih, Martin Lopez-Daneri, and Gustavo Ventura, 2014, Heterogeneity and Gov-
 ernment Revenues: Higher Taxes at the Top?, Working Paper.
Guvenen, Fatih, Burhanettin Kuruscu, and Serdar Ozkan, 2009, Taxation of Human Capital
 and Wage Inequality: A Cross-Country Analysis, Working Paper 15526 National Bureau
 of Economic Research.
Heathcote, J., S. Storesletten, and G. Violante, 2012, Redistribution in a Partial Insurance
  Economy, Working paper.




                                            53
Heckman, James, 1976, The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
  Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such Models, The
  Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5, 475–492.
Heckman, James, 1979, Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error, Econometrica 47,
  153–162.
Holter, Hans, 2014, Accounting for Cross-Country Differences in Intergenerational Earnings
  Persistence: The Impact of Taxation and Public Education Expenditure, Quantitative
  Economics, forthcoming.
Keane, Michael, and Richard Rogerson, 2012, Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities:
  A Reassessment of Conventional Wisdom., Journal of Economic Literature 50, 464–476.
Keane, Michael P., 2011, Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey, Journal of Economic Literature
  49, 961–1045.
Kindermann, Fabian, and Dirk Krueger, 2014, High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%?
  Lessons from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk, Working Paper.
King, R.G., C.I. Plosser, and S.T. Rebelo, 2002, Production, growth and business cycles:
  Technical appendix, Computational Economics 20, 87–116.
Prescott, Edward C., 2004, Why do Americans Work so Much More Than Europeans, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 28, 2–13.
Trabandt, Mathias, and Harald Uhlig, 2011, The Laffer Curve Revisited, Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics 58, 305–327.




                                           54
