                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   TOWARD AN UNDERSTANDING OF REFERENCE-DEPENDENT LABOR SUPPLY:
           THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                        Steffen Andersen
                                         Alec Brandon
                                           Uri Gneezy
                                          John A. List

                                       Working Paper 20695
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20695


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2014




Stefano DellaVigna, Casey Mulligan, Zongjin Qian, and George Wu provided helpful comments and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Steffen Andersen, Alec Brandon, Uri Gneezy, and John A. List. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Toward an Understanding of Reference-Dependent Labor Supply: Theory and Evidence from
a Field Experiment
Steffen Andersen, Alec Brandon, Uri Gneezy, and John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 20695
November 2014
JEL No. C93,D01

                                                 ABSTRACT

Perhaps the most powerful form of framing arises through reference dependence, wherein choices
are made recognizing the starting point or a goal. In labor economics, for example, a form of reference
dependence, income targeting, has been argued to represent a serious challenge to traditional economic
models. We design a field experiment linked tightly to three popular economic models of labor supply—two
behavioral variants and one simple neoclassical model—to deepen our understanding of the positive
implications of our major theories. Consistent with neoclassical theory and reference-dependent preferences
with endogenous reference points, workers (vendors in open air markets) supply more hours when
presented with an expected transitory increase in hourly wages. In contrast with the prediction of behavioral
models, however, when vendors earn an unexpected windfall early in the day, their labor supply does
not respond. A key feature of our market in terms of parsing the theories is that vendors do not post
prices rather they haggle with customers. In this way, our data also speak to the possibility of reference-dependent
preferences over other dimensions. Our investigation again yields results that are in line with neoclassical
theory, as bargaining patterns are unaffected by the unexpected windfall.


Steffen Andersen                                         Uri Gneezy
Department of Economics                                  Rady School of Management
Copenhagen Business School                               University of California - San Diego
Porcelænshaven 16A, 1                                    Otterson Hall, Room 4S136
DK-2000 Frederiksberg                                    9500 Gilman Drive #0553
Denmark                                                  La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
sa.eco@cbs.dk                                            ugneezy@ucsd.edu

Alec Brandon                                             John A. List
Department of Economics                                  Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                    University of Chicago
5757 S. University Ave.                                  1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637                                        Chicago, IL 60637
alec.brandon@gmail.com                                   and NBER
                                                         jlist@uchicago.edu
Several fundamental postulates give rise to the predictions from neoclassical models. One of the most
basic tenets—the basic independence assumption—has recently come under heavy scrutiny. Results
across several experimental settings suggest that preferences are not independent of current
entitlements (see, e.g., Knetsch, 1989; Kahneman et al., 1991; Englemann and Hollard, 2010). The
most accepted theory explaining such preferences invokes psychological effects, and is broadly
termed “prospect theory” (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). Recent studies have shown the power of
using such behavioral insights—from motivating workers in manufacturing plants to convincing
teachers and students to exert more effort, incentive schemes have been used to leverage such
preferences (see Hossain and List, 2012; Fryer et al., 2012; Levitt et al., 2012).

In a normative sense, such preferences call into question commonly held interpretations of
indifference curves and cripple applied welfare analysis. For instance, cost/benefit analysis and
damage resolution would need a new architecture without the basic independence assumption. From
a positive perspective, a large disparity between Hicksian equivalent surplus and Hicksian
compensating surplus essentially renders the invariance result of Coase invalid and calls into
question how we calculate gains and losses of public policies, ranging from computing the correct
gains to trade and who is affected by welfare and transfer programs.

A prime example of the interplay between prospect theory and positive economics is how to grapple
with some of the key questions we face in labor economics. For example, how does labor supply
respond to changes in taxes, welfare, and transfer programs? How important is inter-temporal
substitution? Traditionally, when computing the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution (IES),
scholars make use of synthetic cohorts or panels from large survey datasets and employ various
regression models. A typical finding in this literature is an estimate of the IES between 0 and 0.4
suggesting a small labor supply response to changing the transitory returns to supplying labor
(Ghez and Becker (1975), MaCurdy (1981), and Altonji (1986)). A potential concern with these
methods is that the typical worker is not free to vary labor supply and hence the estimates are
attenuated from the true, structural and policy-relevant, parameter of interest (Chetty et al.
(2011)).1



1
 Parsing anticipated and unanticipated changes in wages is another challenge in this literature. Mulligan (1995)
summarizes labor supply responses to events that the econometrician can confidently call anticipated, like World


                                                                                                                   2
As a result, researchers have turned to novel samples, using high-frequency labor supply data on
workers free to choose their daily hours of work. But instead of clarifying the magnitude of the
IES these studies have suggested that under certain circumstances the IES is actually negative. In
the first study using high-frequency labor supply data, Camerer et al. (1997) finds that New York
City taxi cab drivers work fewer hours when their hourly wage rate is higher, with estimates of
the IES ranging from -0.2 to -0.5. Cab drivers make an attractive sample because their wages
fluctuate from day-to-day, but within a day, their wages are relatively stable. This result is hard
to square with neoclassical theory. To explain the observed behavior Camerer et al. (1997)
informally propose a model of labor supply that borrows from prospect theory, where drivers set
a daily income target beyond which their marginal utility of income decreases substantially.

Clearly the implications of income targeting are far reaching, but the empirical evidence
presented in the literature thus far has been mixed. For example, Oettinger (1999), Farber (2005)
and Goldberg (2014) find that labor supply responds positively to increases in wages for stadium
vendors, a richer sample of New York City taxi cab drivers, and laborers in Malawai, while
Chou (2002), Goette et al. (2004), and Fehr and Goette (2007) report evidence consistent with
reference-dependent preferences for taxi cab drivers in Singapore and bike messengers.

Koszegi and Rabin (2006), KR henceforth, develop a novel theory of reference-dependent
preferences that helps to synthesize the literature by proposing an explicit mechanism for the
generation of reference points in the labor supply decision.2 In the KR model, each worker wakes
up each morning and endogenously generates a reference point via rational expectations of their
daily wages and hours worked. This approach is appealing compared to a model of income
targeting where reference points cannot change in response to expected shifts in supply or
demand. Because reference points in KR are generated via expectations, the theory establishes a




War II, the Trans-Alaskan pipeline construction, or the Exxon Valdez cleanup. Mulligan (1995) shows that the IES
is well above unity for such samples.
2
  The model of reference-dependent preferences developed in KR is quite general. It also reconciles disparate
findings on puzzles like the endowment effect. Empirical research has found support for the role of reference points
in explaining the endowment effect (e.g., List (2003; 2004), Knetsch and Wong (2009), Engelmann and Hollard
(2010)) and against it (e.g., Heffetz and List (Forthcoming)).


                                                                                                                   3
clear set of predictions for labor supply in response to expected and unexpected changes in
income.3

In the first empirical test of KR in the context of labor supply decisions, Crawford and Meng
(2011) reanalyze the naturally occurring data from Farber (2005, 2008) to test a model where cab
drivers target both daily income and hours worked via rational expectations. They find that KR
explains labor supply behavior well, whereas a neoclassical model has difficulties.4 This
represented an important contribution, in that it showcases that in a naturally-occurring economic
environment an important behavioral model can capture the essence of the labor supply decision.
Since currently the dominant paradigm underlying policy estimates is the neoclassical variant,
such a result highlights that with reference dependent preferences the usual elasticity estimates
can be severely biased.

We complement this research by extending it in several dimensions. We begin by formalizing
three major theories of labor supply—two behavioral and their neoclassical counterpart.
Through the lens of the models, one can see that the previous empirical work using naturally-
occurring data relies on an identification strategy that requires strong assumptions. For instance,
in the cab literature, identification is not possible without assumptions on the determinants of
driver expectations. We demonstrate the importance of this assumption in the cab literature by
investigating the sensitivity of key parameters in Crawford and Meng to perturbations in
expectations and realized earnings. This exercise, proposed in Gentzkow and Shapiro (2014),
allows us to explore the relative importance of identifying assumptions for parameter estimates.


3
  In particular, an increase in expected wages on a given day should increase labor supply (consistent with the
findings of Oettinger (1999), Fehr and Goette (2007), Goldberg (2014)), and an unexpected increase in wages
should decrease labor supplied (consistent with the findings of Camerer et al. (1997), Chou (2002), and Goette et al.
(2004)).
4
  There is also increasing evidence of expectation based reference points explaining other types of behavior in
naturally occurring data. Pope and Schweitzer (2011) find that professional golfers behave consistent with KR’s
predictions: They make a higher percentage of putts when a miss would put them in the losses domain when the
reference point is a function of the average score on a whole (as opposed to par). In a similar vein, using
expectations of a win from gambling markets, Card and Dahl (2011) find that when a football team has an
unexpected loss it explains violent behavior well. In the lab, Abeler et al. (2011) test KR in a real effort task. The lab
lends itself well to exogenously varying expectations and Abeler et al. (2011) find that reference points, generated
via rational expectations, influence effort provision as predicted by KR.




                                                                                                                        4
Our findings induce us to design a field experiment that is tightly linked to the theory, where the
exogeneity is achieved by design rather than assumption.

We visit a well-functioning market in India and use a field experiment to construct a panel
dataset of labor supply for 335 vendors that are free to choose their hours of work. We randomly
assign vendors to receive large shocks to their earnings in order to test explicitly the conflicting
predictions of a KR, an income targeting, and a neoclassical model of labor supply. Our sample
allows us to generate data that speaks directly to the earlier literature that utilized naturally
occurring data while enjoying a level of control on the exogenous shocks that allows us to speak
clearly to the theory. In doing so, this study provides a framework to isolate the impact of
expected and unexpected changes in daily income on labor supply over both the hours and effort
dimensions by simply varying the timing of information available to vendors.

We show that expected increases in wages lead to modest, but statistically significant increases
in hours worked, with an implied labor supply elasticity between 0.01 and 0.03. We also show
that when vendors are shocked with an unexpected windfall their hours of labor supply do not
respond: vendors who receive an unexpected windfall work a similar number of hours as control
vendors, and their probability of quitting as the day progresses is also indistinguishable from the
behavior of control vendors. Furthermore, as prices are determined by haggling, the bargaining
data allows us to compare vendor effort between control and treatment and before and after
treatment. Across all comparisons, treatment and control vendors are statistically
indistinguishable. In sum, the evidence suggests that a simple neoclassical model of labor supply
captures the behavior of vendors in our market.

The remainder of the study is organized as follows: Section II reviews the theoretical content of
the competing models of labor supply. Section III links the theory to the experimental design.
Section IV summarizes the evidence generated by our field experiment, first reviewing the
behavioral response to an expected wage increase and then analyzing the response to an
unexpected wage increase. Section V concludes with a brief discussion.




                                                                                                       5
II. Theory

To motivate our experimental design we present a discussion of the labor and effort supply
decisions for vendors in our sample. The decision problem for vendors each day is to choose
their hours of labor supply, ℎ,5 according to that day's marginal return to labor supplied, !,
which we can think of as the vendor’s hourly wage. Wages change day-to-day with vendor's
learning a day's wage rate when they wake up in the morning. Vendor total income endowment,
!, is also affected by unanticipated changes to their endowment, !! , that are uncorrelated with !,
like a large overpayment from a customer or a loss due to a theft, giving us ! = !ℎ + !! .6

With this framework established, we examine predictions of three models of labor supply. First,
we discuss a simple neoclassical labor supply model and characterize the response of labor
supply to anticipated changes in wages and to an unanticipated income shock. Next we consider
the same comparative statics in a model where workers bracket their utility on a day-by-day
basis with gain-loss utility over daily earnings in relation to an exogenously determined
reference point—we refer to this model as an income targeting model as it is motivated by the
informal model of Camerer et al. (1997). Last, we treat reference points as endogenous
distributions of rational expectations for hours and income as presented in KR.

Neoclassical labor supply: Consider the preferences of a neoclassical vendor on a given day, !,
whose utility is additively separable into utility !(∙) from earnings, income ! and !(∙) from
hours worked ℎ. The neoclassical vendor chooses ℎ according to:

(1)                                             ! = ! ! − !! ℎ

where !(∙) is increasing and concave and !(∙) increasing and convex. Totally differentiating the
first order condition with respect to ! and re-arranging yields the following comparative static:

                                              !ℎ  !!! ! !ℎ + !′(!)
                                                 = !!
                                              !" ! ℎ − !!! ! ! !




5
    ℎ can also be thought of as worker effort, !, which we discuss later.
6
    We can also think of !! as a vendor’s expected discounted lifetime earnings.


                                                                                                    6
which is positive if !! ! > ! −!!! ! !ℎ. This condition conveys the mathematical content
behind the belief that labor supply curves slope upwards in response to transitory changes in
wages. In particular, provided vendors have sufficient expected discounted lifetime earnings
(!! ), ! ⋅ shouldn’t display much curvature at ! and the inequality should hold.7

The same procedure for a change in savings yields:

                                               !ℎ        !!! ! !
                                                  =
                                               !!! ! !! ℎ − !!! ! ! !

which will be ≈ 0 for ! ⋅ without dramatic curvature locally. Again, this captures the sense in
which a vendor that receives a shock to non-wage income will only change their behavior
through a wealth effect, which ought to be small over small changes in lifetime income. These
comparative static predictions are summarized in the first row of table 1.

Income targeting labor supply: Under the informal framework suggested by Camerer et al.
(1997)8 vendors choose hours worked in order to maximize a functional form along the lines of:

                                               ![! ! − !! ] − ! ℎ ,!!!!!! ≤ !!
(2)                                     !=
                                                 ! ! − !! − ! ℎ , ! > !!

where !! is an exogenous daily income utility target and ! > 1 captures the aversion vendors
have towards failing to meet their daily target. Income targeting vendors who are below their
daily target earn !" from each hour they work.9 Then, when a vendor crosses their daily target,
the returns to an hour of work drops to !, which captures the sense in which income targeting
vendors will work more on days when their wage is low and less when their wage is high
(!ℎ !" < 0). In an income-targeting model an income shock impacts hours worked by moving



7
 This condition is not an artifact of our static modeling of the decision problem. A similar restriction emerges in a
dynamic model.
8
  We follow the model suggested by Camerer et al. (1997, pp. 425-426): “One possible explanation for the negative
hours elasticities is that cabdrivers take a one-day horizon, and set a target (or a target range) and quit when the
target is reached. This decision rule can be modeled by a marginal utility of income declining substantially around
the average daily income level.”
9
    To see this, note that for vendors with ! ≤ !! , their marginal rate of substitution is equal to !", not !:
                                                         !′(ℎ)
                                                                 = !".
                                                         !′(!)




                                                                                                                        7
vendors who are in the loss domain into the gain domain, reducing their effective wage rate from
!" to !, which induces vendors to work fewer hours (!ℎ !!! < 0).

Figure 1: Panel A shows how labor supply interacts with wages in an income-targeting model
using simulated data.10 The curve labeled No Overpayment plots labor supply when there is no
shock to earnings. The sharp discontinuity around the daily income target is what induces
negative labor supply elasticities over a large region of wage changes. The curve labeled
Overpayment shows labor supply for an income-targeting vendor on a day where they earn a
large income shock. The income shock induces income-targeting vendors into the gains domain,
causing them to work weakly fewer hours at a given wage rate than they would if they had not
earned the overpayment.

To explore these comparative statics further, we suppose a vendor wakes up on a given day and
observes a wage of !! . If there is no overpayment, then the vendor will supply labor along the
associated supply curve and choose ℎ(!! ) for that day. If the wage is increased to !! , then the
vendor will instead choose ℎ(!! ) on the same supply curve, where ℎ(!! ) > ℎ(!! ) for !! < !!
if the wages place the vendor above and below the day’s reference income. To see the
comparative static on an overpayment, compare the supply of labor within a wage, !! , when
there is no overpayment, which is ℎ(!! ), to the supply of labor when there is an overpayment,
which is ℎ(!! ). As the figure shows, provided the vendor is in the income-loss domain,
ℎ(!! ) > ℎ(!! ), the negative relationship between hours worked and an overpayment in an
income-targeting model arises.

Labor supply in KR: The KR model has reference points generated via rational expectations of
daily income and hours worked.11 Thus, if a change to wages is expected, vendors will adjust
their reference points and labor supply will behave according to the neoclassical model's

                                                                               !!!                    !!!
10
  In particular, we assume the following preference parameterization: ! ! = ! ! !!!!!!and ! ℎ = ! !!!
                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                     ℎ    ! with

the following choices of parameter values: ! = 0.01, !! = 10,000, ! = 0.005, ! = 0.3,!and ! = 3 with !! = 100.
The income shock is 500. For the region where vendors are above target income if maximizing their loss utility and
below the target income if maximizing their gains utility we set hours according to gains utility.
11
  By rational expectations we mean that KR vendors would have a plan for hours worked for each possible value of
!. Each plan is made according to a vendor’s neoclassical preferences (1). Vendor expectations for hours worked
and income are then the cumulative distribution of each of these plans weighted by how likely the plan for each
wage will occur.


                                                                                                                 8
predictions. However, when unexpected changes occur within-day, reference points are not
updated and gain-loss utility augments the vendors maximization problem.

More formally, the KR vendor maximize an augmented version of (2) where vendors now assign
probabilistic beliefs to every possible outcome, ex-ante, creating a reference lottery.12 Under this
specification, gain-loss utility arises from a vendor's comparison of a day's outcome in relation to
her distribution of weighted reference points, weighing losses more heavily than gains, the
intuition being that for a given realized daily income, !, vendors will feel a mixture of gains and
losses in relation to all the incomes they were expecting, weighted by the probability with which
they were expecting each possible day’s income:

(3)                        ! =! ! −! ℎ +
                                 !                             !
                                      ! − !! !" !! − !             [!! − !] !" !! +
                                !!                            !

                                  !                               !
                                      [!! − ℎ]!"(!! ) − !             ℎ − !! !"(!! )!
                                !                               !!




where!! > 1 is the weight of losses13 and !(∙) and !(∙) are cumulative distribution functions that
capture the probabilistic beliefs of daily income (the random variable, !! ) and labor supplied
(!! ), respectively. A KR vendor chooses ℎ to maximize (2), yielding two distinct predictions.
Unlike an income targeting model, KR predicts positive labor supply elasticities in response to
expected changes in wages, !, !ℎ !" > 0, but with respect to an unpredicted shock to income,
!! , KR predicts a negative elasticity, !ℎ !!! < 0.




12
  As KR explains it, the idea of a reference lottery is that if you are drawing a dollar amount from 0 to 100 and you
pull a 50, you will feel gains in comparison to the possible draws below 50 and you will feel losses in relation to the
possible draws above 50.
13
  We neglect the typical weight of gain-loss utility for the sake of parsimony. Mathematically, we can think of it
being normalized to 1 and subsumed in our λ term.


                                                                                                                      9
Figure 1: Panel B shows how labor supply evolves for the KR vendor.14 The curve labeled
Baseline plots labor supply for a typical distribution of wages on a day where there is no shock to
income.15 Comparing labor supplied for a given wage rate, for example !! , with and without an
overpayment shows how unexpected changes in earnings can induce vendors to quit early. The
curve labeled Overpayment plots hours worked for each possible wage rate, which is below the
hours worked when there is no shock to earnings. To see this, compare the labor supplied by the
supply function when there is no overpayment, ℎ(⋅), and the supply function when there is an
overpayment, ℎ(⋅), at !! . The comparative static is negative because ℎ !! > ℎ(!! ). To show
the comparative static on an expected change in daily wages, we provide the curve labeled
Expected wage increase, which plots labor supplied when vendors earn an expected hourly wage
in addition to their stochastic wage, !! .16 The comparison between the Baseline curve and
Expected wage increase curve at !! and !! show how an expected wage increase in KR leads to
a positive labor supply response.

Design Suggested by Theory: Figure 2 illustrates how expected and unexpected changes in
income interact with reference points. The figure plots leisure (24 hours - hours worked) against
income with each unit of leisure that is sold in the labor market yielding income as a function of
wages. The figure also features vendor reference points, !! and !! , which can be thought of as
the weighted average of each of the vendor's reference points.

To see the importance of expectations in KR, we consider a vendor on day ! that chooses labor
along !" and is informed that they will earn a supplemental wage on days ! + 1 and ! + 2 for
every hour they work. This intervention changes !, wages, and shifts !" up to !" for days
! + 1 and ! + 2. Because information is revealed about ! on day !, reference points in KR also
shift on days ! + 1 and ! + 2 from !! and !! , up to !! ′ and !! ′, leading to a prediction consistent


14
  We assume the same preferences for the KR vendor as we did the income-targeting vendor with wages distributed
according to: !!~!!(4, 0.2) and the overpayment, !!~!!"#$%&''((0.001). Baseline plots labor supplied when the
overpayment is 0. Overpayment plots labor supplied when the overpayment is realized, ! = 500.
15
  The labor supply curve is upward sloping for KR vendors, but does not have to be for unexpected realized wage
rates. See KR for a discussion.
16
  In particular, the expected wage increase line plots labor supplied for ! = ! + 10, !!~!! 4, 0.2 , and the
overpayment, !!~!!"#$%&''((0.001), where the overpayment does not occur.


                                                                                                               10
with the neoclassical prediction of an upward sloping labor supply for KR. A vendor that
generates references points via lagged earnings, on the other hand, would not move from !! and
!! !to !! ′ and !! ′ and labor supply would be negative in response to the perfectly expected
increase in wages.

When no information is given prior to a random shock of a day's income, !, reference points will
not be able to shift and gain-loss domains will play an important role in both KR and an income
targeting model. Consider again the vendor that accrues hours worked and income along line !".
At the start of the day, this vendor's gain-loss utility is mostly in hours-gains/income-losses so
the marginal cost of each hour worked is cheap compared to the marginal utility gained from
escaping the feeling of income losses. Line !" passes right through the intersection of !! and !!
but consider an unexpected deviation from !" at point ! where a vendor earns a windfall of !
pushing them up to point!!.17 As the vendor continues to work after the windfall, they now move
along line !" where gain-loss utility from income is no longer heavily weighted because the
vendor is well beyond !! . But as the hours accrue and the vendor gets closer and closer to !! , the
weight of hours-losses starts to mount, motivating the vendor to quit early. This can be gleaned
by considering the vendor still on !" whose disutility from approaching !! is counteracted by
the utility from increased earnings and approaching !! . This yields a negative within-day
elasticity with respect to unexpected changes in income.

Expectations and identification in past studies: One of the key results in Crawford and Meng is
the relationship between a driver’s likelihood of quitting after a given fare, 18 cumulative hours
worked, cumulative earnings, and gain/loss status. In particular, on days that a driver’s wage is
above expectations, cumulative hours worked is an important predictor of quitting for the day.19
However when drivers observe a wage below their expectations, the opposite is observed.
Cumulative income instead of hours worked predicts that a driver will quit. As Crawford and


17
  Note that !" and !" are parallel. This is because we assume that the windfall earned at point ! contains no
information that would change ! in future hours of the day.
18
  These marginal effects are from a Probit model reported in Columns 2 and 3 in Panel B of Table 2 in Crawford
and Meng.
19
   To overcome endogeneity concerns, Crawford and Meng cut the sample by whether a driver’s earnings during the
first hour of work is above or below expectations for that hour.


                                                                                                                 11
Meng explain, “Such a reversal is inconsistent with a neoclassical model, in which the targets are
irrelevant; but it is gracefully explained by a reference-dependent model.”

Crawford and Meng use lagged average earnings and hours worked for each driver/day-of-week
combination. They concede that this proxy is noisy but find that their results are “robust to
variations in the specification of the targets.” The stability of their results to alternative
definitions of expectations is key because it suggests that their reported labor supply dynamics
are not driven by their simple approximation of the data generating process for expectations.

As an alternative to their robustness exercise we calculate the (local) sensitivity of key
parameters in Crawford and Meng20 to the assumption that (i) lagged earnings measure
expectations and (ii) first hour earnings measure realized earnings. This exercise, proposed by
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2014), allows us to compare the sensitivity of parameters with respect to
these two assumptions (holding all else equal). This exercise is informative because (ii) is an
administrative measure of earnings. That is, parameters ought be sensitive to perturbations to
(ii), whereas Crawford and Meng present suggestive evidence that their estimates are robust to
perturbations to (i).

Figure 3 presents results from our analysis, with each plotted value representing the expected
change in the marginal effect in response to a standard deviation change in expected or realized
earnings holding all else equal.21 The top frame of Figure 3 shows that when drivers are in the
gains domain, identification is sensitive to both assumptions with the marginal effect responding
slightly more to perturbations in first hour earnings than expectations. This trend reverses in the
bottom frame. When drivers are in the losses domain the marginal effect on quitting with respect
to changes in cumulative total hours worked and income is more sensitive to changes in expected
earnings than realized earnings.


20
  We downloaded Crawford and Meng’s analysis from their online supplementary materials. We focus on the
marginal effects with respect to cumulative total hours worked and cumulative income that are presented in Table 2,
Panel B, Columns 3 and 4 in Crawford and Meng. See Gentzkow and Shapiro (2014) for details on conducting this
calculation.
21
   Perhaps an easier way to view our investigation here is that Crawford and Meng’s estimates are via GMM with
two additional moment conditions in their estimates in Table 2: (i) Expected earnings minus lagged average earnings
is 0 on average and (ii) First hour earnings minus wage is 0 on average. Then results in Figure 3 show the extent to
which parameter estimates are sensitive to model misspecification.


                                                                                                                 12
Put differently, consider the following question: To what extent is the assumption that lagged
earnings measures driver expectations affecting estimates in Crawford and Meng? Figure 3
shows us that key parameters depend as much or more on assumption (i) as they do on
assumption (ii). That is, while the reversal described by Crawford and Meng are robust to
specific changes in the specification of expectations, a more formal investigation reveals that key
parameters are quite sensitive to misspecification of expected earnings.22

Alternative dimensions of labor supply: In Figure 2, one of the key requirements for the
predictions of KR is that after the overpayment at !, the slope of !" is equal to the slope of !".
If workers expected their wage to increase after the overpayment then the slope of !" would be
steeper and the change in the gain-loss utility from the overpayment (the second and third lines
of equation (2)) could be counteracted by the neoclassical component of utility in KR (the first
line in equation (2)). One way around this difficulty is to design an overpayment that is
orthogonal to future earnings that day. Another would be to explore an alternative dimension of
labor supply that does not rely on intuiting the worker’s expectations about future wages.

We present a model of effort provision for a worker at a single-worker firm who collects a
portion of their firm’s profits and where the production function for that firm is only a function
of bargaining effort.23 Using a simple theory of the firm suggests that worker effort can be
directly observed in our setting. To see this, we start with the typical equilibrium condition for
wages at a firm:

(3)                                           !"# = !

where the marginal product of labor is simply the first derivative of the firm’s production
function, !(!), where ! ⋅ is strictly increasing and strictly concave in effort, !. As a result, (3)
simplifies to:

                                              ! ! !! = !! = ! !(!! − !)



22
 We only conduct a sensitivity analysis on Table 2 but extending this to Crawford and Meng’s structural model
would be straightforward. Difficulties in estimating their structural model cause us to focus our efforts on Table 2.
23
  At this point we are introducing a feature of the market that we later study. Some other industries, such as taxi cab
drivers, do not have a similar margin for effort that is easily detectable in the same way.


                                                                                                                    13
where ! is the fraction of profits the worker takes home in wages from transaction ! when the
worker exerts effort level !! . The profits from transaction ! are simply the difference in price that
results from bargaining and the per-unit cost of the good being sold. Thus, a simple theory of the
firm tells us exactly how to identify effort in a market with single-worker firms and no posted
prices—just observe the final negotiated price. That is:
                                                          !
(4)                                            !! = ! !! [!(!! − !)].

By observing !! we can observe effort for a given transaction.

But how do the three models discussed above deal with quality of labor supply (effort), as
opposed to quantity (hours worked)? Conceptually, the three models work identically to the
description above.24 A neoclassical model has a worker that wakes up each morning and
observes the returns to effort on that day, chooses an aggregate level of effort to provide on that
day, and then smooths the effort supplied over all the transactions that occur over the course of
the day. The neoclassical model therefore predicts no change in effort supplied in response to an
overpayment.25 The two behavioral models, on the other hand, predict reduced effort in response
to an overpayment.26

In summary, the three major models of labor supply yield differing sets of predictions in
response to expected and unexpected changes in wages and earnings, as summarized in Table 1.
Neoclassical theory and KR predicts increasing labor supply to increases in expected wages,
while an income-targeting model would predict decreasing. With respect to unexpected changes
in earnings, neoclassical theory predicts no change in labor supply or effort provision but KR and
a status quo model predict negative supply elasticities for both quantity and quality of labor.




24
     KR also suggests that effort and hours worked are interchangeable in their model of labor supply.
25
     A condition that is easy to satisfy provided the overpayment occurs without any bargaining by the customer.
26
  Note that we are modeling the quantity of labor supplied as fixed and the effort provided in those hours as the
relevant margin (see also Abeler et al. (2011)). A joint model would be less tractable and proves unnecessary to
interpret the data from our field experiment.


                                                                                                                    14
III. From Theory to Experimental Design

To test the central predictions of these three theories of labor supply we conduct two field
experiments in the Spring of 2006 (Session 1) and the Fall of 2007 (Session 2) in an Indian open
air market, the Burra Bazaar in Shillong, North East. The market is the city's main poultry, meat,
vegetable, produce, and merchandise market, and has a large number of vendors who are
geographically organized by the wares they sell. Vendors in our experiment work as independent
contractors. They either own their shop or get paid a percentage of daily profits for working.
Only single-vendor shops that sold non-perishables were selected for observation, as vendors
that sold perishables would face a different maximization problem than discussed above.

The market opens at sunrise, which was 8:00am during Session 1 and 6:00am during Session 2,
and it closes at sunset, around 9:00pm. While these constraints place a ceiling on hours of labor
supplied, actual hours are well below the ceiling, giving us a generous margin to examine
changes in labor supplied. Also, importantly, vendors in Shillong are not trading their time
between multiple labor markets, such as agricultural work, allowing us to confidently call the
hours worked we observe, each worker’s total hours of labor supplied that day.

We conduct two separate experiments in the market; (i) The Market Survey experiment, where
we vary expected wages for vendors and observe labor supply, (ii) The Betel Nut Experiment
where we observe labor supply as well as bargaining effort after an unexpected earnings shock.
Table 2 summarizes several key variables of vendors in our two experiments. In particular, the
data confirm that vendors in both experiments set their own hours, as within-vendor variance is
nearly as high as between-vendor variance in both experiments.

In the Market Survey Experiment we highlight the various margins of hours of labor supply for
our sample. In particular, vendors are free to participate in supplying labor on any given day,
with 98% of the vendor days supplying some labor. Also, vendors showed up to the market
between 9:00 am and 10:00 am and left between 6:00 pm and 7:00 pm, with a small percentage
taking breaks during the day.27 These four margins and the substantial within-vendor variance for


27
  For the sake of simplicity, we report average arrival time even though the market's opening time varied between
the two sessions, as it does not change within vendor variance in arrival time to the market.


                                                                                                                15
each outcome highlight the numerous ways that vendors can take on extra hours of labor each
day if offered an expected transitory increase in wages.

In the Betel Nut Experiment we observe both hours of labor supplied as well as bargaining
effort. To quantify bargaining effort, we send local confederates to vendors to negotiate for a
uniform good sold by all vendors—betel nuts of two varieties. It is critical to our identification
strategy that vendors actually vary prices and the second half of Table 2 confirms our claim that
vendors do not use posted prices. In the bargaining task we observe the vendor's initial offer and
final price (in INR). Again, there is both within- and between-vendor variance over these
outcomes, suggesting that vendors are free to shirk if they pass their daily income-target early in
the day but high adjustment costs could cause them to supply their typical number of hours
worked.28

To observe hours of labor supply and effort in bargaining we hired twenty-two local agents over
the two periods. Before the experiment, an extensive mapping of the market was conducted and
each shop was carefully marked out. All agents were carefully trained in identifying the shops
such that purchases and hours worked could be cleanly observed. Figure 4 summarizes the dates
of each experiment, the number of vendors in each cell, the number of days of observation, the
dynamics of treatment assignment, and the size of the treatment incentives compared to
approximate control market earnings. We discuss the details of treatment for each experiment
separately below.

Treatments in the Market Survey Experiment: The Market Survey Experiment consists of
transitory expected increases in the wage for vendors. A total of 250 shops were selected over
two periods of time—90 in the Spring of 2006 and 160 in the Fall of 2007—with the 250 shops
being loosely geographically clustered into 14 geographic groupings where vendors sold similar
types of goods in each cluster. After being identified, vendors were monitored by our
experimenters. On day ! they were only monitored for hours of labor supplied to obtain a pre-
treatment baseline. At the end of day ! a portion of the vendors were randomly selected as


28
  Vendors sell one or two types of betel nuts that vary slightly in price. We present data on both in Table 2. The
only difference between the two types of betel nuts is price. Both types were purchased from all but 15 of the 85
vendors in the Betel Nut Experiment.


                                                                                                                     16
treatment vendors. The survey rewarded vendors for each hour that they recorded the number of
customers that approached the shop over the course of the next two days. Vendors were told that
an agent would come by their shop each hour of day ! + 1 and ! + 2 to collect their tally of
visitors to their shop. When a vendor was done for the day they would be paid INR 10, INR 30,
or INR 60 for each hour that they recorded this information.29 Because vendors agree to
participate in the market study at the end of day !, expectations going into the next day are for a
higher wage, however payment was conducted at the end of days ! + 1 and ! + 2, as opposed to
each hour that our monitors visited. The first five columns of Table 3 break down the number of
vendors and days of observation for each treatment in the Market Survey Experiment.

Under the control header is also the approximate hourly wage of a vendor based on our
discussions with locals—INR 10. The unit of randomization differed between sessions of the
Market Survey Experiment. In Session 1, six clusters of vendors were identified and then each
cluster had a treatment assignment. Then, within each cluster, vendors were randomized into
treatment (the level of which was constant within cluster) or control. Treatment vendors were
then randomized into a two-day period that the treatment would occur. In Session 2 eight clusters
of vendors were identified. Then four of those clusters had treatment (which was constant in
level again) and control status randomized; however the days of the treatment were constant
within cluster. The other four clusters in Session 2 were assigned to be either all treatment or
control, with treatment level also constant within cluster.

Treatment in the Betel Nut Experiment: In the second experiment we shock vendors with an
unexpected overpayment for a good, allowing us to cleanly transfer an overprize, !, early in the
day. In response to the overprize we observe both hours of labor supplied and vendor bargaining
effort for treatment and control. The experiment was run over 3 days according to the following
timeline: On day ! we only observed bargaining behavior across different vendors, on ! + 1 a
random sample of vendors were selected to receive approximately a week of profit (INR 500)
from a westerner. This transfer happens through the purchase of betel nuts, a mild narcotic, and a
huge overprize is made to the shopkeeper without any bargaining by the westerner. After quickly
delivering the shock to each vendor, the westerner leaves the market immediately. In the time

29
     Two vendors in session 1 declined participation in the INR 10 treatment. We omit these vendors from our sample.


                                                                                                                 17
spent in this market, western tourists were spotted occasionally, but only rarely, making an
overpayment by a westerner the ideal method of transferring an overprize, as it is unlikely to
convey information on future wages or bargaining effort that day. On day ! + 1 and ! + 2 we
observe bargaining effort again, as well as hours of labor supplied.30

The commodity chosen was betel nuts, since this was a commonly found non-perishable good,
allowing us to locate scores of different vendors. Our confederates were instructed to bargain at
pre-selected shops that were carefully mapped out. Over the three days, both treated and
untreated shops were approached several times by different agents. Each time a fixed amount of
betel nuts were purchased and bargaining behavior was recorded. Two types of betel nuts are
sold in the market, one type having been suspended in water for about a month. The agents were
instructed to purchase 20 betel nuts on each purchase. The average price elicited beforehand was
approximately 20 Rupees so agents were given 30 Rupees for each purchase. Any money
retained after the purchase was the agent’s to keep — bargaining was therefore incentivized for
our confederates (List, 2004). For each purchase we registered: Initial offer by the vendor, final
price agreed upon, time taken on bargaining, and the type of betel nut.

Figure 4 summarizes the details of this experiment. We note that the typical daily earnings of a
vendor tend to be around INR 80, a total of 85 vendors were randomized into treatment or
control, and the hours of labor supply was observed for two days while bargaining was observed
for all three.


IV.      Experimental Results

Market Survey Experiment: Figure 5 shows a time series of unconditional average hours worked
in the Market Survey Experiment, which we discuss now to motivate our identification strategy
below. The first set of dates is from Session 1, which was run in the Spring of 2006 and the
second set of dates is from Session 2 in the Fall of 2007. The top panel plots the vendors that


30
  Importantly, neither experiment change daily earnings via a mechanism that would induce workers to reciprocate
with increased hours or effort (see, e.g., Akerlof (1982), Fehr et al. (1993), Gneezy and List (2006), and Kube et al.
(2012)) nor do subjects know they are participating in an experiment designed to observe labor supply responses to
changes in earnings.


                                                                                                                    18
earned a high hourly supplemental wage (INR 30 and INR 60) against control vendors while the
bottom panel plots the low wage increase vendors (INR 10) against the same set of control
vendors. The numbers next to points on the time-series are included to indicate that treatment
was applied on that day and whether it was the first or second day of treatment, with a 1 denoting
the first day of treatment and a 2 denoting the second day of treatment.

Figure 5 allows us to compare the impact of treatment status on labor supplied both within
treatment arms and between treatment and control. Immediately a number of trends jump out
from Session 1. In particular, consistent with both KR and neoclassical theory, treatment status
appears to lead to increases of between 0.2 to 0.6 hours of labor supplied, with the biggest
increases on the second day of treatment status. This observation is independent of any possible
day fixed effect for Session 1, as we randomize the start of treatment in Session 1 and both
waves of treatment see an increase in labor supplied on the second day of treatment status. While
treatment vendors were told at the end of day ! that their wages would be increased on days
! + 1 and ! + 2, the supplemental wage may not have been entirely credible until the end of the
day ! + 1 when vendors were actually paid for the first time by our agents. Thus, the time-series
suggests that the purest test of the impact on hours worked of an expected increase in wages
would be a comparison of pre-treatment hours worked to hours worked in day!! + 2.

Figure 5 also shows that, in general, hours of labor supplied decreased for vendors after
treatment status, especially in Session 1. This is consistent with vendors trading current work for
future leisure on treatment days, but to fully test this prediction would require observing vendors
over a longer time-span so we focus on the comparison of pre-treatment hours of labor supplied
to labor supplied on day ! + 2 because using post-treatment variation in hours worked would fail
the strict exogeneity assumption of any panel regression model.

One other feature of the data that Figure 5 highlights is the increased variability in hours worked
in Session 2. Recalling Table 3, Session 2 featured a larger number of vendors over a shorter
period of time than Session 1. Furthermore, the variability of hours worked by geographic cluster
was greater in Session 2, making inference from a comparison of means in Figure 5 difficult.
Nonetheless, Figure 5 does show that the increase in labor supplied on day ! + 2 for treatment
vendors holds for all treatments but INR 10 in Session 2.


                                                                                                   19
To more precisely test the predictions of the three theories, we estimate the following linear
model:

(5)                                  !!"# = !! + !!"! ! + !!"#
Where !!"# represents the quantity of labor supplied by vendor ! in cluster ! on day !. ! is a
vector with dummies for the three levels of treatment status and control. ! is a vector with our
coefficients of interest. Augmenting the analysis we also include fixed effects for cluster (!! ).31
Furthermore, we estimate (5) over two samples. In column (1) we use both days of treatment. In
column (2) estimates are over just Day 2 of treatment. The robust standard errors reported in
Table 3 are clustered at the lowest level of randomization for a geographic cluster of vendors.

Table 3 shows that across both specifications the coefficient for INR 60 is significant at
traditional levels with the inclusion of day 1 of treatment substantially attenuating the estimate.
For example, the coefficient of INR 60 in column (1) tells us that an expected transitory wage
increase of INR 60 led to 0.238 more hours of labor supply. In column (2) that estimate increases
to 0.618 more hours. Estimates of the coefficient on INR 30 are also positive, but only
significant in the statistical sense when day 1 of treatment is dropped in column (2). Across both
specifications we cannot detect whether the impact of a supplemental wage of INR 10 is
different from zero. These estimates show that an expected increase in wages leads to an increase
in hours worked. This outcome is in line with predictions of a neoclassical model of labor supply
and KR, however it is not consonant with a model of labor supply according to an income-
targeting model with exogenous income targets.

While our estimates are statistically significant, economically they are quite small. A back of the
envelope calculation of the implied elasticity suggests an intertemporal substitution elasticity of
labor supply between 0.01 to 0.03 for our sample.32 To place this elasticity in relation to other
estimates we briefly review estimates of this parameter. Card (1994, pp. 63) notes that, “[t]aken


31
  Estimation with vendor specific fixed effects does not change the analysis. Estimation with day*cluster fixed
effects is not feasible because their inclusion drops the four clusters that had no variation in treatment and day.
32
  As reported in Table 4, the average hours worked for vendors in control is 8.343 hours and treatment vendors
increase their hours worked by 0.6 hours in response to a 600% increase in wages, giving an elasticity of labor
supplied of 0.01. The largest elasticity implied by Table 4 is given by the INR 30 treatment in column 2, where
wages were increased by 300% and hours worked increased by 0.7 hours, yielding a labor supply elasticity of 0.03.


                                                                                                                      20
together, the literature suggests that the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is surely no higher
than 0.5, and probably no higher than 0.2.” Subsequent research has sought to estimate this
parameter using quasi-experiments (e.g., Iceland eliminated its income tax in 1987, Bianchi et al.
(2001)), finding elasticities between 0.2 and 0.4 but these elasticities are still an order of
magnitude too small to explain the changes in labor supply over the business cycle. Chetty et al.
(2011) argues that adjustment costs and employer constraints on changing labor supply
attenuates the micro estimates of these elasticities. Fehr and Goette (2007) report evidence
consistent with this claim from a field experiment using bike messengers in Zurich with high-
frequency data. However, we have argued that our sample faces no such constraints and the
labor supply response in our sample is still quite small.

To explore why the response in our sample is so small, Figure 5 pools treatment vendors and
compares the densities of hours worked, start time, and end time for treatment and control
vendors.33 If our vendors face frictions that prevent them from supplying labor right when the
market opens or up until the market closes then the comparison of treatment and control
distributions of start or end time should appear identical. Figure 5 suggests that there are no such
frictions at work, as treatment vendors exploit all three margins by showing up earlier, leaving
later, and taking off the day less often.34 This leads us to attribute the differences between our
findings and recent work to the fact that our estimates are driven off of changes over a very short
time-span, even though it is unclear why an intertemporal substitution elasticity ought to be
driven by a longer time-span. Furthermore, the magnitude of the transitory increase in wages in
our experiment are so large that the returns to supplying more labor ought to overwhelm any
possible adjustment costs.

Betel Nut Experiment: Whereas neoclassical theory and KR have identical predictions for the
market survey experiment, the Betel Nut experiment pits the two theories against each other.
Neoclassical theory predicts no response to labor supply, while KR predicts that vendors would
quit early or supply less effort over the hours of labor they supply. Table 4 presents summary


33
  Figure 4 compares vendors on day 2 of treatment to control vendors that were also in clusters with treatment
vendors. Different specifications yield the same responses.
34
     Which can be seen by comparing the left tail of hours worked.


                                                                                                                 21
statistics from the treatment day of the Betel Nut Experiment. The first row reports the hours of
labor supplied by treatment and control vendors conditional on supplying labor in the market that
day. Table 4 shows that hours of labor supplied across the two samples are identical. The same
trend emerges in the bargaining data, with treatment and control vendors making identical initial
offers, agreeing to the same prices, and using similar amounts of time to negotiate.

Table 4 reports the total hours worked by treatment and control vendors. In line with neoclassical
theory the point estimates are strikingly similar. However, Table 4 does not report one source of
variation that we can exploit. In particular, the intervention occurred just after 10:00 am on the
day of treatment, but vendors arrived at the market at various times. Thus, as the day progressed,
it is possible that the cumulative hours worked by a vendor explains quitting for treatment
vendors but not control. To test this we follow Crawford and Meng (2011) and estimate a probit
model of the probability that a vendor quits in a given hour separately for treatment and control
vendors:

(6)                                    !!" = !ℎ!" + ! !!"
Where vendor ! stops working at ! if !!" > 0 where ℎ!" measures cumulative hours worked at
hour ! for vendor !. Regardless of the model we are testing, cumulative hours worked should be
positively related to the probability of quitting, but if the effect of cumulative hours worked
weighs more heavily for treatment vendors that passed their income target early in the morning
then we would have evidence consistent with KR.

Table 5 reports the marginal effects from a probit regression where, following Farber (2005) and
Crawford and Meng (2011) we assess the marginal effects at the 8th hour of work. Both
estimates in Table 6 suggest that a one hour increase in hours worked corresponds to 30-40
percentage-point increase in the probability of quitting, but consistent with neoclassical theory
the effect of cumulative hours worked does not weigh more heavily on treatment vendors than
control vendors with the two estimates strikingly similar.

Tables 4 and 5 show that an overpayment does not lead to the predicted change in behavior of
KR and an income-targeting model of hours of labor supply, however, we’ve made a strong
assumption in our interpretation of the hours worked data from the Betel Nut Experiment. In
particular we assumed that a large overpayment early in the day will leave each vendor’s
expected wages unchanged. KR contends that reference points are fixed at the start of each day
                                                                                                     22
but the neoclassical utility component in KR is still free to respond to changes in expected
wages. Thus, it’s possible that these two components counteract one another and the results
presented so far are the sum of these two effects.

However, as we showed in the alternative dimensions discussion in Section 1, effort exerted by
vendors can be indirectly observed by final prices bargained in the marketplace and expected
returns to effort should be unchanged in response to an instantaneous overpayment in the
marketplace.

The bottom rows of Table 4 show that treatment and control vendors were equally effective at
bargaining prices suggesting they supplied similar levels of effort in bargaining on the treatment
day. Nonetheless, we can exploit the panel structure of the bargaining data to consider the
possibility that the sample means in Table 4 are motivated by other sources of variation. Figure 6
presents a time series of mean final price standardized across Betel Nut type and confederate
conducting the bargaining for each hour-day over the course of the experiment for treatment and
non-treatment vendors. The number next to each dot in Figure 6 shows the quantity of
transactions observed in that hour-day combination.

Comparing final price for treatment and non-treatment vendors before and after treatment, no
substantial trends emerge. Before the treatment day, prices vary from hour-to-hour between
treatment and control vendors but the number of transactions per hour is small and averaged over
the entire day there is no significant difference. On treatment day, (2/28), the final price for
treatment vendors start out lower (although not lower in a statistically significant sense) than
control vendors. However this trend reverses later in the day. No trend emerges from the post-
treatment days of observation either.

To more formally rule out the influence of other sources of variation we estimate the following
linear model:

(7)                            !!"# = !! + !! + !!!" + !!"#
Where !!"# is the final price agreed upon for vendor ! on day ! with experimenter !. We run a
number of specifications that include fixed effects for day, !! , and vendor, !! , in order to test the
robustness of treatment, !!" , on price. Furthermore, we include control variables for the type of
betel nut bargained over.

                                                                                                     23
Table 6 shows results from estimating (7). Moving from column to column of Table 6 the
treatment status coefficient is consistently close to zero suggesting that receiving a large
overpayment early in the day does not affect vendor effort in bargaining. In fact, as control
variables are added, the sign of treatment actually becomes positive, although not large. Instead
of reference points describing vendor effort, it appears that vendors treat the overpayment just as
a neoclassical model would predict.

While it may be possible that vendors shirk over other dimensions of their effort, it is unclear
how any such dimension could affect the vendor's profits, as we have generated data that speaks
both to the effort a vendor spends on bargaining and the number of hours vendors spend
performing this task. Previous research on reference points and effort provision in lab
experiments (e.g., Abeler et al. (2011)) has similarly captured the profits to subjects by varying
the payoff to quantity and quality of effort. Yet, we find that when such tasks are conducted in
the field outside the scrutiny of the lab, there is little advantage of adding gain-loss utility to a
simple neoclassical model of labor supply.


V.      Concluding Remarks

Understanding the behavioral response to transitory changes in wages is critical for designing
policies ranging from taxation, unemployment benefits, and intergenerational transfers programs
like Social Security. As a result, a large literature in economics attempts to estimate the
magnitude of the intertemporal elasticity substitution for labor supply, the response to transitory
(as opposed to permanent) changes in the wage rate. A recent literature in behavioral economics
has emerged questioning whether the neoclassical model should be relied on to generate such
estimates. In particular, Farber (2008) notes:

        Evaluation of much government policy regarding tax and transfer programs depends
        on having reliable estimates of the sensitivity of labor supply to wage rates and
        income levels. To the extent that individuals’ levels of labor supply are the result of
        optimization with reference dependent preferences, the usual estimates of wage and
        income elasticities are likely to be misleading.
In this study, we design two field experiments to test the role of reference-dependent preferences
in the labor supply decision. We present a several competing models of labor supply and show
how an ideal experiment would test the predictions of these competing models. Beyond

                                                                                                        24
providing empirical insights, theoretically, the results of such exercises are important, as
questions of what models best explain behavior and whether life cycle labor supply models
explain business-cycle labor supply behavior remain ill-understood.

We report that expected changes in wages lead to increases in labor supply—a finding consistent
with neoclassical models of labor supply and KR but not with an income-targeting model. We
then report evidence on the behavioral response to unexpected changes in wages. Consistent with
a neoclassical model of labor supply we find that unexpected changes in wages have no impact
on hours of labor supply or on effort provided, suggesting that reference utility does not drive
behavior of vendors in our study.

Methodologically our study differs substantially from earlier work. By using a field experiment
in a naturally-occurring market, we can control changes in earnings and also changes in expected
earnings by simply divulging or withholding information. This added control of variation,
however, does not come at the expense of using subjects unfamiliar with allocating their labor in
the market studied. In particular, vendors mimic the features of those in studies that have used
naturally occurring data in the sense that the work of vendors is to efficiently allocate their labor
supply in the face of day-to-day changes in earnings.

Overall, we find that the predictions of the neoclassical model speak most clearly to observed
behavior. This, of course, does not mean that continued behavioral modeling is fruitless. More
work needs to be done to determine if our results are replicable; furthermore, much can be
gained by deepening our understanding of the models that can explain behavioral responses to
important changes in the economic environment.




                                                                                                   25
References


Abeler, Johannes, Armin Falk, Lorenz Goette, and David Huffman, “Reference Points and Effort
       Provision,” American Economic Review, April 2011, 101 (2), 470–492.

Akerlof, George A., “Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 1982, 97 (4), 543–569.

Altonji, Joseph G., “Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data,”
        Journal of Political Economy, June 1986, 94 (3), S176–S215.

Bianchi, Marco, Bjorn R. Gudmundsson, and Gylfi Zoega, “Iceland’s Natural Experiment in
       Supply-Side Economics,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (5), 1564–1579.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler, “Labor Supply of
      New York City Cabdrivers: One Day At A Time,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      1997, 112 (2), 407–441.

Card, David, “Intertemporal Labour Supply: An Assessment,” in Christopher Sims, ed.,
       Advances in Econometrics: Sixth World Congress, Volume II, Cambridge University
       Press 1994.

Card, David and Gordon B. Dahl, “Family Violence and Football: The Effect of Unexpected
       Emotional Cues on Violent Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1),
       103–143.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri, “Adjustment Costs, Firm
       Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence From Danish Tax
       Records,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 749–804.

Chou, Yuan K., “Testing Alternative Models of Labor Supply: Evidence from Taxi-Drivers in
      Singapore,” Working Paper, 2002.

Crawford, Vincent P. and Juanjuan Meng, “New York City Cabdrivers’ Labor Supply Revisited:
      Reference-Dependent Preferences with Rational-Expectations Targets for Hours and
      Income,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1912–1932.

Englemann, Dirk and Guillaume Hollard, "Reconsidering the Effect of Market Experience on the
      'Endowment Effect'," Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6): 2005-2019.

Farber, Henry S., “Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City Cab-
        drivers,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 46–82.

Farber, Henry S., “Reference-Dependent Preferences and Labor Supply: The Case of New York
        City Taxi Drivers,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 1069–1082.

Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette, “Do Workers Work More if Wages Are High? Evidence from a
                                                                                              26
       Randomized Field Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (1), 298–317.

Fehr, Ernst, Georg Kirchsteiger, and Arno Riedel, “Does Fairness Prevent Market Clearing? An
       Experimental Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (2), 437–459.

Fryer, Roland G., Steven D. Levitt, John List, and Sally Sadoff, "Enhancing the Efficacy of
        Teacher Incentives through Loss Aversion: A Field Experiment," NBER Working Paper
        No. 18237, 2012.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Measuring the Sensitivity of Parameter Estimates to
      Sample Statistics,” Working Paper, 2014.

Ghez, Gilbert R. and Gary S. Becker, Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life Cycle,
       National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Gneezy, Uri and John A. List, “Putting Behavioral Economics To Work: Testing For Gift
      Exchange In Labor Markets Using Field Experiments,” Econometrica, 2006, 74 (5),
      1365– 1384.

Goette, Lorenz, David Huffman, and Ernst Fehr, “Loss Aversion and Labor Supply,” Journal of
       the European Economic Association, 2004, 2 (2-3), 216–228.

Goldberg, Jessica, “Kwacha Gonna Do? Experimental Evidence about Labor Supply in Rural
      Malawi,” Working Paper, 2014.

Heffetz, Ori and John A. List, “Is the Endowment Effect an Expectations Effect,” Forthcoming,
       Journal of the European Economic Association.

Hossain, Tanjim and John A. List, “The Behavioralist Visits The Factory: Increasing
       Productivity Using Simple Framing Manipulations,” Management Science, 2012, 58 (12):
       21-51.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,”
      Econometrica, March 1979, 47 (2), 263–292.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, “Anomalies: The Endowment
      Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1991, 5
      (1), 193–2006.

Knetsch, Jack L., “The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference Curves,”
      American Economic Review, 1989, 79 (5), 1277–1284.

Knetsch, Jack L. and Wei-Kang Wong, “The endowment effect and the reference state: Evidence
      and manipulations,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2009, 71 (2), 407-
      413.

Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin, “A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1133–1165.
                                                                                            27
Kube, Sebastian, Clemens Puppe, and Michel Andre Marechal, “The Currency of Reciprocity –
       Gift Exchange in the Workplace,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1655-
       1662.

Levitt, Steven D., John A. List, Susanne Neckermann, Sally Sadoff, "The Behavioralist Goes to
        School: Leveraging Behavioral Economics to Improve Educational Performance," NBER
        Working Paper No. 18165, 2012.

List, John A., “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 41-72.

List, John A., “Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect Theory: Evidence from the Marketplace,”
        Econometrica, 2004, 72 (2), 615-625.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (6), 1059–1085.

Mulligan, Casey B., “The Intertemporal Substitution of Work What Does the Evidence Say?,”
       Working Paper, 1995.

Oettinger, Gerald S., “An Empirical Analysis of the Daily Labor Supply of Stadium Vendors,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (2), 360–392.

Pope, Devin G. and Maurice E. Schweitzer, “Is Tiger Woods Loss Averse? Persistent Bias in the
       Face of Experience, Competition, and High Stakes,” American Economic Review, 2011,
       101 (1), 129–157.




                                                                                              28
   Table 1: Comparative Statics of Labor Supply Models
                                                        dh      dh
                                                        dw      ds0
        Standard Neoclassical Model                     >0      ⇡0
        Income Targeting Model                          <0      <0
        Reference Dependent Model (KR)                  >0      <0
    Note: Each cell contains the sign of comparative static predictions
    of three separate models of daily labor supply. Labor supply, h,
    responds to changes in wage rate, w, and to unexpected changes in
    wages consonant with a large tip or overpayment that is uncorrelated
    with future income, s0 .




                    Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                                    Standard Deviation
                                       Mean         Within      Between
   Market Survey Experiment
          Hours                         8.472        1.069        1.405
          Participate                    .976         .096         .116
          Opening Time                  9.622         .586         .764
          Break                         .025         .117         .091
          Closing Time                  18.33         .402         .521
   Betel Nut Experiment
          Hours                         8.733        1.028        1.508
          Betel Nut Variety 1
             Initial O↵er (INR)        18.333        3.232        4.163
             Final Price (INR)         17.674        3.222        3.975
          Betel Nut Variety 2
             Initial O↵er (INR)        21.111        2.958        3.267
             Final Price (INR)         19.829        3.007        2.749

Note: Summary statistics are reported for the two experiments. Standard
deviations are reported for within vendor and between vendors. For the Market
Survey Experiment the statistics reported are daily hours worked, probability
of supply any labor, start time (in local 24-hour clock time), end time, and
probability of taking a break during the course of the work day. For the Betel
Nut Experiment the statistics reported are hours worked, initial price o↵er in
bargaining task (in INR), and final price in bargaining (in INR).
                Table 3: Labor Supply Regressions
                                      (1)               (2)
                                 Trt Days 1 & 2      Trt Day 2
                                     Hours             Hours
               INR 10                 0.026             0.231
                                     (0.251)           (0.245)
               INR 30                 0.134            0.366*
                                     (0.194)           (0.210)
               INR 60                0.233**          0.609***
                                     (0.112)           (0.144)
               Area Control            Yes               Yes
                   2
               R                      0.170              0.186
               N                       982                781

Note: Dependent variable is the number of hours of labor supplied in columns.
Average hours worked by vendors in control in this sample was 8.343 hours.
The unit of observation is vendor*day. Column (1) uses pre-treatment obser-
vations and both days 1 and 2 of treatment to estimate coefficients. Column
(3) uses pre-treatment and day 2 of treatment to estimate coefficients. Post-
treatment days are omitted for vendors assigned to both treatment and control
for all columns. Robust standard errors accounting for relevant unit of cluster-
ing are reported in parentheses. Variance-covariance matrix estimated accounts
for lowest level of randomization. For groups of vendors where treatment was
varied within group, clustering unit is vendor. For groups where treatment did
not vary within group, clustering unit is the group. Area Control fixed e↵ects
control for the geographic cluster of vendors.
⇤p  0.10, ⇤ ⇤ p  0.05, ⇤ ⇤ ⇤p  0.01




Table 4: Betel Nut Experiment Results—Summary Statistics
                                                 Treatment Day
       Variable                               Treated      Untreated
       Total Hours—Working                       8.9             8.9
                                               (.266)          (.118)
       Initial O↵er (INR)
               Betel Nut Variety 1              17.9             17.8
                                               (.983)           (.882)
                Betel Nut Variety 2             21.4              21
                                               (1.42)          (1.006)
       Final Price (INR)
             Betel Variety 1                    17.1            17.4
                                                 (.9)          (.838)
                Betel Variety 2                   20            19.9
                                               (1.323)         (.891)
Note: Summary statistics are reported for the treatment day of the Betel
Nut Experiment. Statistics are reported for total hours worked conditional
on working on treatment day and initial o↵er and final price (in INR) in the
bargaining experiment for both types of Betel Nuts. Standard errors are in
parentheses below.
Table 5: Marginal E↵ects On The Probability of Quitting—Split By Treatment Status
                                                          (1)           (2)
                         Variable          X⇤           Treated      Untreated
                         Total Hours        8             .39           .374
                                                        (.058)         (.072)

                         N                               488            305
                         Log likelihood                 -58.08         -38.77
            Note: The sample is broken down by vendors in treatment and control. The
            number of observations is the number of hours worked by vendors on the day
            of treatment (2/28/2006). Marginal e↵ects are evaluated at eight total hours
            worked, in keeping with Farber (2005) and Crawford and Meng (2011). Robust
            standard errors are reported under each marginal e↵ect.




                  Table 6: E↵ort Provision: Bargaining Regressions
                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)
                                                Final        Final          Final
                                                INR          INR            INR
                    Treatment                 -0.325         1.081         0.910
                                             (0.765)        (1.243)       (1.096)
                    Constant                17.732***      16.756***     17.161***
                                             (0.498)        (0.619)       (0.781)
                    Betel Type Control          Yes          Yes            Yes
                    Vendor Control                           Yes            Yes
                    Day Control                              Yes            Yes
                    Confederate Control                                     Yes
                    R2                          0.059        0.421          0.529
                    N                            258          258            258

                Note: Dependent variable is a dimension of e↵ort provi-
                sion elicited in negotiations with treated and untreated shops
                over three days of observation. The unit of observation is
                vendor*day*negotiation. The outcome variable in all three
                columns is final price in INR. Robust standard errors clustered
                at the vendor level are reported. Betel Type Control means
                that the Betel Nut type that was negotiated over was controlled
                for. Vendor Control means vendor fixed e↵ects were estimated,
                while Day Control means a fixed e↵ect for each day was esti-
                mated. Confederate Control estimates a fixed e↵ect for the six
                confederates that were bargaining over the three days of obser-
                vation.
                ⇤p  0.10, ⇤ ⇤ p  0.05, ⇤ ⇤ ⇤p  0.01
                                           Figure 1: Simulated Labor Supply Response
                                  Panel A: Simulated Labor Supply for Income Targeting Model

                                                              No overpayment
                                h(w1 )


                                h(w2 )
Hours of Labor Supplied




                                h̃(w1 )




                                              Overpayment




                                                       w1                 w2
                                                              Wage Rate

                                           Panel B: Simulated Labor Supply for KR


                                h(w2 )
                                               Expected wage increase



                                                               Baseline
                                h(w1 )
      Hours of Labor Supplied




                                h̃(w1 )




                                                Overpayment




                                                        w1                     w2
                                                               Wage Rate

                                                                                    y1    1
        Note: We assume the following preference parameterization: u(y) =             1
                                                                                              and v(h) =
                               1+✏
                           ✏
                          1+✏
                              h ✏
                    with the following parameter values:      = 0.01, s0 = 10, 000, = 0.005, ✏ =
        0.3, = 3, and yr = 100. When there is an income shock s0 increases to 10, 500. For KR
        the baseline wage is drawn from w ⇠ (4, 0.2) and P {Overpayment occurs} = 0.001. For
        KR with an expected increase in the realized wage is simply, w̃ = w + 10, w ⇠ (4, 0.2).
        Conceptually, the wage and overpayment is realized as soon as workers show up at the market
        that day and they pick their hours of labor supply accordingly.
Figure 2: Budget Constraint and Reference Point Dynamics with Expected Wage Change and
Income Shock

             y

                  • C




                  • B




            Yr0


                                                     • E

             Yr



                                                     •
                                                               A
                                                     D
                                                           •
                                      Hr0 Hr                       24   h
                                    Figure 3: Sensitivity of Identification in Crawford and Meng (2011)
Marginal E↵ect on Probability of Quitting




                                                                       1st Hr Earnings > E[1st Hr Earnings]


                                            Cum Tot Hrs


                                            Cum Inc/100


                                                                       1st Hr Earnings < E[1st Hr Earnings]


                                            Cum Tot Hrs


                                            Cum Inc/100


                                                           -0.50     -0.25      0.00        0.25        0.50       0.75
                                                               Change in Marginal E↵ect to 1 Change in Aux Par

                                                          Aux Parameter:     E[1st Hr Earnings]      1st Hr Earnings




                                 Note: Scaled sensitivity of marginal e↵ects from Crawford and Meng (2011) Table 2,
                                 Panel B, Columns 3 and 4 to changes in expected first hour earnings and realized first
                                 hour earnings (see Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2014 for details on calculation).
                                               Figure 4: Experimental Design

                   Market Survey Experiment: Session 1                                          Betel Nut Experiment
                          Control Hourly Wage ⇡ INR 10                                     Control Daily Earnings ⇡ INR 80
                       Dates Observed = 2/22-25, 2/28-3/1/06                              Dates Observed = 2/25, 2/28-3/1/06

                            Clusters of Vendors = 6                                        Vendors Randomly Selected = 85
                 Vendors Randomly Selected Per Cluster = 15                              Hours Observed = 2 Days (2/28-3/1)
                     Hours Observed = 6 Days (All Dates)                            Bargaining Observed = 3 Days (2/25, 2/28-3/1)
               Days of Treatment = 2 Consecutive Days (2/23-25)                           Days of Treatment = 1 Day (2/28)


                                                                                             INR 500
                                                                                         overpayment                   Control
                     INR 10                                 INR 30

                             Treatment Status of Vendor
 Clusters = 3                                                            Clusters = 3              20                    65
                                      Vendors = 90
    Control             Treatment                     Treatment              Control
                               Start Day of Treatment

        25                                                                     24
               Wave 1          Wave 2            Wave 1            Wave 2



                   7            12                    13            9



                                     Market Survey Experiment: Session 2
                                          Control Hourly Wage ⇡ INR 10
                                       Dates Observed = 11/30, 12/3-12/5/07

                                           Clusters of Vendors = 8
                                 Vendors Randomly Selected Per Cluster = 20
                                     Hours Observed = 4 Days (All Dates)
                         Days of Treatment Per Vendor = 2 Consecutive Days (12/3-4)




                   Control                INR 10           INR 30
                                     Clusters = 2                                            INR 60
              Clusters = 2                            Clusters = 2




      41                                  39                                                      Clusters = 1
                                                                                                                        Treatment
                                                                  Control           Treatment
                                                                                                                        Clusters = 1


                                                                        10          30                                  20
                                                                                               Control          Treatment



                                                                                                    13            7
Note: Each tree summarizes the data collected on vendors in a given experiment and the manner in which treatment was assigned to individual
vendors. The terminus of each edge represents the number of vendors. The label next to each edge represents the treatment randomly assigned.
Labels above dotted lines indicate a change in the unit of randomization. The number of clusters is denoted to show how the sample is divided.
Vendors in Market Survey Experiments were a randomly selected subset of 15 or 20 vendors (depending on the session) from a geographic cluster
of vendors. In Session 1, clusters were then assigned a supplemental wage of INR 10 or INR 30 for two days, after which vendors within a cluster
were randomized into treatment. Treatment vendors then had the start of treatment randomized. In Session 2 vendors in Control and INR 10
clusters received treatment. Vendors in clusters assigned INR 30 and INR 60 had treatment randomized within cluster but for one cluster of INR
60. No data was observed on 2/26-27 in Session 1 and 12/1-2 in Session 2 because they were “Market Days” where market conditions would not
be comparable to the other days of the week. All treatment vendors in Session 2 were o↵ered the expected wage increase on 12/3-4. The Betel
Nut Experiment randomized 85 vendors into receiving an overpayment of INR 500 or not. Hours of labor supply were observed on 2/28 and 3/1.
Confederates blind to treatment bargained with Betel Nut Experiment vendors on 2/25, 2/28-3/1. Treatment occurred on 2/28. Across sessions
and experiments, no vendor was placed into multiple treatment arms. In the Market Survey Experiment: Session 1, one vendor received INR 30 in
an INR 10 cluster. In Market Survey Experiment: Session 2, one vendor received Control in an INR 10 cluster. This detail is omitted for simplicity.
                              Figure 5: Time Series of Labor Supply by Treatment


          9.5
Mean Hours Worked
               9


                                                                                                          2

                                             2
                                      2                                        2
      8.5




                                      1
                                                                          1
                              1
                                                                                                  1
8         7.5




                       2/22 2/23 2/24 2/25 2/28 3/1 11/30 12/3 12/4 12/5 11/30 12/3 12/4 12/5
                                                        Day

                                                Control (INR 30)                   Wave 1: INR 30
                                                Wave 2: INR 30                     Control (INR 30)
                                                INR 30                             Control (INR 60)
                                                INR 60
          11      10
Mean Hours Worked




                                                       2                                              2

                                                                                             1
           9




                                            2
                                            1

                                  1
    8     7
          6




                       2/22   2/23        2/24      2/25    2/28         3/1   11/30      12/3    12/4        12/5
                                                                   Day

                                                Control (INR 10)                   Wave 1: INR 10
                                                Wave 2: INR 10                     Control (INR 10)
                                                INR 10


         Note: The two time series show hours worked by day for session 1 and 2 of the Market Survey
         Experiment. The top panel shows hours worked for the INR 30 and INR 60 treatments. The
         bottom panel shows the hours worked for the INR 10 treatment. The number next to a day’s
         mean conveys the day of treatment for that time series, 1 meaning that it was the first day of
         treatment status and 2 meaning it was the second day of treatment status. Values for the control
         group are calculated o↵ of hours worked by vendors assigned to control in the same geographic
         clusters as vendors receiving treatment at that level.
                    Figure 6: Density Plot of Margins of Labor Supply
   .25
   .2
    .15
Density
   .1
   .05
   0




          0                              5                              10                       15
                                                       Hour

                        Control Hours Worked                          Treatment Hours Worked
                        Control Start Time                            Treatment Start Time
                        Control Quit Time                             Treatment Quit Time


              Note: The Kernel Density plots summarize the distribution of hours worked,
              start time, and quitting time for vendors in treatment on day 2 and compares
              to vendors in control that were in the same clusters as treatment vendors. Start
              and quit time has been normalized to hour 0—the opening time of the market,
              which varied over the two sessions of the Market Survey Experiment. Hours
              worked is the total number of hours of labor supplied.
                                            Figure 7: Time Series of Final Price by Treatment

                                                                                                                 5
                            1.5
 SDs From Mean of Final Price
               .5     1




                                                                                           7
                                                    2                       12             22   13   23
                                               4                            5    7    14             12
                                   12                                                 20
                                                               2
          0




                                                          9                                     13               1
                                                                     19
                                                               4                                           4
                                                                                                           5
     -.5




                                                                     14          10
                                        3
                                               2
-1




                                   6                      2
                                        3           3
                                              m

                                  2/ 1am


                                      25 n
                                   2/ pm

                                   2/ pm

                                  2/ 3pm

                                   2/ am

                                   2/ pm

                                   2/ pm

                                    3/ m

                                   3/ am

                                    3/ m

                                    3/ m

                                    3/ m

                                              m
                                           oo
                      0a




                                            p



                                            a

                                           1p

                                           3p

                                           5p
                                         -1

                                         -2




                                          1

                                         -1

                                         -3

                                         -4

                                           9

                                         11
                                       -N
                                       -1




                                       -1
             -1




                                         -




                                       1-



                                       1-

                                       1-

                                       1-
                                      25

                                      25



                                      28

                                      28

                                      28



                                      1-
                                    25
                                  25




                                    28
 25




                                   2/
                             2/
2/




                                                                    Day-Hour

                                                    Pre-Trt: Trt Vendors               Pre-Trt: Control
                                                    Trt Day: Trt Vendors               Trt Day: Control
                                                    Post-Trt: Trt Vendors              Post-Trt: Control


               Note: The time series shows mean final price for each day-hour combination as negotiated by
               incentivized confederates over the course of the three days of observation standardized to mean
               zero and unit standard deviation for each Confederate*Betel Nut Type combination. The number
               next to each day-hour’s mean conveys the number of transactions recorded in that day-hour.
