NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE GREAT RECESSION:
A COMPARISON OF GERMANY, CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES
Florian Hoffmann
Thomas Lemieux
Working Paper 20694
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20694
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on “The Labor Market in the Aftermath of the
Great Recession”. We would like to thank David Card, Alex Mas, David Dorn, and two anonymous
referees for useful comments, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and
the Bank of Canada Fellowship Program for research support, and Georgios Tassoukis for assisting
us with accessing the German Mikrozensus data. This study also uses the weakly anonymous IAB
Employment Sample. Data access was provided via on-site use at the Research Data Centre (FDZ)
of the German Federal Employment Agency (BA) at the Institute for Employment Research (IAB)
and remote data access. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Florian Hoffmann and Thomas Lemieux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Unemployment in the Great Recession: A Comparison of Germany, Canada and the United
States
Florian Hoffmann and Thomas Lemieux
NBER Working Paper No. 20694
November 2014
JEL No. J21,J64
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the potential reasons for the surprisingly different labor market performance
of the United States, Canada, Germany, and several other OECD countries during and after the Great
Recession of 2008-09. Unemployment rates did not change substantially in Germany, increased and
remained at relatively high levels in the United States, and increased moderately in Canada. More
recent data also show that, unlike Germany and Canada, the U.S. unemployment rate remains largely
above its pre-recession level. We find two main explanations for these differences. First, the large
employment swings in the construction sector linked to the boom and bust in U.S. housing markets
can account for a large fraction of the cross-country differences in aggregate labor market outcomes
for the three countries. Second, cross-country differences are consistent with a conventional Okun
relationship linking GDP growth to employment performance. In particular, relative to pre-recession
trends there has been a much larger drop in GDP in the United States than Germany between 2008
and 2012. In light of these facts, the strong performance of the German labor market is consistent with
other aggregate outcomes of the economy.
Florian Hoffmann
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
florian.hoffmann@ubc.ca
Thomas Lemieux
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
thomas.lemieux@ubc.ca
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20694

I. Introduction
Five years after the onset of the Great Recession of 2008-09, the U.S. labor market remains in a
depressed state relative to its pre-recession level. After hovering between 4 and 5 percent in 2006
and 2007, the unemployment rate spiked up to 10 percent in October 2009 and declined very
slowly since then. More than six years after the onset of the Great Recession, it remains
substantially above its pre-recession level. Both the magnitude of the increase in the
unemployment rate, and the slow pace of its decline since 2009 are unprecedented in the postwar era. For instance, the unemployment rate increased by 3-4 and 2-3 percentage points in the
1981-82 and 1990-91 recessions, respectively, and recovered to its pre-recession level in a matter
of a few years. The employment performance of the U.S. economy over recent years has been
unusually poor compared to other advanced OECD economies as well, with the largest increase
in unemployment rates during the Great Recession among all G7 countries. Moreover, while the
U.S. unemployment rate has declined faster than the OECD average after peaking in 2009, only
Southern European economies like Italy and Spain have witnessed a similar persistent increase in
the level of their unemployment rates since the onset of the Great Recession.
The goal of this paper is to understand why the U.S. employment performance has been
so weak during and in the aftermath of the Great Recession of 2008-09. We use two main
empirical strategies to explore this issue. First, we contrast the experience of the United States to
the experiences of a large set of OECD countries using aggregate labor market data and various
other standard economic indicators. Second, we conduct a detailed analysis using rich micro data
for the United States and two comparison countries: Canada and Germany. Canada has often
been used as a comparator for the United States as the two countries share many common
features, such as their institutional settings and the decentralized nature of their labor markets,
and are strongly connected by international trade. Interestingly, Canada’s unemployment rate
was higher than the U.S. unemployment rate from the early 1980s (Ashenfelter and Card, 1986,
Card and Riddell, 1993) to the onset of the 2008-09 recession, but has remained below the U.S.
rate since then. While the German and U.S. labor markets may not be quite as comparable, the
stellar performance of the German labor market in the Great Recession raises a number of
interesting questions about why that country has been able to sustain relatively healthy labor
market outcomes since then. Hopefully, a better understanding of the core reasons behind the

1

different performances of the U.S., Canadian and German labor markets in recent years could
help inform policies aimed at dealing with high unemployment in the United States.
We explore a number of possible explanations for the lackluster performance of the U.S.
labor market from this comparative perspective and identify two key channels: First, the boom
and bust in the construction industry; and second the overall macroeconomic performance as
captured by GDP growth. The local nature of boom and busts in the construction industry
enables us to rely on evidence from both between- and within-country. The main result from this
analysis is that the U.S. unemployment rate would have been more similar to unemployment
rates of Canada, Germany and most other major OECD economies had employment remained
stable in the construction sector during both the boom and bust phases of the U.S. housing boom.
More precisely, we show that over half of the between-country variation in the magnitude of the
employment rate decline in 2007-10 relative to 2000-07 can be accounted for by the construction
sector. Likewise, this phenomenon accounts for the lion share of the within-country variation in
the United States. Interestingly, Germany did not experience any swings in construction sector
employment in recent years, as its own construction boom linked to the reconstruction of Eastern
Germany ended in the early 2000s. On the other hand, Canada had a housing boom that was
much milder than the one in the United States. Taken together, this is consistent with our main
finding that the U.S. housing boom is central for an understanding of its poor aggregate labor
market performance.
Our second key finding is that, relative to pre-recession trends, there has been a much
larger drop in GDP in the United States than Germany since the onset of the Great Recession.
Given the well-known connection between changes in GDP and changes in the unemployment
rate, commonly referred to as Okun’s law, we show that the poor overall performance of the U.S.
economy goes a long way towards accounting for the persistent increase in the unemployment
rate -- relative to other OECD countries -- since 2007.
The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we present some key trends in
GDP and unemployment in a dozen of OECD countries, and discuss the connection between
these two factors. Section III focuses on the role of the construction sector in the evolution of
unemployment across countries and within regions of the United States, Canada, and Germany.
Section IV discusses in more detail the how institutions and labor market reforms may have
helped explain the impressive labor market performance of that country since the onset of the
2

Great Recession. A number of other explanations are explored in Section V, and we conclude in
Section VI.

II. Country-level trends
We start our analysis with presenting basic trends of unemployment rates in a set of OECD
countries.1 The data comes from the now defunct BLS International Labor Comparisons
Program.2 Unlike other sources of comparative employment data, like the OECD, the BLS
adjusts the unemployment rates reported by national statistical agencies to make them
comparable across countries, if possible.3 We focus on the set of ten countries for which the BLS
reports an unemployment rate that is fully consistent with the U.S. concept -- G7 countries plus
Sweden, the Netherlands and Australia. In some of the figures we also report data for Spain
despite the fact their unemployment rates are unadjusted. As we will see later, the case of Spain
is interesting as it is the only major industrialized country that experienced a boom and bust in
the construction industry that is even more dramatic than the one in the United States.
In Figure 1, we present the trends in the U.S. unemployment rate relative to three sets of
countries: Canada, the United Kingdom, and Japan in Figure 1a; Germany, France, and Italy in
Figure 1b; Sweden, the Netherlands, Australia and Spain in Figure 1c. All figures start in 1991
since it would be difficult to have consistent measures of unemployment in Germany prior to
reunification in 1990. Figure 1a shows that for most of the 1991-2013 period the unemployment
rates of Canada and the United Kingdom were substantially higher than those in the U.S., while
Japan almost always had the lowest unemployment rate. The only exception is the Great
Recession, during which the U.S. unemployment rate increased much faster than in these three
comparison countries and remained at a higher level since then.
Figure 1b shows that throughout most of the 1990s and 2000s, the unemployment rate in
Italy, France and Germany – the three largest continental European economies – was much
higher than in the United States. The unemployment rate increased much faster in the United
1

According to the NBER’s business cycle dating committee, the “Great Recession” lasted from December 2007 to
June 2009.
2
The program was discontinued on March 1st 2013 as part of the across‐the‐board spending cuts (commonly
referred to as sequestration) required by the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act. The Conference
Board is now maintaining these data series using the same methodology as the BLS. The employment numbers for
2013 were downloaded from the Conference Board website (https://www.conference‐board.org/ilcprogram/).
3
For example, in Canada “passive” job searchers who only look at job ads are classified as being unemployed,
while they are classified as being out of the labor force in the United States.

3

States during the Great Recession, however, and was the highest among these three countries by
2009. In sharp contrast, the German unemployment rate declined between 2007 and 2009, a
remarkable fact that has been investigated in a number of studies such as Burda and Hunt (2011).
On the other hand, it increased steadily in France and especially Italy after 2009. Some of these
recent developments are linked to the European debt crisis, and a systematic exploration of its
labor market effects is beyond the scope of this paper.
Except for the unusual case of Spain, Figure 1c shows once again that the unemployment
rate increased much faster in the United States than in either Sweden, the Netherlands, or
Australia between 2007 and 2009.
Taking together, the evidence in Figures 1a, 1b, and 1c shows that in the space of just two
years, the United States went from a low to a high unemployment country. Only Spain
experienced a faster growth in its unemployment rate over this period. A similar conclusion
emerges when analyzing the employment-to-population ratio instead. We show in Appendix
Figures 1a-c that its evolution during the Great Recession is a mirror image of the time-series
pattern of unemployment rates.4 In particular, the employment-population ratio declined in all
countries except Germany between 2007 and 2009, and only Spain experienced a larger drop in
the employment-population ratio than the United States.5 This shows that relative movements in
the unemployment rate across countries during the Great Recession truly reflect changes in
joblessness, as opposed to spurious movements in labor force participation or in how people
“classify themselves” as unemployed.6

Macroeconomic performance and unemployment
Perhaps the simplest explanation for the cross-country differences in recent trends of
unemployment rates is differences in their macro-economic performances. According to Okun’s
law we expect a larger increase in the unemployment rate in economies where GDP fell the most
4

These data were also obtained from the BLS International Labor Comparison Program.
The correlation coefficient between changes in the unemployment rate and changes in the employment‐
population ratio is above 0.9 for the 2007‐09 period, with or without Spain included.
6
Card and Riddell (1993) show that most of the growth in the Canada‐U.S. unemployment rate gap in the early
1980s was not linked to a corresponding change in the employment‐population ratio. Rather, people without jobs
started increasingly classifying themselves as unemployed in Canada relative to the United States. While the
unemployment rate is still relatively high in Canada relatively to the United States, given the much larger
employment rate in Canada, the unemployment rate and the employment‐population ratio have very much
moved in tandem in the two countries over recent years.
5

4

during the Great Recession.7 Existing work suggests this may not be a very promising
explanation for the evolution of unemployment during the Great Recession. For instance, Burda
and Hunt (2011) show that GDP fell at about the same rate in the United States and Germany in
2008-2009, but (consistent with Figure 1a) the unemployment rate increased much more in the
United States than in Germany. Daly and Hobijn (2010) also point out that U.S. unemployment
increased substantially more between 2007 and 2009 than what would have been predicted by
Okun’s law. As we will see below, we reach very different conclusions using more recent data
on GDP and unemployment.
We start exploring this hypothesis using OECD data on real GDP in Figures 2a-b.8 Figure
2a shows the evolution in real GDP for the same eleven countries used in Figure 1 indexed to
100 in the first quarter of 2000. Looking first at the pre-recession (2000-07) period, we see that
there are substantial differences in trend growth in GDP during that period with countries like
Australia, the United Kingdom, and Spain at the top end of the range, and Germany and Japan at
the bottom end. One simple explanation for this difference is that population has been growing at
different rates in different countries. Indeed, annual data on GDP per capita reported in Appendix
Figure 2 indicates that trend growth is much more similar across countries when expressed on a
per capita basis.9 For instance, GDP per capita in Germany and Japan grew at about the same
rate as in other G7 countries like France, Canada, and the United States, and faster than in Italy
over the 2000-07 period. The United Kingdom is somewhat an exception since it was growing at
an especially fast rate until 2007 in absolute and in per capita terms.
A second clear fact that emerges from Figure 2a is that most countries experienced a
sharp decline in GDP during the Great Recession. The only noticeable exception is Australia,
which was hardly affected at all by the downturn, likely because of its close trade relationship
with China. The United States is more or less in the middle of the pack with a 4.7 percent decline
of real GDP between the last quarter of 2007 and the second quarter of 2009, compared to an
average drop of 4.6 percent in all eleven countries. The drop in Germany, Japan, and the United
Kingdom is slightly larger, while it is slightly smaller for Canada, France and Italy. By contrast,
7

Abel, Bernanke and Croushore (2013) provide a nice textbook treatment of Okun’s law where they report that a
percentage point increase in unemployment is typically associated with a two percent decline in output relative to
its potential.
8
We focus on the 2000‐13 period since data are missing for some countries prior to 2000. Furthermore, other
important explanations we consider, in particular the boom and bust in housing, starts around 2000 too.
9
We use data from the IMF World Economic Observer to compute the per capita figures.

5

there are large cross-country differences in the extent of the economic recovery since the second
quarter of 2009. For instance, between the second quarters of 2009 and 2012, Australia, Canada,
Germany, and Sweden all grew by over 8 percentage points, while other European economies
grew little (e.g. France and the United Kingdom) or kept shrinking (Spain). The United States
(6.9 percent growth) and Japan (5.9 percent) did slightly better than average (5.6 percent),
though not quite as well as Canada and Germany. In per capita terms, however, Germany was
clearly the best performer among G7 countries (Appendix Figure 2), while Italy performed
particularly poorly.
In light of the strong GDP performance of Germany since 2007 the decline in its
unemployment rate since the onset of the Great Recession may not be surprising after all. We
explore this more formally in Figure 3 by plotting the de-trended changes in GDP between the
last quarters of 2007 and 2011 against the change in the unemployment rate over the same
period. Okun’s law suggests there should be a strong negative relationship between these two
variables. Importantly, the change in GDP should be adjusted for changes in potential GDP that
encompasses all non-cyclical factors such as technological progress, changes in capital and other
production factors. Since estimating potential GDP is beyond the scope of this paper, we simply
de-trend GDP using country-specific pre-recession linear trends. The resulting time series are
reported in Figure 2b. The figure shows that Germany and Australia have been doing particularly
well since 2007 in terms of GDP growth, while the United Kingdom and Spain have done
particularly poorly. Interestingly, all other countries, including Canada and the United States
look fairly similar, with their GDP standing at about 10 percentage points below what would
have been predicted on the basis of observed trends in GDP prior to the Great Recession.
Returning to Figure 3, we see a clear negative relationship between changes in de-trended
GDP and changes in the unemployment rate across countries. Note that Spain is not included
since it is a case of its own with an increase in the unemployment rate of 14.3 percentage points
compared to 3.9 percent for the second worst performer (the United States). The estimated
coefficient from an Okun-type regression is -1.73 (standard error of 0.72), which is quite close to
standard estimates based on time-series data for the United States (Abel, Bernanke, and

6

Croushore, 2013).10 Note that as in all the other regression estimates reported in the paper,
countries (or regions of a country) are weighted equally regardless of their size.
Most countries, including the United States and Germany, lie relatively close to the
regression line in Figure 3. The estimates remain similar (coefficient of -2.37 with a standard
error of 0.86) when trends are computed over a longer period (1994 to 2007) to avoid the
potentially confounding effect of the strong 2000-07 housing boom in several countries.
However, the Okun relationship becomes substantially weaker when only data from the Great
Recession (2007 to 2009) are used to estimate the model. The coefficient drops to -1.01 and is no
longer significant. As we saw in Figure 2b, the problem is that GDP dropped by fairly similar
amounts in most countries between 2007 and 2009, while unemployment followed quite a
different path in countries like Germany, with a small decline in unemployment, and the United
States, with a large increase in unemployment. We conclude from Figure 3 that differences in
unemployment performance between the United States and Germany are very much in line with
the observed difference in GDP performance once we look at more recent years than earlier
studies such as Burda and Hunt (2011). In particular, de-trended U.S. GDP is 10 percentage
points below its pre-recession level while Germany’s GDP is very much in line with the prerecession trends. The estimated Okun relationship maps this 10 percentage point gap in GDP into
a 5 percentage point difference in the unemployment rates, which is close to the actual difference
of 6.5 percentage points shown in Figure 3. Many observers have pointed to a puzzling “jobless
recovery” in the United States where unemployment has remained stubbornly high despite a
rebounding GDP, which stands in sharp contrast with the “German employment miracle”. The
results reported here indicate that these two phenomena are the two sides of the same “Okun
coin”. There is not much of a puzzle or miracle, but rather a 10 percent deficit in de-trended GDP
in the United States relative to Germany.

III. Role of the Construction Industry
Background and conceptual framework
A number of recent papers suggest that the boom and bust in the housing sector may have
played a leading role in the growth of U.S. unemployment during the Great Recession. This may

10

The estimated coefficient drops slightly to ‐1.1 but becomes more significant when Spain is also included in the
regression.

7

have happened through a variety of channels. In their influential work, Mian and Sufi (2014)
show that U.S. counties where housing net worth declined the most also experienced large falls
in employment in non-tradeable sectors such as retail trade and restaurants (but excluding
construction). This suggests that the negative wealth effect linked to the collapse in house prices
reduced household spending, which had a negative impact on employment.11
Mian and Sufi (2014) focus on the effect of the decline in housing prices on employment
in sectors other than construction. While some of the decline in construction employment, for
instance in renovation work, may be a consequence of the decline in housing net worth – a
wealth effect – most of it was likely due to other factors such as the credit crisis and the
oversupply of housing during the 2000-07 boom. This negative shock in one particular sector,
construction, may have then lead to an aggregate decline in employment if workers displaced
from the construction sector were unable to find jobs in other sector. This alternative channel
goes back to the sectoral shock hypothesis of Lilien (1982). Generally speaking, when labor is
imperfectly mobile across sectors, a large negative shock to a given sector may lead to an
increase in overall unemployment even in the presence of offsetting positive shocks to other
sectors. Recent work by Mehrotra and Sergeyev (2012) suggests that the construction shock
during the Great Recession accounts, through this channel, for a large fraction (1.4 percentage
points) of the increase in the national unemployment rate.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that differences in the magnitude of the boom and bust in
the construction sector may also help explain some of the differences in employment changes
across countries. For instance, Spain experienced a dramatic boom and bust in the construction
sector and a stunning rise in its unemployment rate. By contrast, Germany did not have a
construction boom, or at least not in the period leading to the Great Recession.12
It is beyond the scope of this paper to estimate the relative importance of the housing net
worth and “construction shock” effect in the evolution of employment during and in the
aftermath of the Great Recession. Our more modest objective is to assess how much of the
change in overall employment can be accounted for by changes in construction employment.
This approach is similar to Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2013) who argue that the collapse
11

Mian and Sufi also show that, as expected, changes in housing net worth has no effect on tradeable employment
in the county, since demand for tradeable goods should depend on global, as opposed to local demand.
12
There was a large construction boom in Germany linked to the reconstruction of Eastern Germany, but as we
discuss at the end of the section, this came to an end in the early 2000s.

8

in the employment rate of non-college men during the Great Recession was a combination of two
factors. First, the share of these individuals working in manufacturing had been on the decline
for a long time, but it was “masked” during the 2000-07 period by an offsetting increase in the
share of construction employment among this group. Second, when the housing market collapsed
during the Great Recession, overall employment plummeted as the construction sector could no
longer offset other negative labor market trends, and instead contributed to the decline in overall
employment.
We look at the connection between construction employment and total employment using
variance decompositions and simple accounting exercises that rely both on between- and, for
Canada, the United States, and Germany, within-country variation. Consider the population Pit
that consists of Eit employed individuals and Nit non-employed individuals in country (or region)
i at time t. By further dividing the employed individuals into three employment sectors we get:
Pit ≡ Nit + Eitc + Eitm +Eito,
where the employment sectors considered here are construction (Eitc), manufacturing (Eitm), and
all other sectors combined (Eito). In per capita terms we get the following identity linking the
non-employment rate nit to the fraction of individuals in each employment sector
nit ≡ 1 - eitc - eitm - eito,

(1)

where eitk = Eitk / Pit for k=c, m, and o. We use this identity to compute a counterfactual nonemployment rate that would have prevailed if the share of the population in the construction
sector had remained constant over time. Holding the construction share constant and differencing
yields:
Δñi = - Δeim - Δeio,

(2)

where ñit is the counterfactual non-employment rate. Following, Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo
(2013), it is also interesting to look at how much the boom and bust in the housing sector has
contributed to the different evolution of employment between the 2000-07 boom period and the
bust period (after 2007). This can be computed using the double difference, or difference-indifferences, version of equation (2).
To summarize the contribution of the construction sector to inter-country or interregional
differences in employment changes we also employ a variance decomposition procedure. This

9

decomposition is easier to interpret when using the change in the employment-to-population ratio
Δei as dependent variable, where Δei = – Δni. Since Δei ≡ Δeic + Δeim + Δeio we have:13
Var(Δei) = Cov(Δei, Δeic + Δeim + Δeio)
= Cov(Δei, Δeic) + Cov(Δei, Δeim) + Cov(Δei, Δeio).
Dividing through by Var(Δei) we get:
1 = bc + bm + bo,
where bk = Cov(Δei, Δeik) / Var(Δei) is the slope coefficient from a regression:
Δeik = ak + bk Δei + εk,

(3)

for k=c, m, and o.
The bk coefficients are a convenient way of summarizing the contribution of each
employment sector to the variation in employment (or non-employment) changes across
countries, or regions of a country. For instance, if the fraction of the population working in the
manufacturing industry and other sectors is completely constant over time, then by definition all
the variation in the employment-population ratio will be attributable to the construction share,
and we will have bc = 1 and bm = bo = 0.
By contrast, if all three relative employment shares eitk / eit were constant over time, the
bk coefficients would be equal to sk, the share of sector k in total employment.14

Thus,

comparing bk to sk indicates how much “excess” variation in the overall employment rate can be
related to the construction share. Note that, in general, sectors like manufacturing that tend to be
more cyclically sensitive than others should have a bk larger than sk. When looking at the
contribution of the construction sector during the Great Recession, we will thus contrast it to
manufacturing to make sure that its estimate is not merely a reflection of the fact that it is a more
cyclically sensitive sector. To further highlight the special role that the construction sector played
during the Great Recession we will also compare our results to the coefficient bc obtained when
computing the decomposition for earlier recessions in the U.S.

13

In the empirical section we also discuss an alternative variance decomposition based on Var(Δei) = Var(Δeic) +
Var(Δeim) + Var(Δeio) + 2Cov(Δeic , Δeim) + 2Cov(Δeic , Δeio) + 2Cov(Δeim , Δeio). In that alternative setting, we would
expect Var(Δeic) to be the most important component of Var(Δei) if the construction sector was the key contributor
to changes in overall employment. One advantage of this approach is that the variances are always positive, while
our approach based on covariances can yield negative bk coefficients, which is undesirable for a variance
decomposition.
14
When employment shares skt are constant over time we have eitk = sk eit and cov(eit , eitk) = sk Var(eit). It follows
that bk = Cov(Δei, Δeik) / Var(Δei) = sk Var(eit) / Var(eit) = sk.

10

Analysis at the country level
Figure 4 shows the share of the labor force employed in construction (Figure 4a), manufacturing
(Figure 4b), and all other sectors (4c). The fourth category, not shown in the graphs, is simply
the share of the labour force that is unemployed, i.e. the unemployment rate. These shares are
obtained using OECD data on employment by industrial sector for 2000 to 2012.15 We also use
labor force as the denominator here because the OECD data doesn’t provide consistent measures
of the working age population.
A number of interesting patterns emerge from Figure 4a. First, the construction share in
Germany drops sharply from 2000 to 2005 to reach five percent, the lowest of all countries, and
remains unchanged for the rest of the sample period. The decline observed in the early 2000s in
Germany actually started back in 1995, when the German construction share was at 8 percent,
higher than any other countries except Japan at that time. This three percentage point drop in the
construction share most likely reflects the impact of the reconstruction of Eastern Germany that
peaked in the mid-1990s before winding down in the subsequent decade.
A second interesting fact is the boom and bust in the construction share in Spain, the
United States, and, to a smaller extent, the United Kingdom. The boom and bust is particularly
dramatic in Spain, suggesting that the construction sector was a major factor behind the growth
in its unemployment rate. Other countries like Canada did also experience a bit of a housing
boom in 2000-07, but no bust, at least not yet.
Turning to the manufacturing share in Figure 4b, we see a steady decline in all countries,
especially during the Great Recession. The latter is not surprising since manufacturing, like
construction, is an employment sector that tends to be more sensitive to the cycle than other
sectors. Germany experienced an unusual increase in its manufacturing share between 2006 and
2008, and has generally performed better than other countries in terms of manufacturing
employment over the last few years.
The share of employment in all other sectors is the mirror image of manufacturing, as it
generally increases over time with the Great Recession being a notable exception, especially in
countries like the United States and Spain. The positive trend is not surprising, as it mostly

15

The figures stop in 2012 as more recent data are not available for some key countries like Japan and the United
States. Data for Australia are only available until 2011. In the case of Canada employment by sector was not
available in the OECD data base, so we have used figures from the Labour Force Survey instead.

11

reflects the secular growth of the service sector. Note also that relative to the size of this sector,
changes observed during the Great Recession are relatively small.
The evidence presented in Figures 4a-c is summarized in Table 1 where we show how
much of the total employment changes in the 2000-07 and 2007-10 periods can be decomposed
into the contribution of each employment sector.16 We first show in Panel A the 2007-10 change
in the share of the labor force employed in construction (column 1), manufacturing (column 2),
and all other sectors (column 3). Summing up columns 1 to 3 yields the change in the share of
the labor force employed in any of these sectors (column 4). We then show in column 5 the
percentage of the total change (column 4) solely due to the change in construction share. This is
simply obtained by taking the ratio of columns 1 and 4, and expressing it in percentage terms. In
most countries, this percentage is surprisingly large given the relative small size of the
construction sector. For instance, in the United States the construction share hovers around 7
percent, which is only small fraction of total employment. By contrast, close to 40 percent of the
decline in employment is solely due to the decline in construction employment. Likewise, in
Spain over 40 percent of the large decline in employment (11.5 percentage points) is due to the
collapse of employment in the construction sector.
We perform a similar exercise in Panel B of Table 1, except that we now contrast the
boom (2000-07) and bust (2007-10) periods. For instance, column 4 indicates that U.S.
employment as a share of the labor force declined by 4.3 percentage points in 2007-2010 relative
to 2000-2007. Of this 4.3 “difference-in-differences”, 2.6 percentage points, or 60 percent of the
total, is solely due to the construction industry. The contribution of the construction sector is
qualitatively similar in most other countries. Interestingly, 60 percent of the 2.4 growth of
employment in Germany in 2007-10 relative to 2000-2007 is also due to the changes in
employment in the construction sector. Remember from Figure 4a that the construction share in
Germany stabilized around 5 percent in 2005 after declining steadily prior to that. Thus, an
important part of the reason why employment in Germany did better in 2007-10 than 2000-07 is
that construction employment stabilized after a long period of decline.
We summarize the connection between the evolution of employment in each sector and
total employment by running the regressions shown in equation (3) using cross-country

16

We focus on the 2007 to 2010 period because the U.S. unemployment rate peaked in 2010. Similar results are
obtained using the 2007‐09 or 2007‐11 period instead.

12

variation. In both panels A and B, the estimated coefficients are the largest in the construction
sector (around 0.5), despite the fact that construction accounts for a relatively small fraction of
total employment. The coefficients indicate that a 1 percentage point drop in employment during
the Great Recession is typically associated with a 0.4-0.5 percentage point decline in
construction employment. As noted earlier, one could argue that this simply reflects the strong
cyclicality of construction employment. However, employment in manufacturing is similarly
cyclical, but despite its much larger size its estimated coefficient is substantially smaller and not
even significant in the difference-in-differences specification. Although these regressions are
only based on 11 observations, Appendix Figure 3 shows that in the case of construction, most
observations line up closely to the regression lines, and the regression is not unduly affected by
extreme observations such as Spain and, to some extent, the United States. Taken together, these
results suggest that the boom and bust in the construction industry can account for a substantial
part of the cross-country differences in aggregate labor market outcomes during the Great
Recession, most importantly for the striking differences between the United States and Germany.

Within-country analysis
We now explore in more detail the role of the construction industry in the Great Recession using
micro data from the United States, Canada, and Germany. The key advantage of these data is that
they allow us to perform a more fine-grained study of the trends in employment and
unemployment at the sub-national level. This is particularly useful for understanding the role of
the construction sector in driving the depth and persistence of unemployment in the United
States. For instance, Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2013) show that there is a lot of regional
variation in the housing boom and that it mostly affected the employment of less educated men,
something we can directly check using our micro data.
For the United States we use data from the outgoing rotation group supplement (ORG) of
the Current Population Survey (CPS). We start with year 1997 to have an analysis period similar
to the one available in the other countries.17 We limit our analysis to individuals age 16-64, but
otherwise keep a sample as inclusive as possible. Although trends in the unemployment and the

17

In the case of Canada there was a major change in the Labour Force Survey that started asking question about
wages, union status, and a few other variables in 1997.

13

non-employment rate are broadly similar, we focus our analysis on the latter since it is more
easily connected to changes in employment shares by sector.
Figure 5 shows the evolution of the non-employment rate in different regions of the
United States. We focus on the “sand states” of California, Arizona-Nevada (pooled together),
and Florida that were particularly affected by the boom and bust in the housing sector (Davidoff,
2013). Since these are all Southern States, we also look at the other large Southern state, Texas,
as a comparison, as well as all other states pooled together. The detailed employment changes
during the Great Recession (2007 to 2010) are also reported for these states and the nine census
regions in Table 2a.
While Figure 5 and Table 2a show that non-employment increased substantially in all
regions of the United States during the Great Recession, the increase was largest in ArizonaNevada and Florida, followed by California. The non-employment rate increased by 6-8
percentage points in these regions between 2007 and 2010 (column 11 of Table 2a), compared to
less than five percentage points in most other regions.
Figure 6 shows that men with a high school education and less were by far most affected
by the Great Recession. Their non-employment rate increased by 8 percentage points between
2007 and 2010, compared to only three percentage points for male college graduates, and less
than 2 percentage points for female college graduates. While these relative employment patterns
are consistent with less educated men being particularly affected by the collapse of the
construction sector, that sub-group of the population also tends to exhibit a more cyclical
employment pattern than the rest of the population. This can be observed, for instance, during the
milder recession of the early 2000s where it also experienced the steepest growth in nonemployment. Therefore, we have to go beyond these aggregate national trends for all sectors
combined to get more decisive evidence on the contribution of the construction sector on
employment during the Great Recession.
In Table 2a we decompose the 2007-10 change in non-employment by employment
sector using equation (2). We show the results of this decomposition for men with a high school
degree or less (columns 1-4), all men (columns 5-8), and all men and women combined (columns
9-12). We then show corresponding results in a “difference-in-differences” setting contrasting
the housing boom (2000-07) and bust (2007-10) periods in Table 2b.

14

A striking pattern illustrated in Table 2a is the dramatic decline in the employment of
men with a high school degree (or less) in Arizona-Nevada and Florida where it collapsed by 14
percentage points, a drop that even exceeds what we documented for Spain earlier. At the same
time, the share of men in this group working in construction declined by around 10 percentage
points during that period. Hence, in a purely accounting sense, most of the increase in nonemployment for this group is due to the collapse in construction employment. Indeed, column 4
indicates that 50 to 75 percent of the increase in non-employment in the different regions can be
linked to the drop of construction employment. This is remarkable since construction
employment accounts for less than 20 percent of total employment for that group.
While the growth in non-employment is less dramatic in broader segments of the
population (columns 5 and 9), Table 2a shows that construction remains an important driving
force of aggregate outcomes. For instance, between one sixth and one third of the overall nonemployment rate increase for all men and women combined can be accounted for by the decline
in construction employment.
Comparing the boom and bust periods in Table 2b shows that construction plays an even
more important role in that setting. For example, in Arizona-Nevada and Florida the entire
decline in 2007-10 employment relative to the 2000-07 period is essentially due to the
construction industry. By contrast, there is not much of a systematic pattern in manufacturing
employment, consistent with Mian and Sufi (2014) who find that changes in employment in
tradeable sectors (mostly manufacturing) is unrelated to the extent of the housing bust (as
captured by change in housing net worth).
Note, however, that Mian and Sufi (2014) did not look explicitly at the role of the
construction sector is their analysis at the county level. Since the sand states are also those where
house prices declined the most (Davidoff, 2013), it may be that some of the decline in
construction employment is due to the wealth effect emphasized by Mian and Sufi (2014). It is
difficult, however, to establish a causal connection between these two factors since negative
regional housing shocks directly affect houses prices and new housing supply (and construction
employment).18 But while these issues are important for the interpretation of our findings, this
18

Mian and Sufi use an instrumental variable strategy (based on regional variation in housing supply elasticities) to
show that housing shocks do not confound their estimates of the effect of housing net worth on other non
tradeable employment. This is does not mean, however, that construction employment did not play an important
role during the Great Recession. In that sense our findings complement, and do not contradicst theirs.

15

does not affect our main conclusion that, in an accounting sense, changes in construction
employment are a major contributor in overall employment changes across regions of the United
States (and across countries).
We explore the role of the construction sector more systematically by reporting the
regression estimates based on equation (3) at the bottom of the tables. For either all men, or men
and women combined together, we find that the coefficient in the construction share equation is
around two thirds in both specifications considered. The estimates are even larger when only
looking at men with a high school degree or less. Overall the results indicate that the relative
performance of overall employment across education groups and regions is systematically linked
to what happened to employment in the construction sector. In particular, the estimated
coefficients are much larger than the share of employment in the construction sector.
Furthermore, manufacturing is usually believed to be a highly cyclical sector, but the
manufacturing share is not systematically linked to overall employment, as evidenced by the fact
that the coefficient for that sector is not statistically significant in most cases.
We confirm these results using the alternative variance decomposition introduced in
Section II (footnote 6) where Var(Δei) = Var(Δeic) + Var(Δeim) + Var(Δeio) + 2Cov(Δeic,Δeim) +
2Cov(Δeic,Δeio) + 2Cov(Δeim,Δeio). We compare the results of this alternative variance
decomposition to our main decomposition based on regressions in Appendix Table 1, estimated
on a sample of men. As in our main regression-based decomposition (Panel A), most of the
variation in the overall employment rate can be accounted for by the construction sector under
the alternative decomposition reported in Panel B. The difference between the two approaches
depends on whether or not covariances between construction and the other sectors are attributed
to the “construction effect”.19
While the results reported here are based on simple variance decompositions, they are
very much consistent with the cross-country evidence reported earlier that established a similar
connection between the construction share and overall employment. This is illustrated in
Appendix Figure 6a-b which plots the data used to estimates the construction sector regressions
(for men). The figures are similar to the one reported for countries in Appendix Figure 3.
Changes in the construction share closely line up with changes in the overall employment rate
19

The results are similar under both decompositions because these covariances are relatively small compared to
the variance of the construction share (Var(Δeic).

16

and as in the case of Spain in Appendix Figure 3, extreme observations (men with a high school
degree or less in Arizona, Nevada, or Florida) are more or less on the same regression line as the
rest of the sample. This clearly shows that groups and states where overall employment
plummeted are the ones for which the employment bust in construction was also most dramatic.
In the case of Canada we use data from the Labour Force Survey (LFS) which are very
similar to the U.S. CPS. One small difference is that we look at individuals age 15-64, while 15
years old are not included in the CPS.20 Generally speaking, the main employment patterns for
Canada are qualitatively similar to those we just documented for the United States and are
reported in a series of Appendix Figures 7-9.
As in the U.S. case, Table 3a and 3b show some fairly dramatic differences in nonemployment by region when focusing on men only, especially those with a high school diploma
or less. The non-employment rate for the latter group increased by 7-8 percentage point in British
Columbia and Alberta during the 2007-10 period, compared to 5.5 percent in Ontario and only
one percentage point in Quebec. In the case of Ontario, most of the drop comes from the
manufacturing sector, while a mix of sectors is involved in the case of Alberta and British
Columbia. The construction sector plays a modest role in the 2007-10 period, reflecting the fact
that the growth in construction employment stopped around 2007-08, but remained relatively
stable after that. Construction plays a much more important role, however, when contrasting the
2007-10 and 2000-07 periods (Table 3b). In fact, the construction boom in Western Canada that
stopped around 2007 now accounts for a large fraction of the relatively poor employment
performance of British Columbia and Alberta in 2007-10 relative to 2000-07. Yet, the regression
coefficient reported at the bottom of the table shows that the construction share is not as closely
related to overall employment performance as is the case in the United States.
Another noticeable fact is that primary sector employment (mostly in oil and gas) in
Alberta is also an important part of its economic slowdown – its employment share grew quickly
until 2007 but slightly declined afterwards. The importance of this sector is confirmed by the
regressions coefficient which shows that, despite its small size, the primary sector accounts for a
substantial share of the variation in employment.

20

We cannot exclude individuals age 15 since age is reported in aggregate groups (including one group for age 15‐
16) in the public use files of the LFS we use in this paper.

17

For the analysis of the German labor market we mainly rely on the Mikrozensus, a
repeated cross-sectional data set which is similar in survey design and coverage to the U.S. CPS.
We apply the same sample restrictions as those we use for the CPS.
The evolution of non-employment rates by region are shown in Appendix Figures 10a
and 10b. There is a significant amount of regional variation, with the Southern states persistently
outperforming the Northern states. Levels of non-employment were consistently high at the end
of the 1990s, often exceeding the corresponding U.S.-levels by 10 to 15 percentage points.
However, non-employment rates have been on a downward trend in Western Germany for the
entire sample period, only interrupted by a recession between 2001 and 2004. In contrast, nonemployment rates in Eastern Germany have started to decrease only since the 2003-05 labor
market reforms, described in more detail below. As is now well-documented, the Great
Recession did not have a significant impact on non-employment rates in either parts of Germany.
As a consequence, in 2011 they were close to pre-crisis levels in the United States.
Tables 4a and 4b show employment changes by industry and are directly comparable to
Tables 2 and 3, which report the corresponding results for the United States and Canada. While
aggregate employment rates have remained nearly unchanged between 2007 and 2010 in most
states, there has been a slight reallocation of labor from the goods-producing-sector to the
service-sector. This reallocation started from a much higher employment share of the
manufacturing sector than in the United States: Its average employment share among German
men during the decade was 22.7 percent compared with only 13.5 percent in the United States.
Interestingly, in some states employment in the construction sector has actually increased.
Whether these reallocations are short-term adjustments or long-run structural changes remains to
be seen in the future. In any case, regression results documented at the bottom of Table 4a imply
that the drop in non-employment rates between 2007 and 2010 was mostly associated with the
rising employment share in the service sector and not at all with the changing employment shares
in the construction sector. The difference-in-differences listed in Table 4b clarify that the
increases in employment rates have generally slowed-down during the Great Recession, with the
exception of Berlin. In sharp contrast to the U.S. experience, the change in the relative size of the

18

construction sector was larger between 2007 and 2010 than between 2000 and 2007.21 Again we
show results from corresponding regression models at the bottom of the table. They provide
further evidence for the major role of the service sector and the weak role of the construction
sector in driving the recent evolution of non-employment rates.

Construction Shocks: Further Evidence and Discussion
A central difference between Germany and the United States we are highlighting is the
lack of a construction boom in Germany before the Great Recession and a subsequent bust. Our
results suggest this to account for a major part of the cross-country differences in the labor
market impact of the Great Recession. A remaining question is whether such boom-bust periods
in the construction sector have particularly severe impacts on the labor market more generally,
possibly because construction workers are particularly hard to reintegrate in the labor market or
because construction busts have severe wealth effects. An interesting case study in the German
context is provided by the construction boom in Eastern Germany in the aftermath of the German
unification.22 This was followed by a decline of the construction sector starting in 1995. Nonemployment rates soared in subsequent years as well. To investigate if there is a systematic
relationship between these trends in non-employment rates and the construction boom-bust
period we show the evolution of non-employment and employment shares in Eastern Germany
for various industries, including construction, between 1995 and 2003 in Appendix Figure 15.23
The picture is quite striking: Among all industries, construction was the only one that
experienced a pronounced and continuous decline in employment. Service sector employment
actually grew over that period, while employment in manufacturing and the primary sector
remained fairly stable. Hence, the increase in non-employment was to a significant extent driven
by the flow of construction workers into non-employment that was not fully mitigated by flows
into the service sector.
To quantify the role of this reallocation in driving the evolution of non-employment we
show in Appendix Table 2 the results from single difference regressions described in equation
21

An analysis of the levels (not shown in tables) clarifies that the positive difference‐in‐difference was driven by a
general decrease of employment in the construction industry during the first half of the decade that has come to a
stop afterwards.
22
This boom was generated because a large part of the infrastructure and building structures had to be renovated
or replaced.
23
We choose 2003 as the final year in the figure since the Hartz4 reforms started to be implemented in that year.

19

(2). In the upper panel we show results from regressions that are estimated only on data from
1995 and 2003. To trace out the entire transition path we then re-estimate these regressions yearby-year, with results shown in the lower panel of the table. The results corroborate the evidence
presented in Appendix Figure 15. In particular, most of the poor labor market performance in
Eastern Germany during this period can be explained by a decline in the construction sector and
a sluggish uptake of the service sector.
We have analyzed the labor market effects of two major construction busts, one during
the Great Recession in the U.S. and one in the aftermath of the German Reunification. It is then
natural to ask about the role of the construction sector in earlier recessions that were not
intrinsically linked to such boom-bust periods. We briefly study this question in the context of
earlier recessions in the United States. Appendix Figure 16 shows the relationship for men
between changes in the construction share and changes in the employment rate during the
recession of the early 2000s. Unlike the corresponding graph for the Great Recession (Appendix
Figure 6a), there is only a weak and statistically insignificant connection between these two
variables. It therefore seems that the construction sector does not play a dominant role in driving
labor market dynamics during all recessions. Rather, a major impact of the performance of this
sector on the aggregate economy seems to be reserved to boom-bust like events.
One may interpret the documented performance of the labor market during such episodes
as evidence that shocks to the construction sector tend to have a more persistent effect on
employment than other shocks. This could help explain why the U.S. unemployment rate has
taken so long to recover in the aftermath of the Great Recession. The limited evidence on Eastern
Germany reported in Appendix Figure 15 is also consistent with this interpretation, as the nonemployment rate kept increasing for at least eight years while the construction sector kept
declining. But what is the distinct fundamental feature that causes the labor market to
underperform for a long time after a construction boom? An important part of any promising
explanation has to be that displaced workers from the construction sector have a particularly hard
time finding jobs in other sectors. Recent evidence documented in Acemoglu and Autor (2011),
Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo (2013) and Jaimovich and Siu (2013) suggests that a major
problem may have been that construction workers lost their jobs exactly in periods when the
economy-wide demand for skills typically employed in that sector has decreased. If these skills
are hard to transfer to growing sectors, a persistent slump in the labor market may be the result.
20

However, it is difficult to distinguish such an explanation from the alternative hypothesis that
construction busts may be a symptom of a deeper problem linked to the financial meltdown of
2008 (e.g. Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). That said, recent evidence suggest that sectoral shocks
can have a fairly persistent effect on local labor markets. For instance, Autor, Dorn and Hansen
(2013) do find large adverse labor market impacts of trade shocks with China on local labor
markets that are particularly exposed to theses shocks. As in the case of the East Germany
construction bust, these adverse shocks are not linked to a financial collapse. This suggests that
the connection between construction shocks and overall employment rates we document in the
United States during the Great Recession are likely not just a spurious consequence of a deeper
underlying shock linked to the financial meltdown of 2008.

IV. Labor Market Reforms and Institutions in Germany
In section 2 we argued that the strong GDP performance of Germany in the aftermath of the
Great Recession was an important explanation for the continuing decline in its unemployment
since 2008. But while the lack of a construction bust may have shielded the German labor
market, it fails to explain why employment barely declined early in the Great Recession despite a
sharp fall in output. We now explore whether the large-scale labor market reforms implemented
between 2003 and 2005 – commonly referred to as “Hartz reforms” –, reforms to the retirement
benefit system, and the institutional setting, such as short-week programs, may serve as
explanations for this puzzle.24
We start with plotting the evolution of non-employment rates by education, gender and
age in Figures 7 and 8, again using the Mikrozensus data. The first set of figures shows that there
were pronounced downward trends in non-employment rates for women over the whole sample
period, no matter the education, which were slightly accelerated by the reforms. Less pronounced
trends are detectable for the two higher educated groups of male workers. The most striking fact
however emerges when we compute the non-employment rate by age group. Figures 8a and 8b
show that the pronounced acceleration of the decline in German non-employment rates after the
reforms was almost entirely driven by the oldest workers (age 55-64), regardless of gender. In
24

The Hartz reforms, described in more detail in the Online Appendix 1, are almost entirely labor‐supply oriented,
with the primary goal of increasing efficiency of the unemployment agencies and “job centers”, increasing the
matching rate of unemployed workers to potential employers, and changing the search‐ and work‐incentives of
workers. Authors such as Rinne and Zimmermann (2012) argue that labor market reforms go a long way toward
explaining the “German labor market miracle” during the Great Recession.

21

contrast, the middle aged group has fairly stable employment rates while non-employment rates
of the youngest workers have increased between 2008 and 2010. One may be tempted to
associate the changes in labor market participation rates of older workers with the “Hartz IV”
reforms. However, these were broad labor market reforms and did not specifically target older
workers. It is more likely that a simultaneous redesign of the retirement benefit system that has
increased taxes on retirement benefits while setting tax-incentives for accumulating retirement
savings privately while working is the major driving force behind some of these empirical
patterns. This is consistent with the fact that the share of older workers who are on short-term
contracts, shown in Appendix Figure 17, has remained remarkably stable over time, even though
these types of contracts were made more attractive by the Hartz reforms.
None of these empirical regularities explain why non-employment rates have continued
to decline at similar rates during the recession despite the large drop in GDP. We thus ask next
whether there has been an impact of the output drop on the intensive rather than the extensive
margin of labor supply. Using the Mikrozensus data we plot the evolution of actual hours worked
conditional on employment in the week prior to the survey for our education- and age-groups in
Appendix Figures 11a and 11b respectively. Hours have been on a downward trend for all groups
and over the whole sample period, and the labor market reforms accelerated these trends for the
youngest and oldest workers further. Most important for our discussion is the finding that actual
hours worked dropped noticeably during the Great Recession, with a full recovery by 2011.
Burda and Hunt (2011) among others stress the importance of the German short-time
work programs for mitigating the impact of the Great Recession on non-employment rates by
allowing firms to adjust their labor demand on the intensive rather than the extensive margin.25
As shown in Appendix Figure 12, the fraction of workers who report to be on a short-time work
program has spiked in 2009, indeed, with a full reversal to pre-crises levels by 2011. When
running a simple regression of actual hours worked on a short-time work program dummy and
conducting a variance decomposition we find that 18.5 percent of the decline in aggregate hours
of work between 2008 and 2009 and 39.5 percent of the subsequent recovery can be explained
by this spike. Hence, this government program clearly did buffer the labor market impact of the
Great Recession. In the same figure we also plot the evolution of the fraction of workers in
25

These are government programs that replace a significant fraction of labor earnings paid by firms to their
workers if the firm commits not to fire the employees. Cahuc and Carcillo (2010) show that the availability of such
programs helped mitigate the impact of the recession in a number of countries other than Germany.

22

“mini-jobs”. These are low-paying jobs and jobs in marginal self-employment which were made
financially more attractive by the 2003-05 labor market reforms. A popular hypothesis in the
German press is that mini-jobs provide a further margin of adjustment to recessionary output
declines. The figure shows that the fraction of employed workers in mini-jobs experienced a
temporary decline in 2009, possibly because this group is most likely to enter unemployment or
non-employment during a recession. Given the weak response it is unlikely that this can explain
the German labor market performance in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
To further analyze the potential effect of the Hartz reforms on the German labor market
and its ability to react flexibly to the Great Recession, we now turn to the study of highfrequency labor market flows. Since the reforms changed the search- and work-incentives of
workers, it is natural to look at how they may have affected unemployment- rather than nonemployment rates through their impact on labor flows. An interesting starting point for this
analysis is Elsby’s (2011) discussion of Burda and Hunt (2011), which showed that the exit rate
out of unemployment in Germany started increasing around the time of the reforms in 2004, and
prior to the substantial decline in the unemployment rate that started after 2005. This is not what
is typically observed in unemployment flows data, where changes in the unemployment rate tend
to precede movements in exit flows (Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin, 2008). This suggests that labor
market reforms did indeed play a role in the decline of the German unemployment rate since the
mid-2000s.
We explore this issue by using social security panel data provided by the IAB, currently
available until the year 2010. We apply the same sample restrictions to the data as those for the
Mikrozensus. Ideally we would like to estimate the impact of the Hartz reform by comparing the
evolution of labor market flows in Germany to those in comparison countries like the United
States or Canada. Given that we do not have comparable data for these two countries we use the
past behavior of German labor market flows as a “comparison group” by computing a long timeseries of monthly flows in and out of unemployment. Our working sample starts in January 1977
and ends in June 2010. It is important to note that the IAB data are not nationally representative
and only cover the universe of workers who are either unemployed and registered with the
German employment agency or who are employed in a job that is subject to social insurance
contributions. We therefore cannot compute flows between employment and out-of-the-laborforce.
23

Aggregate UE and EU flows are shown in Appendix Figures 13a and 13b, respectively.26
The figures paint a very clear picture. First, UE-flows decreased tremendously at the beginning
of the 1980s and remained relatively low until the end of the 1990s, corresponding to the well
documented two decades of high unemployment. At the same time, EU-flows remained fairly
stable over time, implying that high unemployment rates were a problem of job creation rather
than job destruction. Second, there was a clear trend break in UE-flows in 2004, with a
pronounced upward trend since then, even during the Great Recession. This is consistent with the
findings in Fehr and Sunde (2009) who show, using a more fine-grained analysis of UE flows,
that the rate at which the unemployed are matched to the employed has significantly increased in
response to the Hartz reforms. Somewhat surprisingly there is also a slight permanent decrease in
EU-flows as well. In particular, job destruction rates have not increased noticeably during the
Great Recession. Hence, both more job creation and less job destruction have contributed to the
falling unemployment rates since 2004/05.
Given the documented importance of the older workers in driving recent employment
trends we also compute the two types of flows for our three age groups, shown in Appendix
Figures 14a and 14b. Two important facts emerge from these figures. First, flows in and out of
employment of the young and the middle-aged groups track each other very closely. In contrast,
UE flows of the older workers are noticeable more stable over time, with a smaller decrease at
the beginning of the 1980s and a smaller increase since 2004. On the other hand, job break-up
rates are the largest for this group, with the exception of the period starting in 2004. Second, both
UE and EU rates were lower for the older workers since the 2003-05 labor market reforms,
suggesting that jobs have become more stable but also harder to find. Since the recent decline in
non-employment of this group has been quite large, it is reasonable to conjecture that it was
mostly driven by a change in flows into retirement rather than by the observed changes in flows
between employment and unemployment.
These statistics paint a complex picture of recent aggregate labor market dynamics in
Germany. On the one hand, the observed changes in flows are likely to be driven by the labor
market reforms and clearly worked in favor of lower unemployment rates for the younger
26

We have cleaned these time‐series from season‐effects by removing monthly fixed effects in a first‐stage
regression and smoothing the residuals subsequently using a standard moving average with a fixed symmetric
window of 2 months. As is apparent from the figures, some seasonality remains, mainly because the amplitude of
monthly seasonality has changed over time.

24

workers, but with a relatively minor impact on their non-employment rates. On the other hand,
flows out of the labor force of the older workers have changed significantly and were arguably
the most important part of the recent trends in aggregate non-employment rates. Since the Hartz
reforms did not explicitly target older workers, these changes are more likely to be driven by
reforms of the retirement benefit system that were implemented around the same time.27 It is also
important to note that the share of mini-jobs, jobs on short-term contracts, and mean and median
wages, all of which are commonly thought to have been strongly affected by the Hartz reforms,
displayed pre-existing trends, starting in the mid-1990s.28 This is consistent with work by
Dustmann et al (2014) providing evidence that it was the increasing flexibility and
decentralization of the wage-setting process starting around the same time which explains recent
trends in the performance of the German labor market. It thus becomes reasonable to view the
implementation of the Hartz reforms as an endogenous policy reaction and manifestation of
deeper labor market trends that were already ongoing.
It remains puzzling however that the Great Recession did not have any noticeable impact
on these recent trends. This is hard to reconcile with a persistent shock to output. Instead, it is
reasonable to assume that firms and workers perceived the drop in output in 2007 as a transitory
shock, possibly because they viewed the German economy as structurally healthy, thus not
significantly altering decisions about consumption, investment and hiring. In other words, one
may conjecture that agents in the economy expected the strong performance of the German
economy as measured by growth in GDP in the aftermath of the recession. This is also consistent
with the minor drop of domestic demand in Germany in 2007.
To go beyond pure speculation we build on the observation documented in e.g. Burda and
Hunt (2011) that the output drop during the Great Recession can be accounted for to a large part
by a decline in domestic consumption in the case of the U.S. but by a decline in net exports in the
case of Germany. We thus ask if (a) shocks to domestic demand are more persistent than shocks
to net exports and (b) if changes in domestic demand have larger effects on unemployment rates

27

It is true that one part of the Hartz reforms attempted to improve job opportunities of older workers. The goal
was to increase labor force attachment of this group by way of facilitating the use of short‐term contracts. As
shown in Appendix Figure 17 there are no noticeable changes in the share of workers on short‐term contracts
among older workers. Together with our finding that jobs held by this group have become more stable in terms of
net flows between unemployment and employment it is unlikely that the Hartz reforms can explain a sizeable part
of the trends in non‐employment.
28
For a discussion of trends in wages at different parts of the distribution we refer to Dustmann et al (2014).

25

than changes in net exports. To this end we expand our data on aggregate country-specific
outcomes, collected from the BLS and the OECD data bases, by including all years since 1970
and by collecting data on aggregate consumption, investment and net exports. We continue to
focus on the 11 countries included in Figures 1a to 1c. Since our time series are now significantly
longer we detrend all aggregate variables but unemployment using country-specific 6th-order
polynomials in time.
To address question (a) we run separate regressions of the three components of aggregate
demand on their lagged levels, clustering standard errors by country. We find that, indeed,
deviations from trend are most persistent for consumption, with an AR(1)-coefficient of .38,
followed by net exports (.33) and investment (.32). All coefficients are estimated very precisely,
and no estimate is included in the 5%-confidence interval around another estimate.29
To answer question (b) we run regressions of changes in unemployment rates on
percentage changes in consumption, investment and net exports. Again we cluster standard errors
on the country level. This yields estimates on changes in consumption and net exports that are
statistically indistinguishable from zero (-.004 and .001 respectively, with standard errors of .003
and .015). In contrast, the coefficient on the percentage change in investment is large (-.093) and
highly significant (standard error of .02). These results are reflections of the well-known
business cycle fact that the correlation between investment and total hours of work is much
larger than the correlation between consumption and total hours of work. Since changes in the
real value of the housing stock is included in our domestic investment variable, the finding that
unemployment rates react strongly to changes in this component of aggregate demand but not at
all to changes in net exports is consistent with our hypothesis stated above.

V.Additional Discussion
In this Section we discuss two additional explanations, demand from China and wage
moderation, that have been suggested to the different labor market performance of difference
countries during the Great Recession.
Demand from China

29

All parameter values are substantially below those we obtain if we use data on the U.S. only (.95, .80 and .96
respectively).

26

While most advanced economies experienced a decline in GDP during the Great
Recession, BRIC countries and China in particular kept growing at a fast pace, albeit not quite as
fast as prior to the Great Recession. This means that countries with substantial exports to China
may have fared better than others during the Great Recession. For example, compared to other
countries we study Germany is a leader in the export of precision machinery and related
intermediate inputs that are in high demand in China. This may account for part of the strong
employment performance of the German manufacturing sector (Figure 4b) compared to other
countries that compete more directly against China in the production of other goods.30
Other countries that can benefit from the demand from China are those, like Australia and
to some extent Canada, that intensively export natural resources to China. One problem with this
explanation is that the more resource-intensive provinces in Western Canada were, if anything,
more adversely affected by the recession than the rest of the country (Table 3 and Appendix
Figure 7). So while the strong performance of Australia during the Great Recession is arguably
linked to its close trade relationship with China, there is no evidence that China helped “shelter”
Western Canada from the Great Recession. Perhaps this has to do with the mix of natural
resources that is more tilted towards oil and gas in Canada, and that the main export market for
most Canadian products remains the United States. But there is clearly no evidence from our
U.S.-Canada comparison that the stronger performance of the Canadian labor market during the
Great Recession is linked to the resources sector since, if anything, Western Canada did worse
than the rest of the country during that period.

Wage moderation
A popular hypothesis, stated in Burda and Hunt (2011) among others, is that Germany’s strong
labor market performance over the last decade is explained by “wage moderation”, i.e. the
empirical fact that the cost of labor has grown at very low rates. We see two main problems with
this argument. First, wage moderation, which is nothing else than a slow growth of real wages
relative to labor productivity, is endogeneous itself and a reflection of deeper economic changes
that have led to a stronger labor market. After all, German unions did not refrain from asking for
higher wage growth because they have become more “moderate”, but because they did not have

30

Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) indeed show that regions of the U.S. that compete more directly with China
experienced adverse labor market consequences following the admission of China to the WTO.

27

another choice in light of increasing globalization of Germany’s industry and the poor labor
market performance in the 1990s. At the same time, it is not entirely obvious why some countries
engage in wage moderation ceteris paribus while others do not.
Second, real wages were also fairly stable in most other countries at a time when labor
productivity continued to rise. Figure 9 shows the evolution of real manufacturing wages as
computed from the BLS data in our set of eleven countries since 2000. Consistent with Burda
and Hunt (2011) and Rinne and Zimmermann (2012), we see that real wages have been relatively
constant in Germany since the mid-2000s, indeed. But at the same time real wages were also
fairly stable in most other countries over the same period. For instance, Canada, Australia, and
the United States all had arguably more “wage moderation” since 2000 than Germany.
Dustmann et al. (2014) offer the most complete exploration of the wage moderation
hypothesis. In their view, Germany’s strong performance is mainly explained by the success of
the export-oriented industry, which itself had feedback effects to the non-tradable sectors of the
economy. This success was caused by an increasing competitiveness of that sector, mainly due to
two channels. First, the introduction of the Euro and its subsequent weakening made German
goods cheaper in countries outside the Euro-zone. Second, and more importantly, the costs of
labor inputs grew at a low rate relative to other countries in the Eurozone, especially when seen
in relation to labor productivity. This is the wage moderation channel. Dustmann et al. (2014)
argue that it did not take place in other Euro-countries because of the more centralized wage
bargaining structure in these countries and because of the weaker trading ties to Eastern
European countries that started to grow at that time. Another reason, not discussed in their paper,
is that when labor is mobile across countries that share a currency, factor prices will eventually
adjust. Since Germany’s real wages were high relative to the other Eurozone countries before the
introduction of the Euro, they experienced a downward pressure afterwards.
The argument that economic forces, such as globalization, the growth of Eastern
European countries, and the introduction of the Euro, lead an export-oriented country like
Germany to become more competitive as reflected by wage moderation is highly plausible. In
fact, one may argue that the pre-existing trends discussed above, such as the increasing use of
short-term contracts and mini-jobs before the Hartz labor market reforms, are just another
manifestation of these forces. We therefore agree that they serve as a plausible explanation for
the strong performance of the German labor market prior to the Great Recession. However, it is
28

difficult to link these trends to the lacking response of labor market outcomes to the large drop in
output that took place in 2008. In particular, if labor market flexibility and low wage growth are
an explanation for this missing response, then one should see an even smaller response in more
flexible economies, such as the U.K. or the U.S. Even if we take into account that there was
some impact of the Great Recession on the intensive margin of labor inputs, i.e. hourly worked
conditional on employment as discussed above, it cannot explain why Germany essentially was
back to pre-crisis levels by 2010 while countries with highly flexible and decentralized labor
markets were not.

Strong GDP performance, mostly due to a non-response in aggregate

consumption and investment demand, and the lack of a boom and bust in construction are much
more unique features of Germany and arguably more promising explanations for the labor
market performance in the aftermath of the Great Recession.

VI. Conclusion
In this study we explore a number of possible explanations for the persistently weak labor
market performance of the United States in the aftermath of the Great Recession by contrasting
its experience to those of a large set of OECD countries. We also conduct a detailed micro-level
analysis of labor market outcomes in two comparison countries, Canada and Germany, that faced
similar declines in output during the recession but that have not been troubled by persistently
high unemployment since then. Adapting this comparative perspective enables us to rule out a
number of previously suggested mechanisms as the main driving forces of Canada’s and
Germany’s relative successes. In particular, we show that the “German labor market miracle” is
not a miracle at all as its labor market performance is in line with its strong GDP-growth in the
post-recession period. We also argue that wage moderation is not likely to be a main explanation
for Germany’s low unemployment rates as real wages have remained constant in other countries
that fared much worse, such as the United Kingdom. In contrast, our findings support recent
studies that emphasize the role of the construction boom in the United States as the main driving
force of its troubled labor markets. Absent this boom and subsequent bust, our micro-level
decompositions of employment rates suggest that U.S. employment rates would have been much
closer aligned with employment rates in Germany and Canada.
Our study raises a number of issues to be addressed in future research. First, our
international comparison suggests that industrial composition is strongly associated with the
29

labor market impact of the Great Recession. Most importantly, countries, states and provinces
with a pre-crisis construction boom were particularly severely hit by the crisis. In contrast,
countries whose output decline was mainly driven by a decline in exports, such as Canada and
Germany, fared much better. This is consistent with balance-sheet recessions as in KiyotakiMoore-type models (1996) where a drop in housing prices can have disastrous and long-lasting
aggregate impacts because of a house’ value as collateral. In contrast, as the drop in output
during the recession in Germany was mainly due to a fall in exports, it may have been perceived
as a transitory rather than permanent shock by firms and workers, thus not significantly affecting
aggregate consumption and investment. Second, the German evidence suggests that large-scale
reforms to the labor market and the pension system can have major impacts on aggregate labor
market performance. It is much less clear as to how such reforms interact with the labor market
impact of a recession.

References
Abel, Andrew, Bernanke, Ben, and Dean Croushore. 2013. Macroeconomics, 8th edition. Boston,
MA: Pearson Education.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
Employment and Earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics. Volume 4, Orley Ashenfelter and
David E. Card (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier
Autor, David, Dorn, David, and Gordon Hanson. Forthcoming. The China Syndrome: Local
Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the U.S. American Economic Review 103, no.
6:2121-68.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and David Card. 1986. Why Have Unemployment Rates in Canada and the
United States Diverged? Economica 53, suppl.: S171-S195.
Burda, Michael C., and Jennifer Hunt. 2011. What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle
in the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2011: 273 – 319.
Cahuc, Pierre, and Stéphane Carcillo. 2010. Is short-time work a good method to keep
unemployment down? Nordic Economic Policy Review, no. 1: 133-169.
Card, David, and W. Craig Riddell. 1993. A Comparative Analysis of Unemployment in Canada
and the United States. In Small Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income
Maintenance in Canada and the United States, ed. David Card and Richard Freeman: 149-190.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

30

Charles, Kerwin K., Hurst, Erik, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. Manufacturing Decline,
Housing Booms, and Non-Employment. Working Paper no. 18949, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Daly, Mary, and Bart Hobijn. 2010. Okun’s Law and the Unemployment Surprise of 2009.
FRBSF Economic Letter 2010-07.
Davidoff, Thomas. 2013. Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s. Real Estate
Economics 41, no. 4:793-813.
Dustmann, Christian, Bernd Fitzenberger, Uta Schönberga, and Alexandra Spitz-Oehner. 2014.
From Sick Man of Europe to Economic Superstar: Germany's Resurgent Economy, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 28(1), 167-188Elsby, Michael. 2011. Comments on Burda and Hunt.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring 2011: 320 - 328
Elsby, Michael, Hobijn, Bart, and Aysegul Sahin. 2008. Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD.
Working Paper no. 14617, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fahr, Rene, Uwe Sunde. 2009. Did the Hartz Reforms Speed-Up the Matching Process? A
Macro-Evaluation Using Empirical Matching Functions. German Economic Review, 10, 284-316
Jaimovich, Nir, Henry Siu. 2014. The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
Recoveries. Mimeo, University of British Columbia.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. Credit Cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105,
no. 2:211–248.
Lilien, David M. 1982. Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment. The Journal of Political
Economy 90, no. 4:777-793.
Mehrotra, Neil R., and Dmitriy Sergeyev. 2012. Sectoral Shocks, the Beveridge Curve and
Monetary Policy. Working paper, Columbia University.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. What explains the 2007-09 Drop in Employment? Forthcoming
in Econometrica.
Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009. The Aftermath of Financial Crises.
American Economic Review 99, no. 2:466-72.
Rinne, Ulf, and Klaus F Zimmermann. 2012. Another Labor Market Miracle? The German
Labor Market and the Great Recession. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 1, no.3:1-21.

31

Table 1: Change in employment shares by sectors, 2000-2010
Others
(3)

Total
(4)

% of total
due to constr.
(5)

-1.9
-0.4
-1.7
-1.4
-0.5
-2.6
-1.8
-1.2
-1.5
-1.2
-1.1

-0.3
1.9
-0.3
1.0
-0.1
-3.7
-1.0
-0.5
-1.6
0.5
-0.4

-2.0
1.5
-2.2
-1.2
-0.9
-11.5
-2.5
-2.5
-4.9
-0.8
-1.5

-12.6
2.8
8.3
59.7
21.7
42.6
-23.5
27.7
36.9
6.8
-3.7

0.15
(0.04)
0.64

0.41
(0.05)
0.90

0.9
1.2
-0.9
-0.1
1.3
1.1
0.5
2.7
1.6
0.4
0.9

-2.7
-0.2
-3.7
-2.2
-1.9
-8.4
-0.8
-3.9
-3.3
-1.6
-2.1

-2.8
2.4
-6.0
-2.1
-0.4
-14.7
-0.8
-2.6
-4.3
-3.0
-2.0

35.2
60.6
22.6
-13.1
-54.9
47.8
51.1
53.7
60.2
60.0
41.3

Construction Manufacturing
(1)
(2)
A: 2007 to 2010
Canada
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
UK
US
Australia
France

0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.7
-0.2
-5.2
0.4
-0.8
-1.8
-0.1
0.1

Regr. Coefficient
(st. error)
R-square

0.44
(0.06)
0.86

B: Diff-in-diff ( (2010-2007) - (2007-2000) )
Canada
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
UK
US
Australia
France

-1.0
1.5
-1.4
0.2
0.2
-7.5
-0.4
-1.4
-2.6
-1.8
-0.8

Regr. Coefficient
0.51
0.02
0.48
(st. error)
(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.05)
R-square
0.92
0.01
0.91
Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the change
(or difference-in-differences) in the share of each employment sector on the total employment
share. The regressions equally weight each observation. The data used are the annual
employment aggregates from the OECD plotted in Figure 4.

Table 2a: Change in employment shares by sectors, United States 2007 to 2010
Men with HS or less
Constr. as
Total % of total
(3)
(4)

Constr.
(1)

Manuf.
(2)

‐3.4
‐3.0
‐3.2
‐1.9
‐5.4
‐3.9
‐3.1
‐5.5
‐5.0
‐6.1
‐10.8
‐3.5
‐9.1

‐2.0
‐1.8
‐3.7
‐2.7
‐1.6
‐3.4
‐0.4
‐2.5
‐1.9
‐1.4
‐0.6
0.0
‐2.2

‐6.6
‐5.6
‐9.8
‐5.7
‐9.1
‐8.0
‐4.8
‐9.9
‐8.4
‐9.3
‐14.3
‐5.5
‐14.9

Employment share

Constr.
0.191

Manuf.
0.195

Regr. coefficient
(standard error)

0.798
(0.161)

0.167
(0.176)

New England
Middle Atlantic
E N Central
W N Central
South Atlantic
E S Central
W S Central
Mountain
Pacific
California
AZ & NV
Texas
Florida

All men

All men and women

Constr. as
Total % of total
(7)
(8)

Constr.
(5)

Manuf.
(6)

‐2.2
‐1.5
‐1.9
‐1.0
‐2.9
‐2.9
‐2.2
‐3.0
‐3.0
‐3.8
‐6.3
‐2.3
‐5.3

‐2.0
‐1.5
‐3.5
‐1.3
‐1.3
‐2.5
‐0.8
‐1.1
‐1.6
‐1.0
‐0.4
‐0.9
‐0.9

‐4.7
‐4.6
‐7.3
‐4.5
‐6.1
‐6.2
‐3.7
‐7.2
‐6.5
‐8.0
‐10.8
‐4.3
‐9.6

Others
0.614

Constr.
0.125

Manuf.
0.165

0.035
(0.099)

0.785
(0.098)

0.008
(0.089)

52
52
32
33
59
49
64
55
60
66
76
63
61

Constr. as
Total % of total
(11)
(12)

Constr.
(9)

Manuf.
(10)

‐1.2
‐0.9
‐1.0
‐0.6
‐1.6
‐1.5
‐1.0
‐1.9
‐1.6
‐2.0
‐3.8
‐1.2
‐2.9

‐1.3
‐1.2
‐2.6
‐1.0
‐1.1
‐2.0
‐1.3
‐1.0
‐0.9
‐0.9
‐0.3
‐0.9
‐0.6

‐3.0
‐3.6
‐5.1
‐3.6
‐4.6
‐4.0
‐3.1
‐5.7
‐4.2
‐5.9
‐7.7
‐2.8
‐7.5

Others
0.711

Constr.
0.072

Manuf.
0.125

Others
0.803

0.206
(0.102)

0.685
(0.074)

‐0.046
(0.056)

0.361
(0.078)

46
33
26
23
48
47
59
42
47
47
59
55
55

40
24
19
17
34
37
33
33
39
34
49
44
39

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the change in the share of each employment sector on the total
employment share. All thirteen regions are equally weighted in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using CPS data.

Table 2b: Change in employment shares by sectors, United States (2007‐10) ‐ (2000‐07)
Men with HS or less
Constr. as
Total % of total
(3)
(4)

Constr.
(1)

Manuf.
(2)

‐5.6
‐5.5
‐2.5
‐1.2
‐8.3
‐5.6
‐5.8
‐8.7
‐9.3
‐10.8
‐14.3
‐6.6
‐13.4

3.0
2.3
‐0.3
‐2.5
5.7
2.4
4.9
0.1
‐0.1
4.8
1.2
4.1
0.9

‐3.7
‐4.5
‐5.6
‐3.3
‐6.5
‐4.5
‐1.7
‐11.0
‐9.1
‐8.2
‐12.7
‐2.8
‐14.4

Employment share

Constr.
0.191

Manuf.
0.195

Regr. coefficient
(standard error)

0.735
(0.100)

0.045
(0.104)

New England
Middle Atlantic
E N Central
W N Central
South Atlantic
E S Central
W S Central
Mountain
Pacific
California
AZ & NV
Texas
Florida

All men

All men and women
Constr. as
Total % of total
(7)
(8)

Constr.
(5)

Manuf.
(6)

‐3.1
‐2.7
‐1.9
‐1.0
‐3.9
‐4.5
‐3.8
‐4.4
‐5.1
‐6.6
‐8.7
‐4.8
‐7.7

1.9
2.0
0.5
‐0.6
4.5
1.4
3.5
1.3
0.3
3.7
1.5
3.1
2.2

‐2.6
‐3.1
‐3.2
‐3.5
‐4.0
‐2.8
‐1.1
‐7.5
‐4.9
‐6.2
‐9.5
‐1.3
‐8.4

Others
0.614

Constr.
0.125

Manuf.
0.165

0.220
(0.048)

0.654
(0.061)

0.101
(0.056)

151
121
44
38
128
123
346
79
102
133
113
233
93

Constr. as
Total % of total
(11)
(12)

Constr.
(9)

Manuf.
(10)

‐1.7
‐1.5
‐1.0
‐0.6
‐2.1
‐2.3
‐1.7
‐2.9
‐2.7
‐3.5
‐5.5
‐2.3
‐4.1

2.2
1.7
0.6
0.1
3.7
0.6
1.5
0.7
0.5
2.8
1.3
1.7
2.0

‐1.3
‐3.3
‐2.3
‐2.8
‐2.8
‐1.3
‐1.8
‐5.8
‐2.7
‐4.7
‐6.8
0.0
‐7.6

Others
0.711

Constr.
0.072

Manuf.
0.125

Others
0.803

0.245
(0.080)

0.581
(0.072)

0.114
(0.125)

0.304
(0.059)

118
86
59
28
99
159
350
59
105
107
92
353
92

130
46
42
22
75
181
97
49
102
75
80
‐‐‐
55

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the difference‐in‐differences in the share of each employment
on the total employment share. All thirteen regions are equally weighted in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using
CPS data.

Table 3a: Change in employment shares by sectors, Canada 2007‐10
Men with HS and less

All men

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Atlantic
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC

1.4
1.1
0.9
0.0
0.7
‐2.0
0.2

‐1.4
‐1.7
‐4.2
‐0.8
‐1.0
‐0.5
‐3.5

‐0.3
‐0.6
‐0.1
‐0.9
‐0.1
‐2.3
‐0.9

‐0.7
‐1.0
‐5.5
‐2.7
‐2.7
‐7.2
‐7.9

Constr. Manuf. Primary Others
Employment share 0.136 0.208 0.066 0.590
Regr. coefficient 0.536 0.114 0.286 0.064
(standard error)
(0.154) (0.144) (0.221) (0.281)

‐190
‐113
‐17
1
‐27
28
‐3

All men and women

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
1.1
1.1
0.7
1.0
1.5
‐1.3
‐0.8
Constr.
0.112
0.540
(0.101)

‐1.7
‐2.0
‐3.8
‐0.3
‐0.9
‐1.0
‐2.6

0.0
‐0.4
0.0
‐0.4
0.5
‐1.1
‐0.3

‐0.7
‐1.1
‐3.7
‐1.9
‐1.7
‐4.7
‐5.3

Manuf. Primary Others
0.179 0.050
0.658
0.086 0.228
0.146
(0.072) (0.137) (0.199)

‐162
‐103
‐19
‐50
‐86
28
15

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.5
0.9
‐0.8
‐0.5
Constr.
0.179
0.735
(0.078)

‐1.2
‐1.5
‐2.6
‐0.5
‐0.2
‐0.9
‐1.6

0.1
‐0.2
0.0
‐0.3
0.4
‐1.0
‐0.1

‐0.2
‐0.4
‐3.0
‐1.3
‐1.0
‐3.5
‐3.0

‐342
‐140
‐10
‐41
‐89
22
16

Manuf. Primary Others
0.128 0.031 0.775
0.045 0.220 0.220
(0.051) (0.086) (0.141)

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the change in the share of each employment sector on the total employment
share. All thirteen regions are equally weighted in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using LFS data.

Table 3b: Change in employment shares by sectors, Canada (2007‐10) ‐ (2000‐07)
Men with HS and less

All men

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Atlantic
Quebec
Ontario
Manitoba
Saskatchewan
Alberta
BC

0.0
‐0.4
0.2
‐2.0
‐2.1
‐8.2
‐4.6

‐1.2
‐0.1
2.0
0.8
‐1.1
1.6
‐2.5

1.9
0.2
0.2
‐1.4
‐3.0
‐6.3
0.0

‐3.0
‐0.3
‐2.6
‐4.7
‐6.6
‐11.0
‐13.6

Constr. Manuf. Primary Others
Employment share 0.136 0.208 0.066 0.590
Regr. coefficient 0.251 0.189 0.143 0.418
(standard error)
(0.134) (0.199) (0.099) (0.098)

‐1
102
‐9
42
32
75
34

All men and women

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.2
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.3
‐0.5
‐5.4
‐5.1
Constr.
0.112
0.362
(0.096)

‐0.5
0.5
1.1
0.8
‐0.7
0.7
‐1.4

1.3
0.2
0.2
‐0.3
‐1.6
‐5.8
0.7

‐2.7
‐1.3
‐1.7
‐2.8
‐4.6
‐6.7
‐8.6

Manuf. Primary Others
0.179 0.050
0.658
0.229 0.190
0.219
(0.137) (0.067) (0.150)

‐7
14
21
10
10
81
60

Constr. as
Constr. Manuf. Primary Total % of total
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
0.1
‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.3
‐0.2
‐3.4
‐3.0
Constr.
0.179
0.195
(0.070)

‐0.5
‐0.1
0.5
0.0
‐0.1
0.0
‐0.9

0.8
‐0.7
0.1
‐0.3
‐0.7
‐4.0
0.5

‐4.3
‐4.5
‐3.5
‐2.9
‐4.5
‐6.1
‐6.1

‐3
5
9
9
5
55
50

Manuf. Primary Others
0.128 0.031 0.775
0.261 0.173 0.371
(0.088) (0.043) (0.104)

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the difference‐in‐differences in the share of each employment sector on the
total employment share. All thirteen regions are equally weighted in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using LFS data.

Table 4a: Change in employment shares by sectors, Germany 2007 to 2010
Men with HS or less
Constr.
(1)

Manuf.
(2)

Primary
(3)

‐0.2
0.2
0.9
0.8
‐1.0
2.0
‐0.4

‐1.3
‐0.6
‐1.3
‐1.3
1.1
‐0.4
1.1

‐0.8
‐0.7
‐0.8
‐0.6
‐0.3
‐0.5
‐0.7

Constr.
Employment share: 0.122

Manuf.
0.317

Primary
0.030

Regression coef.:
(standard error)

0.377
(0.088)

0.151
(0.058)

South‐West
South‐Central‐West
North‐Central‐West
North‐West
South‐East
Berlin
North‐East

‐0.029
(0.098)

All men

Constr. as
Total % of total
(4)
(5)

Constr.
(6)

Manuf.
(7)

Primary
(8)

‐0.4
0.4
0.6
0.5
‐0.2
1.1
‐0.1

‐0.5
‐0.4
‐0.7
‐1.2
0.8
‐0.6
1.3

‐0.6
‐0.6
‐0.6
‐0.7
‐0.2
‐0.5
‐0.6

Others
0.531

Constr.
0.106

Manuf.
0.297

0.501
(0.115)

‐0.002
(0.039)

0.057
(0.059)

‐0.2
0.2
0.1
‐0.4
2.0
3.2
3.2

116
155
707
‐197
‐50
64
‐13

All men and women
Constr. as
Total % of total
(9)
(10)

Constr. as
Total % of total
(14)
(15)

Constr.
(11)

Manuf.
(12)

Primary
(13)

‐0.1
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.0
0.6
‐0.1

‐1.0
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐1.1
0.2
‐0.4
0.9

‐0.5
‐0.4
‐0.4
‐0.5
‐0.1
‐0.4
‐0.4

Primary Others
0.027
0.570

Constr.
0.066

Manuf.
0.221

Primary Others
0.021
0.692

0.046
(0.023)

0.023
(0.027)

0.037
(0.049)

0.024
(0.019)

0.6
1.2
0.8
0.0
3.5
3.6
4.6

0.899
(0.072)

‐62
31
69
‐‐‐
‐6
32
‐2

1.6
1.9
1.6
1.6
4.5
3.4
5.2

‐9
16
22
17
1
18
‐1

0.917
(0.056)

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the change in the share of each employment sector on the total employment share. All 7 regions are equally weighted
in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using Mikrozensus data.

Table 4b: Change in employment shares by sectors, Germany (2007‐10) ‐ (2000‐07)
Men with HS or less
Constr.
(1)

Manuf.
(2)

Primary
(3)

0.5
1.1
2.3
2.2
4.2
5.9
5.3

‐1.4
0.5
‐0.8
‐2.5
‐1.6
0.9
‐3.0

‐0.4
‐0.8
‐0.3
‐0.7
0.1
‐0.6
0.0

‐1.3
‐1.4
‐1.1
‐2.4
0.5
3.6
0.2

Constr.
Employment share: 0.144

Manuf.
0.322

Primary
0.038

Regression coef.:
(standard error)

0.169
(0.125)

0.211
(0.070)

South‐West
South‐Central‐West
North‐Central‐West
North‐West
South‐East
Berlin
North‐East

0.157
(0.121)

All men

Constr. as
Total % of total
(4)
(5)

Constr.
(6)

Manuf.
(7)

Primary
(8)

0.3
1.5
1.7
1.5
4.0
4.5
4.3

‐0.3
1.2
0.2
‐1.8
‐2.0
0.8
‐2.2

‐0.3
‐0.7
‐0.2
‐0.9
0.2
‐0.6
0.0

Others
0.497

Constr.
0.126

Manuf.
0.305

0.464
(0.121)

0.027
(0.030)

0.183
(0.044)

‐38
‐76
‐216
‐90
765
165
‐‐‐

All men and women
Constr. as
Total % of total
(9)
(10)

Constr. as
Total % of total
(14)
(15)

Constr.
(11)

Manuf.
(12)

Primary
(13)

0.3
1.1
1.0
0.8
2.6
2.5
2.5

‐0.6
0.6
‐0.2
‐1.7
‐2.0
0.5
‐1.4

‐0.1
‐0.4
‐0.1
‐0.6
0.5
‐0.4
0.2

Primary Others
0.034
0.535

Constr.
0.080

Manuf.
0.237

Primary Others
0.027
0.656

0.015
(0.018)

0.024
(0.017)

0.147
(0.032)

0.009
(0.013)

‐1.0
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐2.2
1.3
3.3
1.4

0.775
(0.048)

‐29
‐359
‐286
‐70
318
136
305

‐2.1
‐2.1
‐2.5
‐2.1
1.1
1.8
‐0.3

‐12
‐53
‐41
‐38
234
142
‐819

0.820
(0.036)

Note: The regression coefficients are obtained by running a regression of the difference‐in‐difference in the share of each employment sector on the total employment share. All 7 regions are
equally weighted in the regressions. The employment shares are computed using Mikrozensus data.

Figure 1a: Unemployment rates in selected G7 countries
12

10

8

6

4

2

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

United States

2001
Canada

2003

2005

Japan

2007

2009

2011

2013

2011

2013

United Kingdom

Figure 1b: Unemployment rates in selected G7 countries
14.0

12.0

10.0

8.0

6.0

4.0

2.0

0.0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

United States

2001
France

2003

2005

Germany

2007
Italy

2009

Figure 1c: Unemployment rates in other OECD countries
25

20

15

10

5

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

United States

1999
Australia

2001

2003
Netherlands

2005

2007
Sweden

2009

2011

2013

Spain

Note: Data from the BLS International Labor Comparisons Program (1991‐2012) updated using data from the
Conference Board for 2013. The two vertical lines indicate the Great Recession time period (2007‐09).

Figure 2a: Real GDP in OECD countries
150

140

130

120

110

100

90

Australia

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Netherlands

Spain

Sweden

UK

US

Japan

Figure 2b: Detrended Real GDP (using linear trends for 2000‐07)
10
5
0
‐5
‐10
‐15
‐20
‐25
‐30
‐35

Australia

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Netherlands

Spain

Sweden

UK

US

Japan

Note: Real GDP data from the OECD. Trends computed over the Q1‐2000 to Q1‐2007 period.

Figure 3: Okun's law in OECD countries
0
‐3.0

‐2.0

‐1.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5.0

Change in detrended real GDP, Q4‐2007 to Q4‐2011

‐2
Australia
Germany

‐4
Canada

‐6

France
‐8
Y = ‐6.17 ‐ 1.73*UR
(1.63) (0.72)
R‐square = 0.42

Japan
‐10
Netherlands

Italy

US

‐12
Sweden
‐14
‐16
‐18

UK

‐20
Change in unemployment rate, Q4‐2007 to Q4‐2011

Note: The changes in unemployment rates are computed using BLS data. Real GDP data come from the OECD.
The detrended changes in real GDP are obtained by estimating trend real GDP growth for Q1‐2000 to Q4‐2007,
and subtracting the predicted trend from observed changes for Q1‐2007 tp Q‐1‐2011. The Okun relationship
illustrated in the figure is obtained by running an equally weighted regression of changes in detrended real GDP
on changes in unemployment rates.

Figure 4a: Share of labor force working in the construction industry
13.0
12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
2000

2001

Canada

2002

2003

Germany

2004

Italy

2005
Japan

2006

2007

Netherlands

2008
Spain

2009

2010

Sweden

2011

2012

UK

US

2011

2012

UK

US

Figure 4b: Share of the labor force in the manufacturing industry
20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6
2000

2001

Canada

2002

2003

Germany

2004
Italy

2005
Japan

2006

2007

Netherlands

2008
Spain

2009

2010

Sweden

Figure 4c: Share of the labor force in all other industries
85.0

80.0

75.0

70.0

65.0

60.0

55.0
2000

2001

Canada

2002
Germany

Note: Data from the OECD

2003

2004

Italy

2005
Japan

2006

2007

Netherlands

2008
Spain

2009

2010

Sweden

2011

2012

UK

US

Figure 5: US non‐employment rates by individual states
0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15
1997

1999

2001
California

2003

2005

AZ‐NV

TX

Note: Non‐employment rates computed from the CPS.

2007
FL

2009
All other states

2011

2013

Figure 6a: US non‐employment rates by education, men
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1997

1999

2001

2003
HS and less

2005
Some college

2007

2009

2011

2013

2011

2013

College

Figure 6b: US non‐employment rates by education, women
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
1997

1999

2001

2003
HS and less

2005
Some college

Note: Non‐employment rates computed from the CPS.

2007
College

2009

Figure 7a: German non‐employment rates by education, men
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
1997

1999

2001

no formal degree

2003

2005

formal secondary degree

2007

2009

2011

university or tech‐college

Figure 7b: German non‐employment rates by education, women
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
1997

1999
no formal degree

2001

2003

2005

formal secondary degree

2007

2009

university or tech‐college

2011

Figure 8a: German non‐employment rates by age groups, men
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
1997

1999

2001

2003
16‐24

2005
25‐54

2007

2009

2011

55‐65

Figure 8b: German non‐employment rates by age groups, women
0.80
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
1997

1999

2001

2003
16‐24

2005
25‐54

55‐65

2007

2009

2011

Figure 9: Evolution of real wages in manufacturing in OECD countries
(1999=100)
130

120

110

100

90
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

United States

Australia

Canada

France

Germany

Italy

Japan

Netherlands

Spain

Sweden

United Kingdom

Note: : Data from the BLS International Labor Comparisons Program

2010

2011

