NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A WELFARE CRITERION FOR MODELS WITH DISTORTED BELIEFS
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Alp Simsek
Wei Xiong
Working Paper 20691
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20691
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

We thank John Geanakoplos, Lars Hansen, David Hirshleifer, Leonid Kogan, Carsten Nielsen, Stephen
Morris, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Larry Samuelson, Martin Schneider, Chris Sims, Tomasz Strzalecki,
Dimitri Vayanos, Glen Weyl, and seminar participants at London Business School, Princeton University,
University of British Columbia, University of Cambridge, University of Chicago, 2012 Behavioral
Finance Conference in Amsterdam, 2012 NBER Meeting on Capital Markets and the Economy, 2013
Econometric Society Meetings, 2012 NBER Behavioral Economics Meeting, 2012 CITE conference,
2012 SITE Conference on Psychology and Economics, 8th Annual Cowles Foundation Conference
on General Equilibrium and Its Applications, and the 2nd Miami Behavioral Finance Conference for
helpful discussion and comments. We also thank Zhenyu Gao, Ji Huang, and Alejandro Van der Ghote
for able research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20691.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Welfare Criterion for Models with Distorted Beliefs
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 20691
November 2014, Revised February 2015
JEL No. D61,D62,D84,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a welfare criterion for economies in which agents have heterogeneously distorted
beliefs. Instead of taking a stand on whose belief is correct, our criterion asserts that an allocation is
belief-neutral efficient (inefficient) if it is efficient (inefficient) under any convex combination of agents'
beliefs. While this criterion gives an incomplete ranking of social allocations, it can identify positiveand negative-sum speculation driven by conflicting beliefs in a broad range of economic environments.
Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
markus@princeton.edu
Alp Simsek
Department of Economics, E17-244
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Ma. 02139
and NBER
asimsek@mit.edu

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

The burgeoning behavioral …nance and economics literature has identi…ed a set of psychological biases that distort people’s beliefs and decisions in various economic situations.1 The
presence of belief distortions stimulates normative analysis of welfare consequences of belief
distortions. A standard approach taken by the literature is to assume that the social planner knows the objective belief measure and uses the objective measure to evaluate agents’
welfare.2 This approach, however, faces a major challenge in implementation— which belief
should the planner use? In many realistic situations, the planner does not observe the objective belief and faces the same di¢ culty as individuals in discriminating di¤erent beliefs based
on available data. Perhaps due to this challenge, many studies in the behavioral literature
shy away from making any normative statement.
This paper proposes a belief-neutral welfare criterion, which requires the planner to be
sure of the presence of belief distortions by some agents but without having to precisely
identify the objective belief. To illustrate the basic idea, we …rst consider a bet between Joe
Stiglitz and Bob Wilson.3 One day, Joe and Bob argued over the contents of a pillow. Joe
maintained that the pillow had a natural …lling, while Bob thought a polyester …lling was
more likely. Joe assessed with probability 0:9 that the pillow had natural down and Bob
assessed the probability at 0:1. They decided to construct a bet as follows: If the pillow had
natural down, Bob would pay Joe $100, but if it had arti…cial down, Joe would pay Bob
$100. They could discover the truth only by cutting the pillow open, which would destroy
it. They agreed that the winner would replace the pillow at a cost of $50.4 It is clear that
both Joe and Bob preferred the bet relative to no betting at all, as each expected to make a
net pro…t of $35 after deducting the cost of replacing the pillow. This bet was desirable from
each individual’s perspective, and thus it Pareto dominated no betting under the standard
Pareto principle. However, the outcome of the bet was worrisome— it led to a wealth transfer
between Joe and Bob and a perfectly good pillow being destroyed.
Joe and Bob might have taken the bet for its entertainment value, which could have
1

See Hirshleifer (2001), Barberis and Thaler (2003), and Della-Vigna (2009) for extensive reviews of the
literature.
2
For example, see Weyl (2007), Sandroni and Squintani (2007), Spinnewijn (2010), Hassan and Mertens
(2011), Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011), and Bianchi, Boz, and Mendoza (2012).
3
See Kreps (2012, p.193) for more details of the story.
4
We can also make the example more realistic by making the replacement cost of the pillow state dependent, i.e., the cost being $50 if it had natural down and $20 if it had arti…cial down. Our welfare analysis of
the bet is robust to such a state-dependent replacement cost.

1

justi…ed the cost of destroying the pillow. Another possible motive was that each bettor
believed he would win and the other would lose. A planner could simply verify the reason by
asking them. If the bet was motivated by a belief in winning, then at least one of them was
overcon…dent, even though it was still di¢ cult to tell who was overcon…dent. In this case, it
is immediately obvious that the bet was a negative-sum game regardless of whose belief the
planner uses to evaluate the social welfare. The resulting social loss is exactly the destroyed
pillow.
In fact, the con‡icting beliefs of Joe and Bob induced a form of externality. Despite
knowing the bet would lead to the pillow being destroyed, each believed that he would
win and the other party would lose. In this setting with con‡icting beliefs, the meaning
of “externality” needs to be broadened.5 From Bob’s perspective, his action causes an
externality on Joe, even though Joe does not see it this way. From Joe’s perspective, there
is an analogous externality. The standard libertarian view does not restrict the choice of
any individual if it does not cause a negative externality on others. We modify/extend this
libertarian viewpoint to a setting with heterogeneous beliefs. In this setting, externality
has to be evaluated under the belief of the individual whose choice causes the externality
rather than under the belief of the individual who is exposed to the externality. In our pillow
example, under the belief of either Joe or Bob, the negative externality on the other even
exceeds his own gain. This negative sum serves as the basis for our welfare criterion.
To generalize the key insight of this example, we acknowledge the relevance of a set of
reasonable beliefs and require e¢ ciency to be robust across all of the reasonable beliefs. Our
welfare criterion asserts a social choice to be belief-neutral (in)e¢ cient if and only if it is
(in)e¢ cient under every reasonable belief. A key presumption of this criterion is that the
planner is sure that some agents’ beliefs are distorted.6 Speci…cally, we accept all convex
combinations of agents’beliefs as reasonable beliefs, as long as they are consistent with the
commonly agreed upon aggregate statistics. We propose to use all of them to extend the two
standard welfare analysis approaches— the expected social welfare approach and the Pareto
e¢ ciency approach.
5

One might disagree about this broadened use of the term externality— in fact, one of us does so. Alternatively, one could coin a new term for a situation in which one bene…ts at the expense of others under one’s
own beliefs but not under the other’s. In related work, Nielsen (2009b) have also used the word “externality”
to describe a similar phenomenon.
6
One can use sound non-choice evidence to rule the presence of belief distortions in observed choices. See
the recent contributions of Bernheim and Rangel (2007, 2009) and Koszegi and Rabin (2007) along this line.

2

The expected social welfare approach directly compares two social allocations x and y for
a given welfare function. Our welfare criterion posits that y is belief-neutral inferior to x if
the expected total welfare from y is lower than that from x under every convex combination
of the agents’ beliefs. Let’s go back to the bet between Joe and Bob. Suppose that the
planner is sure that the bet was induced by belief distortions and that Joe and Bob were
both risk neutral. If the social planner assigns Joe and Bob equal weight in summing up
their utilities in the social welfare function, it is clear that the bet is belief-neutral inferior to
the status quo (no betting). This is because, regardless of which reasonable belief the social
planner adopts to evaluate Joe’s and Bob’s expected utilities, the transfer of $100 between
them has no impact on the expected social welfare, but destroying the pillow leads to a sure
social loss of $50.
Without relying on a particular social welfare function, we can also adopt the Pareto
dominance approach. Our criterion asserts that an allocation y is belief-neutral Pareto
ine¢ cient if, under every reasonable belief, there exists an alternative allocation y 0 that
improves the expected utilities of some agents without hurting anyone else. Returning to the
example, suppose that the planner adopts Joe’s belief. Under this belief, the bet leads to an
expected wealth transfer of $80 from Bob to Joe and the pillow’s destruction. Alternatively,
a direct transfer of $80 from Bob to Joe without the bet improves everyone’s expected utility
by saving them the cost of replacing the pillow. Similarly, under every convex combination of
Joe’s and Bob’s beliefs, the planner can …nd a suitable (belief-measure dependent) transfer
without the bet to strictly improve everyone’s expected utility. Thus, the bet is belief-neutral
ine¢ cient with respect to any social welfare function that increases with agents’utilities.
In summary, without taking a stand on which belief was correct, the planner can categorically determine that the bet leads to an ine¢ cient social outcome. The key is that the
externality induced by the con‡icting beliefs of Joe and Bob is uniformly negative under
every reasonable belief. Of course, this feature may not always hold in a more general situation. For illustration, let us extend the bet. Suppose that Bob believed the pillow contained
poisonous materials (instead of polyester) with 90% probability and that there is a social
gain of $100 from removing a poisonous pillow from the public (instead of the $50 cost of
replacing the pillow). The bet had a positive sum under Bob’s belief but still had a negative
sum under Joe’s belief. Thus, it is neither belief-neutral e¢ cient nor belief-neutral ine¢ cient.
Despite its incompleteness, our belief-neutral criterion is able to identify negative and

3

positive externalities from belief distortions in a variety of settings. Section 3 illustrates the
potential applications using a series of examples, some of which are simpli…ed versions of
prominent models in the literature.
The …rst example extends and generalizes the pillow example in three ways. First, we
make agents risk averse. Trading induced by heterogeneous beliefs makes agents’consumption more volatile than their endowments and results in a negative-sum game in expected
utility terms regardless of the planner’s belief. Second, we add a hedging motive to the
speculative motive, by making agents’ endowments negatively correlated. In this case, a
trade-o¤ arises between the welfare gain from risk sharing and the welfare loss from speculative trading (see, e.g., Kubler and Schmedders (2012), Simsek (2013a), and Posner and
Weyl (2013)). Third, we also allow for endogenous information acquisition along the lines
of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980). In a fully rational model with homogenous prior beliefs,
agents’ incentive to collect information is subdued since trading reveals part of the information to other traders for free. This positive externality leads to an under-provision of
information that enhances socially bene…cial hedging. Heterogeneous beliefs can provide a
counterforce to this externality as the speculative motive provides additional incentive to
acquire information, as informally discussed in Black (1986). Our criterion enables us to
compare the hedging and information bene…ts with the costs of speculation due to belief
heterogeneity.
Our second example investigates whether agents adequately self-insure, e.g., whether
motorists wear seat belts as a precaution for tra¢ c accidents or banks retain capital as a
precaution for …nancial losses. Suppose agents are optimistic about their own idiosyncratic
risks although they know and agree on the aggregate risks, e.g., each motorist knows the
average accident probability but believes the accidents will happen to other motorists. In
this setting, each agent chooses not to self-insure, even though she recognizes the bene…t
of self-insurance for the average agent. While this example does not involve any negative
externality, the restriction that agents agree on aggregate risks nevertheless makes it possible
for our criterion to evaluate mandatory self-insurance policies such as seat-belt laws or bank
capital requirements.
The third and fourth examples involve speculative bubbles. A number of recent studies
(e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Morris (1996), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), Wu and Guo
(2004), Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006), and Hong and Sraer (2011)) emphasize that

4

the option to resell assets to future optimists can induce bubbles in asset prices. Our …rst
example highlights how overinvestment induced by price bubbles makes speculative trading
a negative-sum game just like the bet between Joe and Bob (e.g., Bolton, Scheinkman,
and Xiong (2006), Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005), and Panageas (2006)).
Our next example highlights that bubbles caused by heterogenous beliefs can help overcome
market breakdowns induced by the adverse-selection problem in lemons models (as in Akerlof
(1970)) and thus lead to a positive-sum game. Our criterion can also identify the consequent
belief-neutral welfare gains.
Our …fth example builds on leverage cycles caused by heterogeneous beliefs (e.g., Geanakoplos (2003, 2009), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Simsek (2013b), Cao (2010), and He and
Xiong (2012)). In these models, binding collateral constraints force optimistic asset owners
to liquidate positions. The liquidation costs associated with forced selling make the initial
leveraged asset acquisition a negative-sum game. Our criterion provides a tool to analyze
welfare implications of such leverage cycles.
The last example illustrates consumption/savings distortions induced by heterogeneous
beliefs in macroeconomic models, e.g., Sims (2008). In production-economy settings, trading
between them not only makes their consumption excessively volatile, but also induces them
to save either too much or too little relative to homogeneous-economy benchmarks. The
consequent distortion in aggregate investment again leads to a negative-sum game, which
our criterion can identify.
Economists have long recognized that the standard Pareto criterion can lead to unappealing outcomes when agents hold con‡icting beliefs. Early general equilibrium literature, e.g.,
von Weizsäcker (1969), Dreze (1970), Starr (1973), Harris (1978), and Hammond (1981),
noted that an allocation that is Pareto optimal in the usual sense might feature less-thanperfect risk sharing. In particular, it made a distinction between ex ante e¢ ciency and
various versions of ex post e¢ ciency (with better risk-sharing properties). In recent work,
Nielsen (2003, 2009a-b) have utilized the ex post welfare criterion to investigate optimal
exchange rate and social security policies in environments with belief disagreements. Other
than using a di¤erent welfare criterion, these papers assume that agents agree on holding
rational beliefs in the sense of Kurz (1994). In contrast, in most of our analysis we do
not place rationality restrictions on agents’beliefs, except for the self-insurance example in
Section 3.2, where we assume agents know and agree on the aggregate risks.

5

The independent decision theory literature, e.g., Mongin (1997), Gilboa, Samet, and
Schmeidler (2004), has also pointed out that the standard Pareto principle can be spurious
when agents hold con‡icting beliefs. Our contribution to these studies is to propose a beliefneutral criterion, which circumvents the spurious unanimity problem under the premise that
the planner is aware of the presence of belief distortions but unaware of the objective belief.
In parallel work, Gilboa, Samuelson, and Schmeidler (2012) have proposed an alternative
criterion, which we compare with our criterion in Section 2.3.3.
Another strand of the literature, e.g., Stiglitz (1989), Summers and Summers (1989),
and, more recently, Davila (2014), has emphasized the negative-sum nature of speculation in
…nancial markets to make a case for a …nancial transaction tax. Our criterion and examples
capture the costs as well as the bene…ts of speculation, therefore providing a framework for
analyzing how speculative activities in …nancial markets should be regulated.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the welfare criterion in a generic
setting. Section 3 provides a series of examples to demonstrate the capability of the criterion
to generate clear welfare ranking in a variety of environments with distorted beliefs. We
conclude in Section 4. The technical proofs are provided in the appendix.

2

The Welfare Criterion

We introduce the welfare criterion in a generic setting with N agents, indexed by i 2

f1; 2; :::; N g and with T + 1 dates: t = 0; 1; :::; T . At time t, let st be the state of the

economy, which summarizes the history of the economy up to t. Agent i’s conditional transition probability at time t from state st to state s0t+1 at t +1 is

i
t

st ; s0t+1

0. The subscript

t indicates that beliefs can be time-varying, and superscript i indicates that beliefs are potentially heterogeneous across agents. We summarize agent i’s beliefs by

i

=

i
t

st ; s0t+1

T 1
.
t=0

We assume that agents consume only at the …nal time T . A social choice x represents a
set of consumption allocations to all agents along the path of sT : x = fxi (sT )g. Note that

xi (sT ) is a vector of consumption to agent i. A feasible allocation satis…es the aggregate

budget constraint at each …nal state.
Suppose that agent i has state-dependent utility function ui [sT ; xi (sT )] over the consumption stream xi (sT ). This function is strictly increasing and locally concave with respect
to consumption. This utility speci…cation is su¢ ciently general to capture the standard utility functions used in most economic models. Based on the utility speci…cation and the agent’s
6

beliefs, his expected utility at time 0 is E0i [ui [sT ; xiT (sT )]], where the superscript i denotes
the expectation under agent i’s beliefs. By building on expected utilities, our framework
ignores preferences that feature ambiguity aversion.7

2.1

Heterogeneous Beliefs

We let agents hold di¤erent beliefs (i.e.,

i

6=

i0

if i 6= i0 ) and assume the beliefs are

common knowledge among the agents. Before we dive into welfare analysis, it is useful to
sort out di¤erent sources of heterogeneous beliefs. Throughout our later analysis, we treat
agents’beliefs as given. It is straightforward to think of the beliefs as outcomes of the agents’
learning processes. Suppose that an unobservable variable

determines the probability of

the tree moving up each period. Each agent has a prior belief about the distribution of ,
observes some information about
about

in each period, and uses Bayes’rule to update his belief

. Through this learning process, three sources may lead to heterogeneous beliefs

among agents: 1) distortions in updating, 2) di¤erent information, and 3) di¤erent prior
beliefs.
We emphasize distortions in updating as a key source of heterogeneous beliefs. A large
branch of the academic literature highlights that people su¤er from a range of well-established
psychological biases, such as overcon…dence, limited attention, representativeness bias, and
conservatism in making …nancial decisions. See Hirshleifer (2001), Barberis and Thaler
(2003), and Della-Vigna (2009) for extensive reviews of the literature. These biases cause
agents to react di¤erently to information. In particular, overcon…dence causes agents to
exaggerate the precision of certain noisy signals and thus overreact to the signals. When
agents overreact to di¤erent signals, they may end up with substantially di¤erent beliefs and,
as a result, may speculate against each other.
The presence of belief distortions prompts welfare concerns. Some agents may be unaware
of their belief distortions and, as a result, take actions that hurt their own and others’
welfare. Thus, it is important that a social planner evaluates each agent’s welfare by using
the objective probability measure, which serves as the premise of our welfare criterion.
A second source of belief di¤erences is asymmetric information. The well-known no-trade
theorem (e.g., Aumann (1976), Milgrom and Stokey (1982) and Sebenius and Geanakoplos
(1983)) shows that asymmetric information cannot cause rational agents with a common
7

Our later examples all use Markovian state structures and consumption at the …nal date T:

7

prior belief to hold common knowledge of heterogeneous beliefs or to trade with each other.
This result motivates us to mostly ignore asymmetric information in our analysis, except in
our example considered in Section 3.4.
A third source of belief di¤erences is heterogeneous prior beliefs. The decision theory
literature that builds on Savage’s (1954) notion of subjective probability treats beliefs separately for individual agents. As economics does not o¤er much guidance on how individuals
form their prior beliefs, economists tend to agree that prior beliefs probably depend on an
individual’s background and experience. Morris (1995) summarizes a series of arguments to
advocate the view that rational agents may hold heterogeneous prior beliefs, just like heterogeneous risk preferences. In Brunnermeier and Parker (2005) and Brunnermeier, Gollier,
and Parker (2007), heterogeneous prior beliefs arise endogenously from agents’anticipatory
utility. In our analysis, we abstract away from agents’heterogeneous priors and instead focus
on heterogeneous beliefs caused by distortions in updating.

2.2

Welfare Analysis with Distorted Beliefs

In the presence of distorted beliefs, it is important that the social planner uses an objective
probability measure to evaluate agents’expected utilities in the welfare analysis. The challenge here is that the social planner may not observe the probability that drives economic
uncertainty. Given the agents’ di¤erent belief measures, whose measure is appropriate for
welfare analysis? Is there an even more appropriate one outside of those used by the agents?
We now introduce a belief-neutral welfare criterion.
Without taking a stand on which agent’s belief is correct, we allow the planner to consider
every belief from a set of reasonable beliefs. In our baseline analysis, this set contains all
convex combinations of the agents’ beliefs. Denote
agents’beliefs with weight h = h1 ; :::; hN :
X
h
=
hi i ; where hi
i

h

to be a convex combination of the

0 and

X

hi = 1:

In settings with multiple events, we further restrict the set of reasonable beliefs to satisfy
commonly agreed upon aggregate statistics.8 As we discuss in Section 2.3.3, our criterion
can be generalized to use alternative speci…cations for the set of reasonable beliefs.
The key contribution of our welfare criterion is that it allows for analysis of the e¢ ciency
of a social allocation according to all reasonable beliefs. Speci…cally, we propose to identify
8

The example in Section 3.2 clari…es this aggregate statistics restriction on reasonable beliefs.

8

an allocation as ine¢ cient (or e¢ cient) if the social planner …nds it ine¢ cient (or e¢ cient)
h

under every reasonable probability measure

that is commonly used to evaluate all agents’

expected utilities. We can use two di¤erent approaches to implement our proposal, one based
on a given social welfare function and the other through the notion of Pareto e¢ ciency. As
is well known from standard economic theory, in the absence of belief distortions these two
approaches are internally consistent. In particular, any Pareto-e¢ cient social allocation
corresponds to an optimal allocation that maximizes the agents’aggregate expected utilities
under a set of nonnegative weights.
2.2.1

Belief-neutral Social Welfare Criterion

The Bergsonian social welfare function is a sum of agents’expected utilities E0h [ui ] (calculated according to a common measure

h

) using a set of nonnegative weights f i g:
" N
#
N
X
X
h
h
W E0h [u1 ] ; E0h [u2 ] ; :::; E0h [uN ] =
i E0 [ui ] = E0
i ui :
i=1

i=1

If the weights are all equal, it becomes the utilitarian social welfare function:9
" N #
N
X
X
W E0h [u1 ] ; E0h [u2 ] ; :::; E0h [uN ] =
E0h [ui ] = E0h
ui :
i=1

i=1

Based on a given welfare function, we can implement our criterion as follows.
De…nition 1 Consider two social allocations, x and y. If the expected social welfare of
allocation x dominates that of allocation y for every reasonable probability measure
W E0h u1 sT ; x1T (sT )

h

,

; :::; E0h uN sT ; xN
T (sT )

W E0h u1 sT ; yT1 (sT )

; :::; E0h uN sT ; yTN (sT )

with the inequality holding strictly for at least one reasonable measure, then allocation x is
belief-neutral superior to allocation y:
To establish the superiority of one social allocation relative to another, a higher expected
social welfare according to every convex combination of the agents’beliefs is required. This
9

Given that these social welfare functions are linear and that the social planner uses the same probability
measure to evaluate the expected utilities of all agents, the expected social welfare is independent of the
order of aggregating welfare and computing expectations. In our analysis, we …nd it more convenient to
…rst aggregate agents’welfare in each of the …nal states and then compare the expected social welfare under
di¤erent probability measures.

9

proposed belief-neutral superiority is a partial ordering of social allocations. Given two social
allocations x and y, the allocation x might dominate y in one measure and y might dominate
x in another measure. In such cases, we would say that x and y are incomparable.
Despite its incompleteness, this criterion is nevertheless useful in detecting negative-sum
speculation driven by distorted beliefs. We now apply this criterion to analyze the bet
between Joe and Bob described in the introduction. Suppose that both Joe and Bob are
risk neutral, uJoe (w) = w and uBob (w) = w, and that the social planner uses the utilitarian
social welfare function for a reasonable belief:
W E0h [uJoe ] ; E0h [uBob ] = E0h [wJoe + wBob ] = wJoe + wBob :
It is obvious that without any betting, regardless of the probability measure the social
planner adopts, the social welfare is simply the sum of Joe’s and Bob’s initial wealth. The
bet causes a transfer of $100 between them and the pillow’s destruction. The money transfer
has no impact on the social welfare regardless of its direction or the probability measure the
social planner adopts to evaluate the welfare. However, replacing the pillow incurs a sure
cost of $50 and therefore makes the bet a negative-sum game for every reasonable, common
probability measure used to evaluate Joe’s and Bob’s expected utilities. Thus, the status
quo allocation is belief-neutral superior to the bet.
The utilitarian social welfare function assigns equal weights to all agents. If the social
welfare function puts a su¢ ciently high weight on one agent, say, Joe, then we cannot directly
compare the two allocations x and y. This is because, under Joe’s belief, the bet increases
his own expected utility and thus the social welfare relative to the status quo allocation.
However, this may not be the case under Bob’s belief. The second version of our criterion
addresses this concern by generalizing the notion of Pareto e¢ ciency and establishes that
the bet is belief-neutral ine¢ cient regardless of the choice of social welfare function.
2.2.2

Belief-neutral Pareto E¢ ciency

The essence of Pareto e¢ ciency is to determine whether there exists an alternative feasible
allocation that improves the welfare (i.e., expected utility) of some agents without hurting
any other agent. If such an alternative exists, the allocation under evaluation is Pareto
ine¢ cient. We next generalize this logic to environments with distorted beliefs to obtain a
second implementation of our criterion.

10

De…nition 2 Consider a social allocation y. Suppose that, for every reasonable probability
measure

h

, there exists another (measure dependent) allocation y h such that it improves

some agents’ expected utilities without reducing anyone’s, i.e., 8i; E0h [ui (sT ; yTi (sT ))]

E0h ui sT ; yThi (sT )

with the inequality holding strictly for at least one agent. In that case,

allocation y is belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient. In contrast, if, for every

h

, there does

not exist a dominating alternative, then allocation y is belief-neutral Pareto e¢ cient.
If agents have common beliefs, i.e., if

i

is the same for each i, then the belief-neutral

Pareto criterion coincides with the usual Pareto criterion. In the presence of distorted beliefs,
as we discussed before, the social planner uses a common probability measure from the set
of reasonable measures to evaluate each agent’s expected utility. The belief-neutral criterion
then identi…es an allocation as ine¢ cient (or e¢ cient) if it is Pareto ine¢ cient (or e¢ cient)
under every reasonable measure.
Returning again to the bet between Joe and Bob, we can show that the betting allocation,
denoted by y, is belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient. Under Joe’s belief, y is dominated by an
alternative allocation, y h , which keeps the pillow intact and simply transfers $80 from Bob
to Joe. This allocation improves both Joe’s and Bob’s expected utilities, under Joe’s belief.
Similarly, under Bob’s belief, y is dominated by an alternative allocation that keeps the pillow
intact and transfers $80 from Joe to Bob. More generally, under every convex combination of
Joe’s and Bob’s beliefs, there exists an appropriate direct transfer that improves the expected
utilities of both Joe and Bob. The gain from such a transfer is due to saving the pillow from
destruction. The bet is thus belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient. It is also easy to see that
the status quo allocation is belief-neutral e¢ cient, as for every reasonable belief the planner
cannot …nd a transfer to improve Joe’s or Bob’s welfare without hurting the other’s. Taken
together, the status quo allocation is on the belief-neutral Pareto-e¢ cient frontier while the
betting allocation is in the belief-neutral ine¢ cient set.
Recall from the standard welfare theory (e.g., Mas-Colell et al., 1995, Proposition 16.E.2)
that each allocation on the Pareto frontier maximizes a linear social welfare function corresponding to some Pareto weights. This observation leads to the following result, which
states belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ ciency in terms of social welfare maximization.
Proposition 1 Let X denote the set of all feasible allocations. Accordingly, an allocation,
x 2 X, is belief-neutral Pareto e¢ cient (ine¢ cient) if and only if, for every reasonable
11

probability measure h ; there exists (does not exist) a set of Pareto weights
P
for all i and i hi = 1) such that
x 2 arg max
x
^2X

N
X

h h
i E0

ui sT ; x^iT (sT )

h
i

(with

h
i

>0

:

i=1

Proposition 1 illustrates the relationship between the two versions of our criterion. Both
versions consider all reasonable beliefs (i.e., convex combinations of agents’beliefs), which is
the key characteristic of our approach. However, the welfare-function-based criterion …xes
a particular social welfare function (e.g., a particular set of Pareto weights). By doing so,
it enables us to compare allocations directly, e.g., to say that the status quo allocation,
x, is belief-neutral superior to the betting allocation, y. In contrast, the Pareto-e¢ ciency
version is more general because it considers not only all reasonable beliefs, but also all social
welfare functions (e.g., all possible Pareto weights). The cost of this generality is that the
criterion does not provide direct comparisons between two allocations. Rather, it categorizes
allocations into three sets: 1) those that are belief-neutral ine¢ cient because they are inferior
under every reasonable belief and every welfare function, 2) those that are belief-neutral
e¢ cient because under every reasonable belief they are superior at least according to one
welfare function, and 3) those that are neither uniformly e¢ cient nor uniformly ine¢ cient
across all reasonable beliefs.

2.3
2.3.1

Comments on the Criterion
Incompleteness

Our belief-neutral criterion requires the externality induced by agents’con‡icting beliefs to
be uniformly positive or negative across the set of reasonable beliefs. This requirement is
demanding and may lead to an incomplete ranking in some situations. To illustrate this
incompleteness, we will extend the bet between Joe and Bob. Suppose that Joe believed
that the pillow was made of cotton with 90% probability as before, while Bob believed that
the pillow contained poisonous materials with 90% probability. Again, they had to cut open
the pillow to …nd out its content. If Joe was right, he would win $100 from Bob and pay
$50 to replace the pillow. If Bob was right, he would win $100 from Joe. In addition, by
removing the poisonous pillow from the public, there is a social bene…t of $100, which we
assume goes to Bob. For the sake of our discussion, we implement our criterion by using
only a utilitarian social welfare function. It is easy to see that if the planner uses Joe’s belief
12

to evaluate the social welfare, the bet induces a negative sum. However, if the planner uses
Bob’s belief, the bet induces a positive sum due to the reward for discovering a poisonous
pillow. Taken together, the bet is neither belief-neutral superior nor belief-neutral inferior
relative to the status quo. This incomplete ranking re‡ects the belief-dependent cost and
bene…t of the bet in this case.
Furthermore, in this extended example, the sets of belief-neutral e¢ cient and beliefneutral ine¢ cient allocations are both empty. Given that these sets can be empty, our
criterion instructs the planner to 1) choose a belief-neutral e¢ cient allocation if it exists, 2)
avoid a belief-neutral ine¢ cient allocation if there is any, and 3) otherwise avoid any market
intervention.
2.3.2

Collective and Cautious Paternalism

As our criterion ignores agents’preferences under their own beliefs, it is naturally paternalistic. That said, the criterion features a speci…c and disciplined form of paternalism— which
might be called collective paternalism— as it is designed to detect ine¢ ciencies (or e¢ ciencies) based on disagreements between agents in a group setting.
More speci…cally, our criterion is not designed to analyze the ine¢ ciencies induced by
irrational behavior of an individual agent. Consider an agent who invests a large fraction of
her wealth in a particular company’s stock. This investment decision may appear ine¢ cient
to a conscientious observer who holds a more neutral view of the company’s stock than
the agent and who thus believes the agent should diversify her investment away from the
company. However, the decision is optimal under the agent’s beliefs. Without taking a
stand on the beliefs of the agent and the observer, our criterion cannot identify the agent’s
investment decision as e¢ cient or ine¢ cient in isolation.
On the other hand, in an equilibrium context, when one group of agents holds di¤erent
beliefs than another group due to belief distortions, the trading between the two groups
can make their consumption excessively volatile (as we will discuss in Section 3.1). Our
criterion can identify the negative sum in expected utilities induced by trading without
ruling a particular group’s choice as ine¢ cient.10
10

In this context, it is also useful to contrast our criterion with that o¤ered by Bewley. In Bewley (2002),
an individual decision maker holds several belief distributions and overcomes inertia only if the new choice
dominates the status quo under all belief distributions. Bewley’s theory shares our feature of belief neutrality,
but analyzes a single agent’s decision problem rather than evaluating the welfare of many decision makers,
each with a di¤erent (but single) belief distribution.

13

Even in group settings, our criterion is further disciplined by the requirement that the
planner knows agents’beliefs are distorted. In practice, the planner might rule the presence of
belief distortions using evidence from psychology or neuroscience (along the lines of Bernheim
and Rangel (2007, 2009) and Koszegi and Rabin (2008)). Alternatively, the planner can
account for other reasons for trade and obtain belief distortions as a reasonable residual.
For example, consider the evidence suggesting that individuals invest considerably in their
own companies or in professionally close stocks and that they tend to lose money on these
investments (see Doskeland and Hvide (2011)). In this context, risk-sharing can be ruled
out since it would require investment in the opposite direction. Trade based on individual
investors’ informational advantage can also be ruled out since it would result in realized
gains on average as opposed to losses. Hence, using this type of reasoning, a planner can
conclude observed trades in this context are likely to be based on belief distortions.
2.3.3

Set of Reasonable Beliefs

In our baseline analysis, we take the set of reasonable beliefs as those that correspond to
convex combinations of agents’beliefs, subject to the aggregate statistics commonly agreed
by the agents. We view this as a reasonable benchmark for two reasons. First, this set is
su¢ ciently large to include all of the extreme beliefs held by any agent in a given environment.
As illustrated by the examples in the next section, this set includes the beliefs of the optimists
who bid up asset prices and who take highly leveraged positions, as well as the beliefs of
pessimists who are constrained by short-sales restrictions from directly participating in asset
markets. Second, the set of convex combinations is also appropriate given our focus on
detecting the ine¢ ciencies due to belief disagreements as opposed to belief mistakes shared
by all agents. If the objective belief is outside our reasonable set, then there might be some
welfare losses— due to an irrational behavior common to all agents— that go undetected by
our criterion. But our criterion will be useful even in these scenarios to detect part of the
welfare losses that stem from negative-sum speculation.
That said, as De…nitions 1 and 2 illustrate, our welfare criterion can also be used with
more ‡exible speci…cations for the set of reasonable beliefs. We envision that, depending on
the application, the set of reasonable beliefs can be taken to be larger— or perhaps smaller—
than our baseline speci…cation. For instance, if the planner has a priori knowledge that the
objective belief is likely to be in a particular set, then reasonable beliefs can be extended

14

to include that set.11 Conversely, if the planner has a priori knowledge that certain beliefs
do not correspond to the objective belief, then those beliefs could be excluded from the
reasonable set even if they are held by some agents.
2.3.4

Improving an Ine¢ cient Allocation

In welfare analysis, the planner is often concerned not only with whether a social allocation
is e¢ cient or not, but also with how to improve upon an ine¢ cient allocation. If the planner
follows a speci…c welfare function, the …rst version of our belief-neutral criterion can be
applied to address both of these issues because it can directly rank an allocation y against
any alternative y 0 .
If the planner cannot rely on a speci…c welfare function, one might wonder whether the
second version of our criterion, the belief-neutral Pareto criterion, can address the issue of
how to improve upon an ine¢ cient allocation, say, y. This concern arises because, according
to De…nition 2, an alternative allocation y h that dominates y may depend on the belief
measure

h

that the planner uses to evaluate y. In other words, the planner has to specify a

particular belief

h

in order to implement a belief-dependent alternative allocation. However,

as we will show in several of our examples, the belief-neutral Pareto-e¢ cient frontier is often
non-empty. When this is the case, we can indirectly rank y as inferior to any allocation on
the belief-neutral Pareto-e¢ cient frontier. This is also the case in our initial example of the
bet between Bob and Joe, in which the status quo allocation is on the belief-neutral Pareto
e¢ cient frontier while the betting allocation is in the belief-neutral ine¢ cient set. Thus,
without relying on a particular welfare function, the belief-neutral Pareto criterion would
nevertheless suggest that the status quo is preferred to the betting allocation.
2.3.5

An Alternative Criterion

It is useful to compare our welfare criterion to the no-betting Pareto-dominance criterion of
Gilboa, Samuelson, and Schmeidler (GSS, 2012). They propose to extend the Pareto criterion
in the presence of heterogeneous subjective beliefs by de…ning a choice x to dominate another
choice y based on two conditions. First, each agent’s expected utility under her own beliefs
from x is higher than or equal to that from y, which is the standard Pareto condition. Second,
there exists one belief, under which the expected utility of each agent from x is higher than
11

As shall become clear, in endowment-economy settings, our criterion becomes discerning even if the
reasonable beliefs are extended to include any belief that assigns nonzero probability to all relevant states.

15

or equal to that from y. This second condition is additional and requires the existence of a
common belief to rationalize the e¢ ciency of x.
In the example of Joe and Bob, there is no common belief that can rationalize the
betting allocation. Hence, GSS’s second condition prevents the bet from no-betting Pareto
dominating the status quo. However, their …rst condition also prevents the status quo
from no-betting Pareto dominating the bet— since the bet is desirable according to traders’
own beliefs. As a result, the betting and the status quo allocations cannot be compared
according to their no-betting Pareto dominance criterion. In contrast, our belief-neutral
criterion identi…es the betting allocation as being belief-neutral inferior.
The di¤erences between the two criteria can be understood by considering the main
premises behind our approach. First, we envision scenarios in which the planner knows that
agents’beliefs are distorted. Consequently, unlike GSS, we ignore agents’expected utilities
under their own, possibly distorted beliefs. Our second premise is that the planner does not
know the objective belief. Consequently, we require the planner to vary the common-belief
measure across a large set of reasonable beliefs so that the resulting welfare ranking is robust.
In contrast, GSS require the existence of a single common belief to rationalize the e¢ ciency
of an allocation. Despite the seemingly restrictive robustness requirement, our criterion is
able to identify positive and negative externalities in the bet between Joe and Bob, as well
as in many other examples discussed in the next section.

3

Examples

This section provides a series of examples to demonstrate that the simple welfare criterion
we propose, despite its incompleteness, can produce a surprisingly sharp welfare ranking in
a wide range of economic environments with heterogeneously distorted beliefs. The key is
that the externality induced by con‡icting beliefs in these models is often uniformly positive
or negative across di¤erent beliefs. In the example of the bet between Joe and Bob, the
negative externality is re‡ected in the destroyed pillow. More generally, similar negative
externalities can emerge through excessive risk taking, overinvestments, bankruptcy costs,
and distorted consumption/saving decisions. Meanwhile, positive externalities can arise
from alleviating the free-rider problem in information acquisition and overcoming market
breakdowns induced by adverse selection. This section uses simple models to illustrate
these di¤erent sources of externalities and demonstrates that our welfare criterion provides
16

a clear welfare ranking in each case. The second example on self-insurance shows that our
criterion can provide a welfare ranking even without any externality, provided that there
are certain restrictions on agents’belief disagreements— as for example a commonly agreed
upon aggregate statistic. Our analysis o¤ers important policy implications. However, the
purpose of our simple examples is to isolate particular externalities rather than cover all
relevant features necessary for making speci…c policy recommendations.

3.1

Speculation, Hedging, and Informational E¢ ciency

Our …rst example focuses on excessive trading induced by distorted beliefs, an issue that
often arises in policy discussions. We present this example in three stages to explore several
closely related conceptual issues. In the …rst stage, agents have constant endowments, but
trading induced by their belief disagreements makes their consumption risky. As a result,
trading is a negative-sum game in expected utility terms under any convex combination of
the agents’beliefs. As in the pillow example, the welfare cost here stems from excessive risk
taking. In the second stage, we introduce hedging motives by allowing agents’endowments
to be risky and perfectly negatively correlated. Nevertheless, belief disagreements make the
agents trade beyond simply o¤setting their endowment risks. Our criterion can again identify
the welfare loss induced by distorted beliefs. In the third stage, we introduce informational
frictions regarding the state of the economy, which governs the agents’endowment risks. The
presence of informational frictions makes costly information acquisition socially desirable.
However, without heterogeneous beliefs, agents cannot fully appropriate the social value of
their information acquisition. Distorted beliefs in this case can help overcome this free-rider
problem and restore informational e¢ ciency.
3.1.1

Speculative Motive

We start with a one-period endowment economy setting with two agents, A and B. Each
agent invests at time t = 0 and consumes only at t = 1. Each agent has a constant endowment
at t = 1 denoted by w. That is, there is neither aggregate nor idiosyncratic endowment risk.
Each agent has an increasing and strictly concave utility function u (ci ). The two agents
hold heterogeneous beliefs about the state of the world, which takes two values, a and b. For
now, since the endowment is constant, one may interpret the state as a sunspot. There is a
single risky asset with payo¤ V (a) = 1 in state a and V (b) =

17

1 in state b. The asset is in

zero net supply, like derivative contracts or bets. Agent A assigns a probability of
to state a, while agent B assigns

B

A

2 (0; 1)

2 (0; 1). The di¤erence in beliefs causes the agents to

engage in speculative trades against each other.12

Suppose that the asset is traded at a price of p at t = 0: Agent i (i 2 fA; Bg) chooses k i ,

the number of contracts, to maximize his strictly concave expected utility:
max
i

i

u w + k i (1

p) + 1

i

u w

k i (1 + p) :

k

In the appendix, we formally derive each agent’s optimal trading strategy and the resulting
asset price p: It is intuitive that, in the presence of belief disagreements, each agent takes a
nonzero position in the asset. The trading turns the agents’constant consumption allocation
in the status quo into a risky one. The resulting market equilibrium is ine¢ cient by either
version of our welfare criterion. Suppose the planner has a utilitarian welfare function,
W (uA ; uB ) = uA +uB : For any probability measure that lies between agents’belief measures,
it is socially optimal to maintain deterministic consumption.13 If

A

6=

B

, the status quo

allocation is belief-neutral superior to the market equilibrium allocation. We also apply the
second version of our criterion. Under any belief measure

2 (0; 1), the status quo with

an appropriate (measure dependent) transfer Pareto dominates the equilibrium allocation
(again, because the latter is more volatile). Thus, the equilibrium allocation is belief-neutral
ine¢ cient.
3.1.2

Speculative and Hedging Motives

To make the example more realistic, we now introduce risky endowments. Agent A’s endowment is w
a and w

z in state a and w + z in state b, while agent B’s endowment is w + z in state
z in state b. Without loss of generality, we assume z 2 (0; w). The negatively

12

A large class of economic models analyzes trading between agents who hold heterogeneous beliefs regarding economic fundamentals and the impact of their trading on equilibrium asset price dynamics (e.g.,
Detemple and Murthy (1994), Kurz (1996), Zapatero (1998), Basak (2000), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006),
Jouini and Napp (2007), David (2008), Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal (2009), Xiong and Yan (2010), and Dumas, Lewis, and Osambela (2011)). A key insight of these models is that trading induced by heterogeneous
beliefs can lead to endogenous ‡uctuations in agents’ wealth distribution, which, in turn, ampli…es asset
price volatility and induces time-varying risk premia. While these models can capture important dynamics
of asset prices and risk premia, researchers tend to avoid making any welfare statement due to the lack of
a well-speci…ed welfare criterion. This simple example serves to illustrate that our criterion can potentially
…ll this gap, albeit without delivering any implication for asset price dynamics.
13
In fact, for this example, the set of reasonable beliefs can be extended to include any measure that
assigns a probability 2 (0; 1) to state a.

18

correlated endowments motivate the two agents to trade for hedging purposes, in addition
to acting on the speculative motive discussed in the previous version.
Suppose that agent i (i 2 fA; Bg) takes on a position of k i in the risky asset. If agents

have common beliefs,

A

=

B

= , they will trade the asset to fully hedge their endowment

risk. As a result, each agent consumes a constant amount w regardless of the state. However,
when agents have di¤erent beliefs,

A

6=

B

, their equilibrium consumption is risky. This

is because their pursuit of speculative gains causes them to deviate from the optimal risksharing allocation. Like in the previous version, the market equilibrium is again belief-neutral
Pareto ine¢ cient.14 Speci…cally, we formally prove in the appendix that, for any measure
with

2 (0; 1), the equilibrium allocation is dominated by the optimal risk-sharing allocation

with a certain transfer (which depends on the belief measure).

However, in this case, the status quo allocation with endowment risks is also belief-neutral
ine¢ cient. The welfare ranking between the status quo and the equilibrium allocation depends on the relative magnitude of the agents’endowment risk and their belief disagreement.
For example, if the endowment risk is large and the belief disagreement is small, then the
equilibrium allocation belief-neutral dominates the status quo. This sheds light on the ongoing debate over …nancial innovation, see, e.g., Posner and Weyl (2013). Introducing new
tradable securities on the one hand allows agents to hedge their risk and on the other hand
opens room for welfare-reducing speculation.
3.1.3

Social Value of Information

Besides speculation and hedging, trading can also occur for informational reasons. Traders
can collect information and make trades based on it. The trading reveals (part of) the
information to all market participants. This information is socially desirable if it improves
investment e¢ ciency in physical projects or enhances risk sharing. However, each agent has
an incentive to free-ride on the costly information acquisition of others (e.g., Grossman and
Stiglitz (1980)). When agents are fully rational, the level of information acquisition may
be suboptimally low. Distorted beliefs can help mitigate this ine¢ ciency. We now extend
the example to show that our criterion permits a welfare analysis of the social value of
information in the presence of distorted beliefs.
14

Kubler and Schmedders (2012) and Simsek (2013a) analyze richer settings that feature a similar tradeo¤ between hedging and risk sharing. Our welfare criterion is also useful for analyzing the ine¢ ciency of
speculative trading in these richer settings.

19

Consider a setting in which agents A and B live in an economy with two possible regimes
that are characterized in the previous two stages. In regime 1, both agents have constant
endowments w; as described in Section 3.1.1. In regime 2, they have perfectly negatively
correlated endowments y =

yaA ; ybA ; yaB ; ybB

= f(w

z; w + z) ; (w + z; w

z)g ; as

described in Section 3.1.2. Let us assume that both agents agree that the two regimes are
equally likely. At t = 0, one of the agents, say, agent A, can acquire information, which
perfectly reveals the regime the economy is in, at a personal acquisition cost c

0.15 This

acquisition cost is in utility terms and is deducted from the agent’s utility from wealth.
As before, agents can trade a risky asset with payo¤ V (a) = 1 in state a and V (b) =

1

in state b. The agents have (possibly) heterogenous beliefs about probabilities of states a
and b. For simplicity, we impose symmetry, i.e.,

A

= 1

B

. If

A

= 1=2, beliefs are

homogenous. For explicit derivation, we assume that both agents have a logarithmic utility
function over wealth, u (W i ) = ln (W i ).
Let us …rst consider the case with common beliefs

A

=

B

. In this case, agents trade

only to hedge the risk embedded in their endowments. If they know the regime the economy
is in, they can mutually diversify away their endowment risk in regime 2 by trading the
risky asset. Otherwise, any trading position on the risky asset yields a risky consumption
stream in either regime 1 or regime 2, or in both. Acquiring information then plays a critical
role in resolving this situation. While the costly signal is observed only by the information
acquirer, i.e., agent A, trading perfectly reveals the private information to agent B as well.
Speci…cally, if the signal reveals to agent A that the economy is in regime 2, agent A will
initiate a trade with agent B; on the other hand, if the signal reveals to agent A that the
economy is in regime 1, agent A is indi¤erent between trading or not trading. Thus, in the
absence of any strategic behavior (which we assume), the trade initiated by agent A reveals
his private signal to agent B:
Despite being socially desirable, the costly information may be under-provided in a competitive equilibrium. This follows from the public-good nature of information: both traders
bene…t from knowing the regime, but a single trader, agent A, bears the cost of acquiring
the information. As in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), information revealed through trading
conveys a positive externality to the uninformed agent that cannot be fully captured by
15

Strictly speaking, there is a continuum of each type of agent. In this example, we abstract from the
free-rider problem among type-A agents in acquiring the information. One can think of a monopolistic
information seller, who sells the information only to an investment club of type-A agents at a …xed cost
higher than any single agent can a¤ord.

20

the information acquirer. This externality may lead to an (ine¢ cient) under-provision of
information— speci…cally, when the information acquisition cost c exceeds agent A’s individual gain but not the social gain.
The particular depiction of the information acquisition problem changes once traders are
endowed with distorted beliefs. Under distorted beliefs, agents trade not only for risk-sharing
purposes but also for speculative reasons. Speculation may be welfare enhancing, as it could
give agent A additional incentives to acquire the costly information. Speci…cally, knowing
which regime the economy is in allows agent A to fully hedge his endowment risk in regime
2, which, in turn, frees up his risk-bearing capacity to take a greater speculative position
against agent B based on their heterogeneous beliefs about states a and b.16 This speculative
motive for acquiring information thus mitigates the externality in acquiring information and
may lead to a belief-neutral e¢ cient private provision of information, provided that the
distortions of beliefs are not su¢ ciently strong.
In the appendix, we formally derive the subgame perfect equilibrium of the model by
…rst computing both agents’ trading strategies at t = 0 while taking as given agent A’s
information acquisition decision, and then solving agent A’s optimal information acquisition
policy. It is intuitive that agent A chooses to acquire information if and only if the acquisition
cost c is lower than a threshold ceq

A

, his private value of information. His value of

information depends on the two agents’beliefs,

A

and

B

=1

A

. By letting the planner

use a utilitarian welfare function, W (uA ; uB ) = uA + uB , we also de…ne two other threshold
levels, ce¤

A

and cinef

A

neutral e¢ cient, while if c

,8

A

cinef

2 [0; 1]. If c
A

ce¤

A

, acquiring information is belief-

, acquiring information is belief-neutral ine¢ cient.

These two thresholds measure the social value of information. It turns out that, due to the
symmetry in the two agents’ …nal wealth in this example, these two thresholds coincide:
ce¤

A

= cinef

A

, which we simply denote by ce¤.

Figure 1 plots the two thresholds for the information acquisition cost against agent A’s
belief

A

A

, based on the following parameter values: w = 10 and z = 5. As

0:5; there is greater belief disagreement between agents A and B, since
solid line plots the private value of information ceq

A

B

deviates from

=1

A

. The

, below which agent A chooses to

acquire information in the market equilibrium. The dotted line depicts ce¤

A

, below which

acquiring information is belief-neutral e¢ cient. The shapes of these lines are symmetric
16

This feature is reminiscent of Simsek (2013a), in that by helping agents to better hedge their endowment
risks, …nancial innovations allow agents to speculate more based on their heterogeneous beliefs.

21

0.14

ceq
ceff

0.12

Region III: No Acquisition,
Belief-Neutral Efficient

Information Cost

0.1
0.08

0.06

Region II: No Acquisition,
Belief-Neutral Inefficient

Region IV:
Acquisition,
Belief-Neutral
0.02 Inefficient
0.04

0
0

0.1

Region IV:
Acquisition,
Belief-Neutral
Inefficient

Region I: Acquisition,
Belief-Neutral Efficient
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

π

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

A

Figure 1: Threshold levels for information acquisition cost. ceq denotes the threshold for agent A
to acquire information in equilibrium. ce¤ refers to the threshold for acquiring information to be
belief-neutral e¢ cient. This plot uses the following parameter values: w = 10 and z = 5:

around

A

= 0:5 due to the symmetric structure in the two agents’beliefs.

At the benchmark level

A

= 0:5, agents A and B have the same (correct) beliefs about

the probabilities of the two states. In this case, ce¤ (0:5) > ceq (0:5), which re‡ects the underprovision of information in the equilibrium. This is because agent A alone pays for the
information acquisition, while both agents A and B bene…t from the information. In fact,
ce¤ (0:5) is exactly double ceq (0:5) due to the symmetric structure of this example.
As

A

deviates from 0:5, ceq

A

rises. This is because, as the two agents’ belief dis-

agreement increases, agent A perceives a greater pro…t from trading against agent B. This
opportunity for increased speculation motivates agent A to acquire information at a larger
cost. Thus, by raising ceq , belief distortions mitigate the under-provision of information in
the market equilibrium.
As

A

deviates from 0:5, ce¤

A

drops. That is, as the two agents’belief disagreement

increases, the social value of information decreases. This is because the acquired information
not only improves the sharing of endowment risks between the two agents, but also allows
them to speculate more based on their disagreements. The latter e¤ect makes both agents’
…nal consumption more volatile and thus reduces the social value of information.
22

Based on the way ceq

A

and ce¤

A

intersect each other, Figure 1 illustrates four

di¤erent regions. In region I, the information acquisition cost c is lower than both ceq
and ce¤

A

A

and, as a result, agent A acquires information in the equilibrium and the

information acquisition is belief-neutral e¢ cient. In region II, c is higher than ceq
lower than ce¤

A

A

but

and, as a result, there is no information acquisition and the lack of

information acquisition is belief-neutral ine¢ cient. As discussed earlier, a key insight of our
analysis is that as the two agents’belief disagreement rises (i.e.,

A

deviates further away

from 0:5), this region narrows. In region III, c is higher than both ceq

A

and ce¤

A

:

In this case, agent A does not acquire information and the lack of information acquisition is
belief-neutral e¢ cient. Finally, in region IV, c is higher than ce¤

A

but lower than ceq

A

.

In this case, agent A acquires information and the information acquisition is belief-neutral
ine¢ cient.
The …nance literature, e.g., Black (1986), has long recognized the presence of noise trading
induced by potential belief distortions of certain market participants as the key to resolving
the free-rider problem in information acquisition. However, there is little formal analysis of
this issue due to the challenge in performing welfare analysis with the presence of distorted
beliefs. This example shows that our criterion can help …ll this gap in the literature.

3.2

Self-insurance with Optimism

It is well known that insurance markets might malfunction because of information asymmetries. However, these asymmetries cannot explain the failure of self-insurance arrangements
that do not require market interaction. For instance, survey evidence suggests that less than
15% of motorists in the US would wear seat belts voluntarily (see Williams and Lund (1986)).
This means that seat belt laws in the US represent mandatory self-insurance. Regulations
of this type are common also in other contexts. For example, …nancial regulation typically
imposes on banks capital requirements that serve as insurance against potential losses.17 We
next present a model of the failure of self-insurance arrangements based on optimism. In this
model, our criterion can identify mandatory insurance allocations as belief-neutral superior
to laissez-faire allocations. This example also highlights that our criterion can lead to clear
welfare ranking even in the absence of any externality, as long as agents’belief disagreements
satisfy certain restrictions.
17

These requirements are typically justi…ed by moral hazard or …re-sale externalities. However, given that
they are conceptually similar to seat-belt laws, there might be room for an additional justi…cation.

23

We develop the model in the context of seat-belt laws. There are a large number of
motorists denoted by i 2 I = f1; ::; N g. Each motorist i takes a precautionary action,

bi 2 f0; 1g, where bi = 1 corresponds to wearing a seat belt and bi = 0 corresponds to
not wearing one. After this decision, the motorist can be in one of two states denoted by

si 2 f0; 1g, where si = 1 corresponds to an accident and si = 0 corresponds to no accident. In

case of an accident, the motorist su¤ers physical damage, which we capture with a monetary
equivalent loss denoted by d > 0. For simplicity, suppose wearing a seat belt enables the
motorist to completely avoid the damage. But wearing a seat belt is also inconvenient,
which we capture with a monetary equivalent cost c 2 (0; d). We also assume the motorist
is risk-neutral, so that the state utility function can be written as
ui =

si (1

bi ) d

bi c.

The aggregate state of the economy is given by s = (si )i2I 2 S. Unlike our other

examples, here the state involves multiple events. For simplicity, the economy features no
aggregate uncertainty in the sense that exactly a fraction
an accident, where N is also an integer, so that
N
X
i=1

2 (0; 1) of motorists will have

si = N for each s 2 S.

(1)

Importantly, all agents agree on this aggregate statistic, although each agent also believes
her own state satis…es si = 0 with certainty. Put di¤erently, motorists know and agree on the
average accident probability (perhaps because they observe the historical accident statistics).
Nonetheless, each motorist is optimistic in the sense that she believes these accidents will
happen to other motorists.
Absent any policy requirement, each motorist chooses not to wear a seat belt so that
the laissez-faire allocation features bi = 0 for each i 2 I. To evaluate welfare, consider
the utilitarian social welfare function under any convex combination of motorists’ beliefs.

Since each motorist’s belief satis…es the aggregate restriction in (1), so does any convex
combination of their beliefs, which implies the utilitarian welfare,
E0h
Intuitively, the fraction

"

N
X
i=1

#

ui =

E0h

"

N
X
i=1

#

si d =

N d.

of motorists will have an accident, which will lead to a social
24

loss, N d. Importantly, the ine¢ ciency is detected by our belief-neutral criterion because
motorists agree on the average accident probability.
Next consider a policy that makes it mandatory for all motorists to wear a seat belt so
that bi = 1 for each i 2 I. The corresponding belief-neutral utilitarian welfare is
" N #
X
E0h
ui = N c.
i=1

This policy features a di¤erent type of ine¢ ciency. In particular, according to each motorist,
at most N

1 motorists— namely, motorists excluding himself— can have positive accident

probability. Thus, each motorist believes that motorists in total are forced to wear more seat
belts than is strictly necessary to reduce accident damage. The ine¢ ciency is again detected
by our belief-neutral criterion.
Comparing the two cases, the mandatory seat belt allocation is belief-neutral superior to
the laissez-faire allocation if and only if
c < d.

(2)

Intuitively, a seat belt is socially bene…cial in this model as long as its inconvenience cost,
c, is smaller than its average damage reduction, d.18 While there is not any externality in
this example, the assumption that agents agree on the average accident probability— that
restricts agents’belief disagreements— enables us to provide a clear welfare ranking.
In the context of capital requirements for banks, the counterpart of an accident si = 1 can
be su¤ering …nancial losses. The counterpart of wearing a seat belt bi = 1 can be retaining
su¢ cient equity capital (as opposed to paying out dividends) to absorb potential losses. The
counterpart of the optimism assumption can be that banks know and agree on the average
probability of su¤ering losses, but each bank believes these losses will be borne by other
banks. Our analysis then suggests banks in a laissez-faire allocation will not retain su¢ cient
capital to absorb losses. Moreover, as long as retaining capital is relatively cheap, mandatory
bank capital requirements will generate a belief-neutral welfare improvement over the laissezfaire allocation. More broadly, our criterion would identify mandatory self-insurance policies
18

The same point can be made using the Pareto version of our criterion, although the argument is more
subtle than that derived from the utilitarian social welfare function. In this model, there are no belief-neutral
Pareto-e¢ cient allocations. This is because e¢ ciency requires a subset of motorists to wear a seat belt, but
which subset of motorists does so depends on the belief used for welfare analysis. That said, when condition
(2) is satis…ed, the laissez-faire allocation is belief-neutral Pareto dominated by the mandatory seat-belt
allocation combined with appropriate ex ante transfers. In this sense, the Pareto version of our criterion also
favors the mandatory seat-belt allocation over the laissez-faire allocation.

25

π uA = 0.5 + δ ,π uB = 0.5

Duu

u
π 0A = 0.5, π 0B = 0.5

π dA = 0.5 − δ ,π dB = 0.5

Dud

d
Ddd
t=0

t=1

t=2

Figure 2: Payo¤ and belief structure in the bubble model.
as belief-neutral superior under the assumptions that agents agree on the aggregate risks, as
in (1), and the cost of self-insurance is smaller than its average bene…t, as in (2).

3.3

Bubble Models of Overinvestment

A segment of the literature emphasizes that when short sales are constrained, heterogeneous
beliefs can lead to price bubbles as asset owners anticipate reselling their assets to other, more
optimistic agents in the future (e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Morris (1996), Scheinkman
and Xiong (2003), Wu and Guo (2004), Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006), and Hong and
Sraer (2011)). In these models, heterogeneous beliefs induce risk-neutral agents not only to
trade against each other but also to overvalue assets. Overvaluation does not reduce social
welfare by itself, because it is simply a welfare transfer across agents. However, overvaluation
of equity can lead to …rms’ overinvestments (e.g., Bolton, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2006),
Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and Huberman (2005), and Panageas (2006)), which reduce the total
welfare of all investors. Our criterion can identify overinvestments independent of the belief
used to evaluate …rms’fundamental values.
We focus on a simple binomial setting with three dates (i.e., t = 0; 1; 2) and two riskneutral agents (A and B). These agents trade the equity issued by a …rm. The …rm chooses
its investment at time 0. Suppose that the …rm’s investment is cost-free but the investment
return has a decreasing return to scale. If the …rm chooses to establish a production capacity
of n units, the dollar return to per unit of capacity is determined by a binomial tree depicted
in Figure 2. There are three possible states (uu, ud, and dd) on t = 2: Suppose that the

26

return per unit across the states at time 2 is
e = fDuu ; Dud ; Ddd g = fR + 1
R

n; R

n; R

1

ng ;

where R > 1 is a constant. Due to the …rm’s decreasing return to scale, a larger investment
scale n reduces the per-unit return by n across all states at time 2. Suppose that the …rm
issues one share of equity for each unit of production capacity. The shares are equally
distributed to A and B:
Before analyzing the …rm’s investment decision, we …rst examine the market price of each
share of equity. Figure 2 depicts the dynamics of the two agents’beliefs. We assume that
the two agents have time-varying beliefs: They start with the same beliefs at time 0 but
hold di¤erent beliefs at time 1:
A
0

=

B
0

= 0:5,

A
u

= 0:5 + >

B
u

= 0:5; and

A
d

= 0:5

<

B
d

= 0:5:

(3)

In particular, agent A becomes more optimistic than agent B in state u at time 1 and less
optimistic in state d. The parameter

> 0 determines the two agents’belief dispersion in

both states u and d: It is straightforward to verify that, at t = 0, the two agents share the
same expectation of the asset’s …nal payo¤:
h i
h i
e = EB R
e =R
E0A R
0

n:

Following this literature, we assume that short-sale of the equity is not allowed. Accordingly, the ‡uctuations of the two agents’beliefs at t = 1 give an asset owner, who can be
either A or B, an option to resell his holding to the other agent: more speci…cally, for agent
A to sell to agent B in state d and for agent B to sell to agent A in state u: To obtain a
bubble, we assume that each agent has su¢ cient cash to acquire the asset so that the competitive price is determined by the buyer’s reservation value. It is straightforward to derive
the following market price in state u: pu = R + 1=2 +
in state d: pd = R

1=2

n; which is paid by agent B. By backward induction, both agents

at time 0 value the asset by p0 = R + =2
asset payo¤ is R

n; which is paid by agent A, and

n: Even though each agent’s expectation of the

n, their valuation of the asset is R + =2

n. The di¤erence is driven by

the resale option, i.e., the speculative motive to resell the asset to the other agent at a price
higher than his own valuation at time 1. This resale option contributes a non-fundamental
component to asset prices in the aforementioned bubble models.
27

We now analyze the …rm’s investment decision. Suppose the …rm chooses its production
capacity, n, to maximize its market value, given by n p0 = n (R

n + =2). This is

the appropriate objective function since the owners, agents A and B, agree on the …rm’s
valuation at time 0. The …rm’s optimal investment level is then given by n =

1
2

R+

2

,

which depends on , the magnitude of the two agents’belief dispersion at time 1.
Is this investment decision socially e¢ cient? Suppose the planner uses the utilitarian
social welfare function along with a convex combination of the two agents’ beliefs,
A

h

=

B

, 8h 2 (0; 1). Since both A and B are risk neutral, the expected utilitarian
h i
e = n (R n).
social welfare is equal to the …rm’s expected …nal payo¤, given by n E h R
h

+ (1

h)

This expression is maximized by choosing n

= 12 R < n : This implies that the …rm overin-

vests in the market equilibrium relative to the level that maximizes the expected utilitarian
social welfare (or the …rm’s long-run fundamental value) under any convex combination of
the agents’beliefs.19
This result does not need to rely on any social welfare function because the market
equilibrium is, in fact, belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient. In particular, it can be checked that
for any reasonable belief,

h

, the market equilibrium with investment level n is Pareto

dominated by an alternative allocation with investment n
transfer, T 2 [ n (R

n ) ; n (R

< n combined with some initial

n )], from agent B to agent A.

The driving force behind the ine¢ cient overinvestment is exactly the value of the resale

option in the …rm’s time-0 market valuation. Anticipating the possibility of reselling the
share to the other agent at time 1 at a pro…t, each agent overvalues the share at time 0
relative to his own expectation of the share’s long-run fundamental value. This, in turn,
induces the …rm to overinvest. Note that each agent recognizes that this level of investment
reduces the …rm’s long-run value. However, each agent also thinks that these losses will
be borne by the other agent. A negative externality emerges just like in the bet between
Joe and Bob. Consistent with this overinvestment example, Gilchrist, Himmelberg, and
Huberman (2005) provide evidence that …rms tend to increase investment in response to
increased heterogeneous beliefs proxied by dispersion in analysts’earnings forecasts.
19

Given the presence of the …rm’s investment decision, it is important to restrict the set of reasonable beliefs
to the convex combinations of agents’ beliefs. This is because a measure outside the convex combinations
of agents’beliefs would imply that the agents’aggregate belief is biased and thus rule the …rm’s investment
decision in the equilibrium as ine¢ cient, even in the absence of any belief dispersion between the two agents.
As stated previously, analyzing ine¢ ciencies associated with agents’aggregate biases is not our focus.

28

3.4

Bene…ts of Speculation in Lemons Models

The previous example shows that overinvestment in heterogeneous-beliefs-induced bubble
models leads to belief-neutral welfare losses. However, speculation and bubbles induced by
heterogeneously distorted beliefs can also be bene…cial. Among other things, bubbles help
overcome market breakdown in “lemons” models caused by adverse selection (as in Akerlof
(1970)). This subsection illustrates this point by introducing heterogeneous beliefs into a
recent model of Tirole (2012). Also see Morris (1994) for a model in which heterogeneous
beliefs help break the no-trade theorem and Zhuk (2012) for a model in which bubbles
induced by heterogeneous beliefs help overcome the information externalities among …rms.
The model of Tirole (2012) considers a …rm that attempts to …nance a new investment
project by selling its legacy asset. However, the …rm is asymmetrically informed about the
payo¤ from the legacy asset, which creates a lemons problem. As in Akerlof (1970), the
equilibrium features a low price and reduced trade and, in some extreme cases, a complete
market breakdown. We show that bubbles induced by heterogeneous beliefs mitigate the
lemons problem by allowing the …rm to sell its asset and invest in the new project even if the
quality of its legacy asset is relatively high. Our criterion can detect the consequent welfare
gain.
Consider a seller who has access to a new project that costs I and generates a payo¤ of
I + G. The payo¤ of the project is not pledgable (that is, it accrues to the seller but cannot
be promised to others). Thus, the seller needs to …nance the project by selling a legacy asset
that is pledgable. This asset returns R with probability , and 0 otherwise. The probability,
, itself is uniformly distributed over [0; 1]. The prior value of the pledgable asset exceeds
the investment cost, pprior

R
2

> I, so that the project is always …nanced in a constrained

e¢ cient allocation.
The key friction is that the seller is asymmetrically informed about the success probability
of the legacy asset. In particular, the seller receives a signal and fully learns , while potential
buyers continue to believe that

is distributed according to the uniform prior. The rest of

the section analyzes the e¤ect of this friction on the e¢ ciency of the equilibrium allocation
with and without heterogeneously distorted beliefs. Suppose also that G <

R
,
2

which rules

out the extreme case in which the seller is always able to …nance the project despite having
asymmetric information.
First, consider the benchmark without distorted beliefs among potential buyers. Let p
29

denote the equilibrium asset price. If p < I, then there is no trade because the seller is
unable to …nance the new project by selling the legacy asset. If p > I, then a trade is
possible. In particular, the seller will sell the asset only if R
equilibrium, the buyers break even, which implies p = RE

j

p + G. In a competitive
p +G
R

. Solving this further

gives the equilibrium price p = G. It follows that there is no trade when G < G = I. When
G

G , the seller will sell the asset only if
=

<

, and she will do so at a price p , where

2G
< 1 and p = G < pprior :
R

In particular, the adverse selection induced by the asymmetric information between buyers
and the seller reduces the level of asset trading and the asset price. Intuitively, sellers
with low-quality assets (“lemons”) exert a negative externality on sellers with higher-quality
assets. In some cases (i.e., G < I), there is a complete market breakdown.
To formally discuss social welfare, we consider (as in Tirole (2012)) the ex ante utilitarian
social welfare function, i.e., the sum of the seller’s and buyers’expected utilities under the
prior distribution for . Since the trading pro…ts represent a pure transfer between the seller
and buyers, the ex ante social welfare is simply
h
i R
e
E R + IfG>G ; < g G < + G:
2
Here, IfG>G

; <

g

is an indicator function for whether the seller manages to invest in the

project, and the inequality follows since there is investment with probability strictly less
than 1. In contrast, an alternative (feasible) allocation that always transfers the asset from
the seller to buyers at price pprior ensures that the project is always …nanced and the social
welfare is

R
2

+ G. Hence, the competitive equilibrium is (constrained) Pareto ine¢ cient.

Next, we consider the case of buyers holding heterogeneously distorted beliefs regarding
the asset return. Suppose that the asset return in the event of success is random and
e and assume that it can take two
independent of the asset’s success. We denote it by R
e = R + 1 is 0:5.
possible values, R + 1 and R 1: The seller believes the probability of R
There are two groups of risk-neutral buyers for the asset. One group believes the probability
e = R + 1 is 1, while the other group believes the probability is 0: Suppose that no
of R

one can short-sell the asset and each group has su¢ cient cash to acquire the asset. As
in the previous example, buyers in the optimistic group acquire the asset and bid up its
price to their expectation of the asset payo¤. A key feature of the model is that the asset

overvaluation induced by agents’heterogeneous beliefs (as in Miller (1977)) helps overcome
30

the lemons problem. To see this most starkly, suppose G >
G<

R
).
2

R 1
2

(while continuing to assume

Under this assumption, it can be seen that the seller chooses to sell and …nance the

project regardless of . The optimistic buyers break even only if p = R + 1 E [ ] =
At this price, the seller in turn …nds it optimal to sell because R
the last inequality follows since G >

R 1
.
2

R+1
.
2

R < p + G, where

Consequently, unlike the earlier case (for the

same parameters), the competitive equilibrium with belief heterogeneity features trade and
investment with probability 1.
We can apply our welfare criterion to show that the equilibrium with belief heterogeneity
is, in fact, belief-neutral e¢ cient. To see this, let h denote a probability measure, which
e = R + 1 and which is a convex combination of all buyers’
assigns probability h 2 [0; 1] to R
beliefs. The ex ante social welfare under this belief can be written as
h
i
e + G = E h R 1 + G,
Eh R
2

since the project is invested with probability 1. As this expression illustrates, regardless of the
probability measure, the ex ante welfare is at its highest possible level. This is because there
is no disagreement about G, the gains from undertaking the project. This in turn implies
that the equilibrium is belief-neutral e¢ cient. Thus, speculation induced by heterogeneous
beliefs mitigates the lemons problem and leads to belief-neutral welfare gains.

3.5

Bankruptcy Costs in Leverage Cycle Models

A growing literature builds on agents’heterogeneous beliefs to analyze leverage cycles (e.g.,
Geanakoplos (2003, 2009), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Simsek (2013b), Cao (2010),
Shen, Yan, and Zhang (2011), and He and Xiong (2012)). The key feature of those models is
that optimism can motivate cash-constrained optimists to use collateralized short-term debt
to …nance their asset acquisition. The leverage initially fuels the price boom but later forces
the optimists to deleverage after bad shocks, resulting in a leverage cycle. This framework
nicely integrates the optimists’ leverage cycle with the asset price cycle. Both cycles are
important for understanding various historical episodes of …nancial crises, including the
recent one. To use this framework to analyze relevant policy issues (such as regulation
over …nancial institutions’ leverage), it is important to discuss welfare implications. Our
criterion can generate clear welfare ranking in this framework. The key insight is that overoptimism causes optimists to use excessive leverage in asset acquisition despite the possibility

31

1

πA >πB

u
π A >πB

1

π A >π B

d
θ
t=0

t=1

t=2

Figure 3: Payo¤ and belief structure in the leverage cycle model.
of incurring bankruptcy costs in the future. Bankruptcy costs make the excessive leverage a
negative-sum game between optimistic buyers and pessimistic creditors.
Consider a setting with 3 dates, i.e., t = 0; 1; 2, and two types of risk-neutral agents (A and
B). Figure 3 depicts the asset payo¤ and the beliefs of the two types. Suppose that the …nal
e = f1; 1; g, where 2 (0; 1).
payo¤ of a risky asset across the three …nal states at date 2 is R

The asset gives a low payo¤ of

after two negative fundamental moves and gives 1 in other

…nal states. We normalize the net supply of the asset to one unit and the risk-free interest
rate to zero. Each type holds a constant belief about the probability of the fundamental state
rising on the tree in the following period. We denote the two groups’beliefs by
and

B

2 (0; 1) with

A

>

B

A

2 (0; 1)

. A key feature of this setting is that the speci…ed payo¤ and

belief structures lead to an increased divergence in the agents’ fundamental expectations
about the asset payo¤ in the lower state d of date 1; which eventually triggers a leverage
cycle.20
Suppose that the pessimists (type-B agents) initially own all of the asset at t = 0: It
is desirable for the optimists (type-A agents) to acquire all of the assets. However, they
face a practical problem in that they may not have su¢ cient cash endowments to make the
purchases. To highlight this problem, we assume that there is one unit of optimists, each
with an initial cash endowment of c > 0: They can use asset holdings as collateral to raise
debt …nancing. If a borrower is unable to make the promised debt payment, the creditor
can seize the collateral. This in turn makes the availability and cost of the borrower’s debt
20

In Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), bad fundamental news leads to higher fundamental volatility,
which in turn triggers an increase in margin.

32

…nancing dependent on the future value of the collateral. On the other hand, the availability
of debt …nancing directly determines how much the optimists can bid up the asset price
beyond the pessimists’asset valuation.
In deciding how much to borrow, type-A agents face two sources of costs. First, as the
creditors (likely type-B agents) are more concerned about the potential default risk than the
borrowers, higher leverage tends to be more costly. Second, if a type-A agent defaults on
the debt and is forced to sell his asset on either date 1 or 2, he faces a personal liquidation
cost, . One can interpret this cost as the inconvenience cost of vacating a house, which is
incurred by the borrower. At the end of this subsection, we also describe a version of the
model in which costs are incurred by the creditor when the borrower defaults. These two
versions have similar welfare implications.
Our setting maintains several key features used by Geanakoplos (2009), including the
same binomial payo¤ structure and the same collateralized debt contract. We add liquidation
costs, which is a realistic feature, and one that was especially relevant during the recent
subprime mortgage crisis. Since this feature complicates the analysis, we allow for only two
types of beliefs rather than a continuum. The model derivation follows He and Xiong (2012),
who analyze equilibrium debt …nancing in a setting with two types of agents whose beliefs
vary over time, but without liquidation costs.
There are two relevant debt contracts in equilibrium. One contract promises a payment
of

at date 1 collateralized by one unit of the asset. Because the asset’s fundamental value

in the worst state of date 2 is able to cover , this debt contract is riskless throughout and
can thus give the borrower an initial credit of . The second contract promises a payment
on date 1 equal to type-B agents’(the creditors’) asset valuation in state d of date 1:
Kd

e =
EdB [R]

B

+ 1

B

> :

As the creditors value the collateral for at least Kd on date 1, this debt is also riskless and
allows a borrower to borrow at the risk-free interest rate for the initial period. However,
to re…nance this debt in state d of date 1, the borrower has to make a greater promise of
paying 1 at date 2. This new promise allows him to raise Kd from type-B agents to pay o¤
his initial debt, but exposes him to the risk of defaulting and being forced to liquidate the
asset if the asset’s fundamental value eventually turns out to be

on date 2. Relative to

the …rst contract, the second one gives higher leverage at the expense of a higher re…nancing
cost in state d of date 1 as well as the possibility of incurring the liquidation cost on date 2.
33

We prove in the appendix that these two debt choices dominate the other alternatives.
We assume that the liquidation cost, , is modest so that in some scenarios the type-A
agents will choose the higher leverage (i.e., the contract with promise Kd ) and thus face the
liquidation risk:
A B

B
( A
)
B
(1
)(1
).
(4)
A
2
B
2
(1
) [1 (1
)]
Under this assumption, the analysis in the appendix shows that there is a price threshold
h i
h i
~ ; EA R
~ , such that type-A agents choose the debt with promise Kd if and
p 2 EB R

<

0

0

only if p0

0

p0 . Intuitively, when the price is low, type-A agents see a bargain and are willing

take the high-leverage debt despite the re…nancing and liquidation costs it entails.
Appendix A.4 characterizes the equilibrium in …ve di¤erent cases based on type-A agents’
initial cash c: We are particularly interested in three cases, in which c is su¢ ciently low so
that at least some of type-A agents choose to …nance their asset purchases by using the
high-leverage debt with promise Kd . This debt …nancing exposes them to the liquidation
cost on date 2. They make this choice purely for speculative reasons— because they perceive
h i
~ .
the asset to be signi…cantly underpriced, p0 p < E A R
0

0

We next apply our welfare criterion to illustrate that this equilibrium is indeed ine¢ cient.

To see this, …rst suppose the planner has the utilitarian welfare function. We use a convex
combination of the two types’ beliefs,

h

= h

A

+ (1

h)

B

, 8h 2 (0; 1), to calculate

welfare. The risk neutrality of both types of agents implies that the social welfare is given
by the asset’s expected fundamental value plus optimists’cash, c, and minus the expected
liquidation costs, which amount to

where

h
e
W E0h [uA ] ; E0h [uB ] = c + E0h R

IR=
~

i

,

is the fraction of type-A agents using high-leverage Kd debt contract and IR=
~
~ = . Since both type-A and
denotes the indicator function for the realization of the state R
type-B agents assign a positive probability to this state, the social welfare is lower than that
of the status quo allocation with no asset trading:
h i
~ .
W E0h [uA ] ; E0h [uB ] < c + E0h R

Thus, our criterion identi…es, regardless of the beliefs, a strict welfare loss in these cases due
to the liquidation costs incurred by the borrowers.21 As before, this result holds for any
21

The welfare loss is present even if the planner adopts a belief measure outside the convex combinations
e= :
of the two agents’beliefs, as long as the measure assigns a positive probability to the state R

34

welfare function because the equilibrium is also belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient.22
In more general settings, agents acquire assets not just for speculative purposes but also
for consumption. For example, people buy houses not only because they expect housing
prices to appreciate but also because they enjoy living in their house. It is important to
incorporate both speculative incentives and consumption values in evaluating the welfare
consequences of leverage cycles. Our criterion provides a useful tool for such an evaluation.

3.6

Consumption/Savings Distortions in Macro Models

In macroeconomic models, belief disagreements can also distort aggregate investment through
individuals’consumption/savings decision, e.g., Sims (2008). Belief disagreements cause individuals to perceive greater expected returns from their investments. This a¤ects their
savings decision in the same way an increase in the real interest rate does. It creates not
only a substitution e¤ect, which tends to increase savings, but also an income e¤ect, which
tends to increase current consumption and thus reduce savings. Depending on which e¤ect
dominates, individuals might save too much or too little relative to a homogeneous-beliefs
benchmark. The net saving in turn leads to over- or under- investment. Our criterion can
help detect these types of ine¢ ciencies.
As the setting used by Sims is simple enough, we adopt it in full. The setting has two
dates and two types of agents. We normalize the size of the population to one. Each agent
starts with an endowment of B0 dollars of nominal bonds issued by the government and
an endowment of Y units of goods. At the initial date, he can consume part of the goods
endowment and invest the rest either in the nominal bonds or in a real asset.
There are two possible states of the world on the second date s 2 ff; mg. In state s; the
22

As an alternative, we brie‡y describe a setting in which bankruptcy costs are borne by creditors instead
of borrowers. This alternative setting follows that of Simsek (2013b). Suppose there are only two dates,
t 2 f0; 1g, but three states, fH; M; Lg, in which the asset price will be either high, medium, or low. The
agents agree about the probability of the low payo¤ state, L , but disagree about the probabilities of the
B
remaining states. In particular, type-A agents are more optimistic about the high state, i.e., A
H > H (and
A
B
thus, M < M ). As before, type-A agents borrow from type-B agents using collateralized debt contracts.
Suppose a fraction, 2 (0; 1), of the value of the asset is lost in a foreclosure, which is the main di¤erence
from the earlier setting. In this case, it can be seen that type-A agents face a trade-o¤ between choosing a
safe debt contract with face value L, and a risky debt contract with face value M . The risky debt enables
them to borrow a larger amount, L (1
) L + (1
L ) M , but is also expensive (i.e., it has a high yield).
This is because it leads to bankruptcy costs in some states. As before, under appropriate conditions, the
speculative motive induces type-A agents to …nance their purchases with the risky debt. This arrangement
generates expected bankruptcy costs according to any reasonable belief measure, and is thus belief-neutral
ine¢ cient.

35

government …xes the state-dependent lump-sum tax on each agent to be

s

and the gross

nominal interest rate to R. In state f; the tax backing for bonds is low and hence prices are
high, while in state m; taxes are high and prices are therefore lower. Thus, the government’s
second date budget constraints determine the bond price: P2s =

RB0
s

; where s = f; m:

The economy has a representative …rm, which produces at the second date according to
a decreasing return to scale production function: g (K) = AK 1

, where K is the capital

input and A is a constant. The …rm has to rent capital from individual agents at a market
rental rate of . We normalize the …rm’s ownership to one share, which is equally divided
among the agents. Thus, the …rm’s pro…t per unit of ownership is
…rm’s pro…t optimization requires that

= A (1

)K

= AK 1

K: The

:

There are two types of agents: i 2 fa; bg. Type i agents believe that the probability of

state f is

i

2 (0; 1). Each type contributes to half of the population. Each agent maximizes

his aggregate utility across the two dates:

max U (Ci1 ) + [ i U (Cif ) + (1

i) U

(Cim )]

where Ci1 ; Cif , and Cim are a type i agent’s consumption on date 1 and in states f and m of
date 2, and

is the agent’s time discount rate. On the …rst date, the agent can allocate his

initial good endowment Y to consumption Ci1 ; renting capital to the …rm Ki , and buying
more nominal bonds Bi

B0 at a nominal price of P1 :
Bi B0
Ci1 + Ki +
= Y:
P1
Note that the agent can take a short position in the capital, which is equivalent to borrowing
in real terms at a rate of . He can also take a short position in the nominal bonds, which is
equivalent to borrowing in nominal terms at a rate of R: His consumption in state s of the
second date is given by
RBi
s+
P2s
2
is the nominal bond price in the state. Suppose that both types of agents have a
Cis = Ki +

where P2s

power utility function: U (C) =

C1
1

with

as the rate of relative risk aversion.

The …rst order condition for the agent with respect to Ki gives
Ci1 =
and with respect to Bi gives
1
C = R
P1 i1

i Cif

"

i Cif

P2f

+ (1

+

i ) Cim

(1

i ) Cim

P2m
36

i 2 fa; bg

;
#

;

i 2 fa; bg :

f a; bg
f0:3; 0:3g
f0:7; 0:7g

Ka
0:51
0:51

f0:3; 0:7g

2:19

Kb
0:51
0:51

K
1:03
1:03

Ba
1:50
1:50

3:30

1:12

3:94

Bb
1:50
1:50
0:94

P1
0:84
0:98

Ca1
1:09
1:09

Caf Cam
0:61 0:61
0:61 0:61

Cb1
1:09
1:09

Cbf
0:61
0:61

Cbm
0:61
0:61

0:89

1:04

0:20

1:04

1:09

0:20

1:09

Table I: Equilibrium under homogeneous and heterogeneous beliefs.

The market clearing condition for the capital gives K = Ka + Kb and for the nominal bonds
gives B0 = Ba + Bb : These conditions allow us to determine a unique equilibrium represented
by fKa ; Kb ; Ba ; Bb ; P1 g.

While analytical solution of the equilibrium is not available, it is numerically tractable.

We adopt the same parameter values used by Sims to illustrate the equilibrium:
Y = 1:6; R = 1:1;

f

= 1:1;

m

= 1:65;

= 0:3;

= 0:9; A = 1:2;

= 0:5; B0 = 1:5:

(5)

We compare the equilibrium outcomes under three sets of beliefs: two homogeneous-beliefs
benchmarks, f

a

= 0:3;

b

= 0:3g and f

a

= 0:7;

b

= 0:7g, and a heterogeneous-beliefs econ-

omy in which each agent believes in one of the benchmarks, f

a

= 0:3;

b

= 0:7g.

Table I lists the equilibrium quantities in the three settings. First note that the two

homogeneous-beliefs equilibria have some common (belief-neutral) properties. In particular,
while beliefs about in‡ation a¤ect the nominal bond price, P1 , they have no e¤ect on real
allocations such as investment and consumption. In contrast, the equilibrium with heterogeneous beliefs has two main di¤erences in terms of real allocations. First, with heterogeneous
beliefs, agents have more volatile consumption across the two states of the second date.
Like the last example, this increased variability is due to the speculation between the agents
about the nominal price in‡ation. The type a agents (the in‡ation pessimists) invest more
in nominal bonds and at the same time short-sell the capital (i.e., borrow in real terms).
Second, with heterogeneous beliefs, agents also save more (and consume less) on date 1.
Intuitively, belief disagreements induce agents to perceive a greater expected return from
their investments, which creates both substitution and income e¤ects. Given the elasticity
of intertemporal substitution, 1=

= 2 > 1, the substitution e¤ect dominates. Thus, in

this case agents save more to engage in more speculation. This leads to a greater aggregate
investment (K = 1:12) than in homogeneous-beliefs benchmarks (K = 1:03).23
23

In contrast, if 1= < 1, then the income e¤ect dominates and agents save less with heterogeneous beliefs
relative to the homogeneous-beliefs benchmarks.

37

Homogeneous Beliefs
Heterogeneous Beliefs

3.8

3.55

Utilitarian Social Welfare

3.7

3.5

3.6

3.5
3.45
3.4
3.4
3.3
3.35
3.2

3.3
0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

3.1

0.7

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

Figure 4: Social welfare and Pareto frontier in homogeneous-beliefs benchmarks and heterogeneousbeliefs equilibrium. The left panel plots the utilitarian social welfare based on any convex combination of the two types of beliefs. The right panel plots the Pareto frontiers respectively for the
market equilibrium and a belief-neutral planner.

Taken together, this setting with heterogeneous beliefs exhibits two types of ine¢ ciency:
more volatile consumption and distorted savings (and investment). To discuss welfare implications of heterogeneous beliefs, we start by considering the utilitarian social welfare
function. Instead of taking a stance on whose beliefs are superior, the planner evaluates the
social welfare using any convex combination of the two types of beliefs:

2[

a;

b ].

The

left panel of Figure 4 depicts the social welfare based on the equilibrium consumption of the
two types of agents in the heterogeneous-beliefs and homogeneous-beliefs settings as
between

a

and

b.

varies

Heterogeneous beliefs reduce the expected social welfare regardless of

the belief measure one uses to evaluate the agents’expected utilities.
As before, this result holds for any welfare function because the market equilibrium is
in fact belief-neutral Pareto ine¢ cient. To illustrate this point, de…ne y (T ) as an allocation
in which a fraction, T , of all of agent B’s endowments (bonds, goods, and shares of the
representative …rm) are transferred to agent A. For each T , consider the common-beliefs
equilibrium starting with this initial allocation y(T ); which is a feasible allocation available
to the planner. The case T = 0 corresponds to the homogeneous-beliefs benchmarks displayed in Table I. The second panel of Figure 4 plots the slightly curved Pareto frontier
corresponding to this allocation as the transfer, T , varies. The same panel also plots the
Pareto frontier for the equilibrium with heterogeneous beliefs as ; the belief the planner

38

uses to evaluate agents’expected utilities, varies between
for any belief

2[

a;

b ],

a

and

b.

The …gure shows that,

the equilibrium with heterogeneous beliefs is Pareto dominated.

The intuition is the same as in the earlier sections: In this economy, more volatile consumption and distorted savings is sub-optimal according to any reasonable belief. A planner who
corrects these ine¢ ciencies can redistribute wealth to improve over the market equilibrium.
This example demonstrates that our criterion is able to give clear welfare ranking in a macro
setting with distorted consumption/savings decisions induced by heterogeneous beliefs.

4

Conclusion

This paper proposes a belief-neutral welfare criterion for models in which agents have heterogeneously distorted beliefs. The criterion builds on the premise that a planner is aware
of belief distortions by some agents but cannot di¤erentiate whose beliefs are distorted. The
criterion rules that an allocation is belief-neutral e¢ cient (ine¢ cient) if it is e¢ cient (ine¢ cient) under any convex combination of the agents’beliefs. We can implement this criterion
either through a given social welfare function or the notion of Pareto e¢ ciency. While this
criterion gives an incomplete welfare ranking, it is nevertheless useful in identifying negativesum or positive-sum speculation. Through a series of examples, we show that this criterion
is capable of identifying welfare gains/losses in a wide range of economic environments with
heterogeneously distorted beliefs.

References
Akerlof, George (1970), The market for lemons, qualitative uncertainty and the market
mechanism, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 488-500.
Aumann, Robert (1976), Agreeing to disagree, The Annals of Statistics 4, 1236-1239.
Barberis, Nicholas and Richard Thaler (2003), A survey of behavioral …nance, in Constantinides, G., Harris, M., Stulz, R. (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Basak, Suleyman (2000), A model of dynamic equilibrium asset pricing with heterogeneous
beliefs and extraneous risk, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 63-95.
Bernheim, Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2007), Toward choice-theoretic foundations for
behavioral welfare economics, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 97,
464-470.
Bernheim, Douglas and Antonio Rangel (2009), Beyond revealed preference: Choice-theoretic
foundations for behavioral welfare economics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 51104.
39

Bewley, Truman (2002), Knightian decision theory, Part I, Decisions in Economics and
Finance 25, 79-110.
Bianchi, Javier, Emine Boz, and Enrique Mendoza (2012), Macro-prudential policy in a
Fisherian model of …nancial innovation, working paper, University of Maryland.
Black, Fischer (1986), Noise, Journal of Finance 41, 529-543.
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong (2006), Executive compensation and
short-termist behavior in speculative markets, Review of Economic Studies 73, 577610.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Christian Gollier, and Jonathan A. Parker (2007), Optimal beliefs,
asset prices, and the preference for skewed returns, American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 97, 159-165.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Jonathan A. Parker (2005), Optimal expectations, American
Economic Review 95, 1092-1118.
Buraschi, Andrea and Alexei Jiltsov (2006), Model uncertainty and option markets with
heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Finance 61, 2841-97.
Cao, Dan (2010), Collateral shortages, asset price and investment volatility with heterogeneous beliefs, working paper, MIT.
David, Alexander (2008), Heterogeneous beliefs, speculation, and the equity premium, Journal of Finance 63, 41-83.
Davila, Eduardo (2014), Optimal …nancial transaction taxes, working paper, Harvard University.
DellaVigna, Stefano (2009), Psychology and economics: Evidence from the …eld, Journal
of Economic Literature 47, 315-372.
Detemple, Jerome and Shashidhar Murthy (1994), Intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Economic Theory 62, 294-320.
Doskeland, Trond and Hans Hvide (2011), Do individual investors have asymmetric information based on work experience?”Journal of Finance 66, 1011-1041.
Dreze, Jacques (1970), Market allocations under uncertainty, European Economic Review
2, 133-165.
Dumas, Bernard, Alexander Kurshev, and Raman Uppal (2009), Equilibrium portfolio
strategies in the presence of sentiment risk and excess volatility, Journal of Finance
64, 579-629.
Dumas, Bernard, Karen Lewis, and Emilio Osambela (2011), Di¤erences of opinion and
international equity markets, working paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos (2008), Leverage cycles and the anxious economy, American Economic Review 98, 1211-1244.
Geanakoplos, John (2003), Liquidity, default, and crashes: endogenous contracts in general equilibrium, Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications,
Eighth World Conference, Volume II, 170-205.
40

Geanakoplos, John (2009), The leverage cycle, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24, 1-65.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (2011), Neglected risks, …nancial
innovation, …nancial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Gilboa, Itzhak, Dov Samet, and David Schmeidler (2004), Utilitarian aggregation of beliefs
and tastes, Journal of Political Economy 112, 932-938.
Gilboa, Itzhak, Larry Samuelson, and David Schmeidler (2012), No-betting Pareto dominance, Econometrica, forthcoming.
Gilchrist, Simon, Charles Himmelberg, and Gur Huberman (2005), Do stock price bubbles
in‡uence corporate investment? Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 805-827.
Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally
e¢ cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393–408.
Hammond, Peter (1981), Ex-ante and ex-post welfare optimality under uncertainty, Economica 48, 235-250.
Harris, Richard (1978), Ex-post e¢ ciency and resource allocation under uncertainty, Review
of Economic Studies 45, 427-436.
Harrison, Michael and David Kreps (1978), Speculative investor behavior in a stock market
with heterogeneous expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323–336.
Hassan, Tarek and Thomas Mertens (2011), The social cost of near-rational investment,
working paper, University of Chicago.
He, Zhiguo and Wei Xiong (2012), Debt …nancing in asset markets, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.
Hirshleifer, David (2001), Investor psychology and asset pricing, Journal of Finance 56,
1533-1597.
Hong, Harrison, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong (2006), Asset ‡oat and speculative bubbles, Journal of Finance 61, 1073-1117.
Hong, Harrison and David Sraer (2011), Quiet bubbles, working paper, Princeton University.
Jouini, Elyes and Clotilde Napp (2007), Consensus consumer and intertemporal asset pricing with heterogeneous beliefs, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1149-1174.
Koszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2007), Mistakes in choice-based welfare analysis,
American Economic Review 97, 477-481.
Kubler, F. and K. Schmedders (2012), Financial innovation and asset price volatility, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102, 147–151.
Kreps, David (2012), Choice and Competitive Markets, Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
Kurz, Mordecai (1994), On the structure and diversity of rational beliefs, Economic Theory
4, p.877-900.
Kurz, Mordecai (1996), Rational beliefs and endogenous uncertainty, Economic Theory 8,
383-397.
41

Mas-Colell Andreu, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green (1995), Microeconomic Theory,
Oxford University Press.
Milgrom, Paul and Nancy Stokey (1982), Information, trade and common knowledge, Journal of Economic Theory 26, 17-27.
Miller, E. (1977), Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
1151-1168.
Mongin, Philippe (1997), Spurious unanimity and the Pareto principle, working paper,
Universite Cergy-Pontoise, France.
Morris, Stephen (1994), Trade with heterogeneous prior beliefs and asymmetric information,
Econometrica 62, 1327-1347.
Morris, Stephen (1995), The common prior assumption in economic theory, Economics and
Philosophy 11, 227-253.
Morris, Stephen (1996), Speculative investor behavior and learning, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 110, 1111-1133.
Nielsen, Carsten Krabbe (2003), Floating exchange rates versus a monetary union under
rational beliefs: the role of endogenous uncertainty, Economic Theory, 21, p.293-315.
Nielsen, Carsten Krabbe (2009a), Optimal economic institutions under rational overcon…dence, with applications to the choice of exchange rate regime, International Journal
of Economic Theory, 5, p.375-407.
Nielsen, Carsten Krabbe (2009b), Rational overcon…dence and social security, discussion
paper no. 916, The Institute of Economic Research, Korea University.
Panageas, Stavros (2006), The neoclassical q theory of investment in speculative markets,
working paper, University of Chicago.
Posner, Eric and Glen Weyl (2013), An FDA for …nancial innovation: Applying the insurable interest doctrine to 21st century …nancial markets, Northwestern University Law
Review 107, 1307-1485.
Sandroni, Alvaro and Francesco Squintani (2007), Overcon…dence, insurance, and paternalism, American Economic Review 97, 1994-2004.
Savage, Leonard (1954), The Foundation of Statistics, John Wiley and Sons.
Scheinkman, Jose and Wei Xiong (2003), Overcon…dence and speculative bubbles, Journal
of Political Economy 111, 1183–1219.
Sebenius, James and John Geanakoplos (1983), Don’t bet on it: Contingent agreements
with asymmetric information, Journal of the American Statistical Association 78, 424426.
Shen, Ji, Hongjun Yan, and Jinfan Zhang (2011), Collateral-motivated …nancial innovation,
working paper, Yale University.
Sims, Christopher (2008), In‡ation expectations, uncertainty, and monetary policy, working
paper, Princeton University.
Simsek, Alp (2013a), Speculation and risk sharing with new …nancial assets, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 128, 1365-1396.
42

Simsek, Alp (2013b), Belief disagreements and collateral constraints, Econometrica 81, 153.
Spinnewijn, Johannes (2010), Unemployed but optimistic: Optimal insurance design with
biased beliefs, working paper, London School of Economics.
Starr, Ross (1973), Optimal production and allocation under uncertainty, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 87, 81-93.
Stiglitz, Joseph (1989), Using tax policy to curb speculative trading, Journal of Financial
Services Research 3, 101-115.
Summers, Lawrence and Victoria Summers (1989), When …nancial markets work too well:
A cautious case for a securities transaction tax, Journal of Financial Services Research
3, p.261-86.
Tirole, Jean (2012), Overcoming adverse selection: How public intervention can restore
market functioning, American Economic Review 102, 29-59.
von Weizsäcker, Christian (1969), General equilibrium and uncertainty, teaching note, MIT.
Weyl, Glen (2007), Is arbitrage socially bene…cial?, working paper, Princeton University.
Williams, Allan and Adrian Lund (1986), Seat belt use laws and occupant crash protection
in the United States, American Journal of Public Health 76, 1438-42.
Wu, Ho-Mou and Wen-Chung Guo (2004), Asset price volatility and trading volume with
rational beliefs, Economic Theory 23, 795-829.
Xiong, Wei and Hongjun Yan (2010), Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1433-1466.
Zapatero, Fernando (1998), E¤ects of …nancial innovations on market volatility when beliefs
are heterogeneous, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22, 597-626.
Zhuk, Sergei (2012), Bubbles and technological innovations, working paper, Princeton University.

Appendix:
A.1

Appendix

Technical Derivation for Section 3.1.1

The …rst-order condition to agent i’s utility maximization implies
(1

p)

i 0

u w + k i (1

p) = p 1

i

u0 w

k i (1 + p) :

The market-clearing condition requires that k A + k B = 0: The standard results hold that
there is a market equilibrium allocation, k A ; k B ; p , which solves each agent’s optimality
condition and the market-clearing condition.
43

A

First, we establish that, if

B

6=

, the two agents will take a nonzero position in the

contract. The …rst-order condition implies that
A

1

u0 w + k A (1 p)
=
A
u0 (w k A p)
1

Suppose that k A = k B = 0: Then, we must have
A

B

u0 w + k B (1 p)
:
B
u0 (w k B p)
A
A

1

=

B
B

1

; which contradicts

B

A

Thus, k and k cannot both be zero, which in turn implies that both are nonzero.

6=

B

:

We now prove that if the social planner has the utilitarian welfare function W (uA ; uB ) =
uA +uB , then the status quo allocation y = f(yai ; ybi )
to the market equilibrium allocation:
x=

xia ; xib

i2fA;Bg

Consider any measure with
equilibrium is given by
Uh =

B

2

w + k i (1

=
A

;

p) ; w

k i (1 + p)

i2fA;Bg

.

. The agents’utilitarian social welfare in the market

u w + k A (1
+ (1

(w; w)gi2fA;Bg is belief-neutral superior

p) + u w

k A (1

kAp + u w + kAp

) u w

p)
:

The strict concavity of u ( ) implies that
u w + k A (1

u w
Thus, U h <

2u (w) + (1

k A (1

p) + u w

p)

< 2u (w) ;

kAp + u w + kAp

< 2u (w) :

) 2u (w) = 2u (w) ; which is the utilitarian social welfare

under the status quo. This proves that the status quo allocation is belief-neutral superior to
the market equilibrium allocation.
Next, we show that for any measure with 2 (0; 1), the equilibrium allocation is Pareto
dominated by the status quo allocation with a certain transfer T 2 [ w; w], which leads
to the following allocation: y (T ) = f(w + T ; w + T ) ; (w
agent’s certainty-equivalent wealth, w
u wi;eq = u w + k i (1

i;eq

T ;w

T )g : Consider each

, given by the solution to

p) + (1

)u w

k i p , 8i 2 fA; Bg .

The strict concavity of u ( ) (along with the fact that k i 6= 0) implies that
u wi;eq < u

w + k i (1

p) + (1

) w

kip

.

Since u ( ) is strictly increasing, this further implies
wi;eq <

w + k i (1

p) + (1

) w

k i p ; 8i 2 fA; Bg :

Adding these inequalities and using market clearing, k A + k B = 0, we have wA;eq + wB;eq < 1.
It follows that the status quo with an appropriate transfer Pareto dominates the equilibrium.
44

A.2

Technical Derivation for Section 3.1.2

Suppose that agent i (i 2 fA; Bg) takes on a position of k i in the risky asset. The position

is characterized by the following …rst-order condition:
(1

p)

z + k A (1

A 0

u w

p) = p 1

A

u0 w + z

k A (1 + p) .

This is also a similar condition for agent B. In equilibrium, the market-clearing condition is
k A + k B = 0.
Recall that the optimal risk-sharing trade is given by k
analysis similar to the previous proof shows that, when
A

A

6=

A

A

= z and k
B

B

z. An

=

, agents deviate from the

optimal risk-sharing trade, that is, k 6= k . Next, …x a belief, , and consider each agent’s
certainty-equivalent wealth under this belief given by the solution to
u wA;eq (e; )

=

u w

z + k A (1

p) + (1

)u w + z

k A (1 + p) ,

u wB;eq (e; )

=

u w + z + k B (1

p) + (1

)u w

k B (1 + p) .

z

Since k A 6= k A , an agent’s consumption is not constant across the states. Using the strict

concavity of u ( ), we obtain

wA;eq (e; ) + wB;eq (e; ) < 2w.
On the other hand, the status quo allocation, combined with the optimal risk-sharing trade,
k A; k

B

, gives each agent a constant consumption of w. It follows that, under any belief ,

this allocation, combined with an appropriate transfer T , Pareto dominates the equilibrium
allocation.

A.3

Technical Derivation for Section 3.1.3

To solve the subgame perfect equilibrium of the model, we …rst compute both agents’trading
strategies at t = 0, while taking as given agent A’s information acquisition decision, and then
solve agent A’s optimal information acquisition policy.
Consider the case in which agent A acquires the information at t = 0. Recall that agent
A’s trading position perfectly reveals the informational content of his private signal to agent
B. Thus, both agents have the same information set at the time of choosing their optimal
trading strategies. Let W i (S; s) denote the endowment of agent i in regime S and state s,
where S 2 f1; 2g and s 2 fa; bg. In view of log utility, the agent’s problem can be written as
Uie (S) = imax

i

ln W i (S; a) + k i (S) + 1

k (S)2R

45

i

ln W i (S; b)

k i (S)

.

(6)

The …rst-order condition for k i (S) is given by
i

1
W i (S; a) + k i (S)

1
W i (S; b)

i

1

k i (S)

= 0:

Note that, due to symmetry, the market-clearing condition k A (S) + k B (S) = 0 is automatically satis…ed.
Consider now the case in which agent A does not acquire information at t = 0. As before,
the agents’problems are symmetric. Speci…cally, agent i’s problem is given by
1
k (N )2R 2

Uie (N ) = imax

i

i

ln W i (1; a) + k i + 1
+

i

ln W i (1; b)

ln W i (2; a) + k i + 1

i

ki

ln W i (2; b)

(7)
ki

.

The …rst-order condition for k i (N ) is given by
1
(1; a) + k i
1
+ i i
W (2; a) + k i
i

Wi

i

1

1
(1; b) k i
1
=0.
i
W (1; a) k i

Wi
i

1

As in the previous case, note that the market-clearing condition k A (N ) + k B (N ) = 0 is
automatically satis…ed.
Agent A acquires information if and only if
1 e
1
UA (1) + UAe (2)
2
2

c

UAe (N ) ;

where UAe (N ), given in (7), is agent A’s expected utility by not acquiring the information
and UAe (S), given in (6), is his expected utility conditional on acquiring the signal and the
signal reveals regime S. This condition is equivalent to
ceq

c
Here, ceq

A

A

1 e
1
UA (1) + UAe (2)
2
2

UAe (N ) .

(8)

denotes the cost threshold below which agent A chooses to acquire information,

characterized by equations (6) and (7).
Having solved for agent A’s information acquisition policy, we now apply our welfare
criterion to determine whether the private provision or lack of provision of information
is either 1) belief-neutral e¢ cient, 2) belief-neutral ine¢ cient, or 3) neither belief-neutral
e¢ cient nor ine¢ cient.
The set of reasonable beliefs is given by
BR

A

= min

A

A

;1
46

; max

A

;1

A

:

For any reasonable belief Pr (a) 2 BR , the social welfare obtained when acquiring information, W (I), is given by
W (I) =

2 P
b P
B 1
P
Pr (s) ln W i (S; s) + V (s) k i (S)
S=1 s=a i=A 2

cI(i=A) ;

while that obtained when no information is acquired, W (N ), is given by
2 P
b P
B 1
P
Pr (s) ln W i (S; s) + V (s) k i :
2
S=1 s=a i=A

W (N ) =

De…ne the belief-neutral-e¢ cient cost threshold ce¤
ce¤

A

sup c

A

inf c

We now characterize ce¤
i

A

A

A

A

as
A

W (N ) , 8 Pr (a) 2 BR

0 : W (I)
and cinef

as

W (N ) , 8 Pr (a) 2 BR

0 : W (I)

and the belief-neutral-ine¢ cient cost threshold cinef
cinef

A

, and prove that ce¤

A

.

= cinef

A

i

;8

A

2

[0; 1]. De…ne x (S; s) and y (S; s) as trader i’s …nal wealth in state (S; s) when trader A
acquires and does not acquire information, respectively:
xi (S; s)

W i (S; s) + V (s) k i (S)

and
y i (S; s)

W i (S; s) + V (s) k i (N ) :

From the market-clearing condition, it follows that
S=1

S=2

s=a

s=b

s=a

s=b

xA (S; s)
xB (S; s)

w + k A (1)
w k A (1)

w k A (1)
w + k A (1)

w z + k A (2)
w + z k A (2)

w + z k A (2)
w z + k A (2)

y A (S; s)
y B (S; s)

w + k A (N ) w k A (N )
w k A (N ) w + k A (N )

w z + k A (N ) w + z k A (N )
w + z k A (N ) w z + k A (N )

It follows directly from the symmetry in the agents’payo¤s that both W (I) and W (N ) are
independent of the belief that the planner uses to evaluate the social welfare:
W (I) =

2 1
P
ln xA (S; a) + ln xB (S; a)
2
S=1

47

c

and
W (N ) =
Accordingly, we have
ce¤

= cinef

A

A

=

2 1
P
ln y A (S; a) + ln y B (S; a)
2
S=1

2 1
P
ln xA (S; a) + ln xB (S; a)
2
S=1

:

ln y A (S; a)

ln y B (S; a)

,
(9)

completing the characterization. The main text compares the cost thresholds characterized in
(8) and (9) to assess the belief-neutral e¢ ciency of agent A’s private information acquisition
decision.

A.4

Characterization of Equilibrium in Section 3.5

The following proposition summarizes the market equilibrium:
Proposition 2 Depending on type-A agents’cash endowment c, the following …ve cases can
emerge in equilibrium.
e
Case 1: c < c1 , where c1 = E0B [R]

Kd . In this case, type-A agents acquire the

asset at t = 0 by using a one-period debt contract with a promise of Kd . However,
their purchasing capacity is insu¢ cient to lift the asset price, p0 , above type-B agents’
e
expectation of the asset’s fundamental value. Consequently, p0 = E0B [R].

Case 2: c 2 [c1 ; c2 ), where c2 = p0
p0 =

2

A

A

[

B

(2

+ (1
A ) A (1

B

Kd and

) ](1
)

)
A (1

[

A

(1
B )(1

B

)(1
)
) + (1

(1
A )2

A 2

)

]

: (10)

In this case, type-A agents acquire the asset at t = 0 by using one-period debt contract
with a promise of Kd . The asset price p0 is given by type-A agents’aggregate purchasing
capacity: p0 = c + Kd :
Case 3: c 2 [c2 ; c3 ); where c3 = p0

. In this case, type-A agents acquire the asset at

t = 0 and are indi¤erent to using debt contracts with promises of

and Kd . The asset

price p0 remains at a constant level p0 = p0 . The fraction of borrowers who choose to
use debt face value Kd is given by equation (11) below.
e
Case 4: c 2 [c3 ; c4 ), where c4 = E0A [R]

: In this case, type-A agents acquire the asset

by using riskless debt with a promise of . The asset price p0 is determined by their
aggregate purchasing capacity: p0 = c + .

48

Case 5: c

e
c4 , where c4 = E0A [R]

. In this case, type-A agents have ample cash

endowments to support their asset acquisition at a price equal to their expectation of
e by using debt with a promised payment less
the asset’s fundamental value, p0 = E0A [R],

than .

We prove this proposition in two steps. First, we characterize type-A agents’ optimal
debt contract. We show that the relevant debt contracts are short-term debt with face value
and Kd , and we characterize the choice between these two contracts. Second, we consider
market clearing and characterize the equilibrium price for cases 1-5. In each case, we also
show that (unlike in Geanakoplos, 2009) type-A agents do not have an incentive to hold cash
to buy assets in state d of date 1. In particular, type-A agents use all of their purchasing
power to buy the assets at date 0.
Step 1. First consider type-A agents’debt contract choice. We start with short-term debt
with maturity at t = 1: It can be seen that the face value of short-term debt should lie in the
range of [ , 1], i.e., between the two possible payo¤s of the collateral. If the agent chooses
to borrow short-term debt at t = 0, he has to roll over his debt at t = 1: If he fails to
obtain re…nancing, he will default and incur a personal liquidation cost of : In state u, the
subsequent asset payo¤ is surely 1; thus there is no problem rolling over the debt. In state
d, the maximum debt …nancing the borrower can obtain from the pessimistic creditors is
e =
Kd = EdB [R]

B

+ 1

B

:

Thus, the borrower is able to structure a new debt contract with creditors if his initial debt
promise is not higher than Kd . By making a new promise of Fd , he can obtain the following
credit to repay his initial debt:
C(Fd ) =

B

Fd
Fd + (1

Note that the new debt is risk-free if Fd

B

)

or risky if

if Fd
,
if < Fd
< Fd

1.
1. In the latter case, the

lender will be paid with Fd in the good du state but receive the asset in the bad dd state.
Thus, if the borrower’s initial debt promiseF0 is lower than or equal to Kd ; he can obtain
re…nancing even in the lower state d at t = 1; and if F0 is higher than Kd , he will have to
default in the lower state d:
We now discuss the borrower’s debt promise choice in using short-term debt. First
consider the range, [ ; Kd ]. If the borrower promises F0 = , he can obtain an initial credit
of , which allows him to establish an initial position of c= (p0
49

) units of asset. The

expected return on his cash is
A

(2

R0 =

)

A

(1

)

:

p0

If he chooses a promise F0 2 ( , Kd ], he can obtain an initial credit of F0 . The expected
return on his cash after accounting for the possible liquidation cost is
A

(1

F0 ) + (1

A

(1

F0 ) + (1

R0S =
=

A

) A (1 Fd ) + (1
p0 F 0
A A
B
) B [ B + (1
)
p0 F 0

A 2

)(

)
A 2

F0 ] + (1

)(

)

:

Note that while he can re…nance his initial debt in state d on date 1; he will eventually
dRS
default in state dd on date 2: It is straightforward to verify that dF00 < 0 if and only if
A

p0 > pe0

A

+ (1

)

A
B

B

[
A

B

+ (1
A)

+ (1

) ]

A 2

(1

)

A
B

:

is the optimal choice. If p0 = pe0 , any F0 2 ( , Kd ] would yield

Thus, if p0 > pe0 , F0 =

the same expected return. If p0 < pe0 , F0 = Kd is superior to any promise in ( , Kd ). But
we still need to compare this choice with F0 = debt. Suppose that at a critical level p0 ,
the expected returns from F0 = and Kd are equal:
A

(1

Kd ) + (1
p 0 Kd

A 2

)(

)

=

A

(2

)

A

(1

)

p0

which gives
p0 =

[1

(1

A 2

) ][ B + (1
A )2 ](1
[1 (1

B

) ](1
)

) [
A (1

A

(1
B )(1

B

)(1
)
) + (1

(1
A )2

Therefore, if p0 < p0 , F0 = Kd is the optimal face value; if p0 > p0 , F0 =

A 2

)

]

< pe0 :

dominates; when

p0 = p0 , the borrower is indi¤erent between F0 = Kd and .
We now consider short-term debt with promise higher than Kd . For such a choice, the
debt is no longer riskless as the borrower cannot re…nance it in state d on date 1 and has
to turn over the asset to the creditor. Anticipating this possibility, the creditor is willing to
grant the following credit on date 0:
C0 (F0 ) =

B

B

F0 + (1

)[

B

+ (1

B

) ]:

Then, the expected return to the borrower is
A

R0S =

p0

(1
BF
0

F0 ) + (1
B )[
(1
50

A
B

)( )
+ (1

B)

]

:

It is straightforward to verify that

dR0S
dF0

< 0 i¤
B

p0 > p0

1

B 2

(1

B 2

) + (1

)

A

(1

A

) :

Note that the asset price p0 is bounded from below by the asset valuation of pessimists
e
E0B [R]

1

(1

B 2

) + (1

B 2

) .

e > p , it is not optimal for the borrower to choose a debt promise above Kd :
As E0B [R]
0
e Therefore, the
It is also straightforward to verify that under condition (4), p0 > E0B [R].

borrower’s optimal short-term debt promise at t = 0 is
8
e p0 );
if p0 2 [E0B [R];
< Kd ;
or Kd ;
if p0 = p0 ;
F0 =
:
e
;
if p0 2 (p0 ; E0A [R]]:

Step 2. We now discuss di¤erent cases based on group-A agents’cash endowment c from

high to low, in reverse order from those cases listed in Proposition 2
Case 5: c

c4 :

In this case, the asset price is determined by type-A agents’beliefs at each date. Moreover,
at these prices, type-A agents are able to …nance their asset acquisition by using debt with
promise less than . In fact, each type-A agent is indi¤erent between acquiring or not
acquiring the asset. To ensure this case holds true, c has to satisfy
h i
e
:
c c4 E0A R
Case 4: c3

c < c4 .

In this case, type-A agents use debt with promise

to …nance their asset acquisition.

However, their aggregate purchasing power is unable to sustain the price at their asset
valuation. Instead, at t = 0; the price is determined by their purchasing power:
p0 = c + :
Going forward, in state d of date 1; type-A agents can
h still
i re…nance their debt and thus
e : To ensure that optimists’ debt
keep the asset price at their valuation, i.e., pd = EdA R
contract choice is optimal, we need to ensure that p0 > p0 , which is equivalent to
c > c3

p0
51

:

We next check type-A agents’incentive to save cash to date 1 in this case. First consider
their return from buying at date 0 (and holding until date 2), which is given by:
[

A

A

+ (1

)

A

](1

)

p0

> 1,

e If instead they save cash to date 1, they
where the inequality follows since p0 2 [p0 , E0A [R]).

will have to buy the asset from other type-A agents (since these agents hold all the assets in
the conjectured equilibrium). In view of liquidation costs, other type-A agents would sell at
e + . Thus, the return from saving cash is given by:
a price E A [R]
d

A

A

A

+ (1

)

(1
e +
E A [R]

)

< 1:

d

Thus, type-A agents have no incentive to save cash.
Case 3: c2

c < c3 .

In this case, type-A agents are indi¤erent to using debt with promises of

and Kd to

purchase asset at price p0 . The expected return is
A

A

+ (1

)

A

(1

)

p0
=
>

[1
[1

(1

A 2

(1

A 2

) ](1
) ](1

)
)
B (1

.

A

(1
B (1
A
(1
)

B

)(1

) + (1

B

)(1

)

A 2

)

)
A

=

A

A

+ (1

)

B

,

where the equality follows from the de…nition of p0 in (10).
Next consider a type-A agent, which we refer to as an arbitrageur, and consider his
incentive to save cash to date 1. If the state goes to u at t = 1, the arbitrageur cannot pro…t
from his cash. If the state goes to d, he can potentially pro…t. He has three options. First, he
could buy the asset from type-A agents who initially purchased with a debt contract with face
value . To buy from these agents, the arbitrageurs would have to pay pliq = +E A [~], which
d

d

exceeds her valuation. Second, he could buy from type-A agents who initially purchased with
a debt contract with face value Kd . These agents are distressed in the sense that they have
collateralized all of their asset in exchange for Kd . At the same time, they incur a liquidation
cost, , from selling the asset at date 1. If instead they wait until date 2, then they incur
the liquidation cost only if state dd is realized. Thus, they would be willing to sell the asset
to the arbitrageur at a price:
pliq
d = Kd

(1
52

A

) + .

Third, instead of buying the asset, the arbitrageurs could also re…nance the debt contract
of other optimists. This gives a payo¤ of Kd . The expected return to holding cash at date
t = 0 is:

A

A
(1
)
A
= A + (1
) B:
Kd
This shows that taking an asset position at t = 0 dominates saving cash.
A

+ (1

A

)

Next consider the fraction of optimists, , that uses debt with promise Kd . By market
clearing,

is determined as the solution to:
(1

At the lower end of the region c2 ,
Kd . Thus,

)

c
p0

+

Kd

p0

(11)

= 1.

= 0, i.e., all optimists use short-term debt with promise
c2 = p 0

Case 2: c1

c

Kd :

c < c2 .

In this case, each optimist uses debt with promise Kd to …nance his asset acquisition at
t = 0, and the asset price is determined by the aggregate purchasing power of the optimists:
p0 = c + Kd < p0 :
As the asset price is even lower than the previous case, the expected return to an optimist
from taking a levered position with debt promise Kd is at least
the expected return from saving cash is at most
for any optimist to save cash at t = 0.

A

+ (1

A

)

A
B

A

+ (1

A

)

A
B

. However,

: Thus, there is no incentive

Once the optimists’cash endowment drops to a critical level c1 , the asset price becomes
e This determines c1 :
the pessimists’asset valuation: E0B [R].
Case 1: c < c1 :

e
c1 = E0B [R]

Kd :

In this case, each optimist acquires the asset by using debt with promise Kd , but his
aggregate purchasing power is insu¢ cient to maintain a level above the pessimists’valuation.
The low price implies a high expected return, which makes it undesirable for any optimist
to save cash at t = 0. This completes the proof of Proposition 2.

53

