                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       REVEALING MALFEASANCE:
HOW LOCAL MEDIA FACILITATES ELECTORAL SANCTIONING OF MAYORS IN MEXICO

                                          Horacio A. Larreguy
                                             John Marshall
                                          James M. Snyder, Jr.

                                          Working Paper 20697
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20697


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




 We thank Daron Acemoglu, Rakeen Mabud, Ben Olken, Jesse Shapiro, and David Stromberg, as well
 as participants at the Harvard Comparative PoliticsWorkshop and MIT Political Economy Lunch for
 useful comments. Thanks to Andrea Ortiz and Daniel Silberwasser for excellent research assistance,
 and to ASF officials for providing information about the auditing process. Horacio Larreguy acknowledges
 financial support from the IQSS Undergraduate Research Scholars Program. The views expressed
 herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Horacio A. Larreguy, John Marshall, and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Revealing Malfeasance: How Local Media Facilitates Electoral Sanctioning of Mayors in
Mexico
Horacio A. Larreguy, John Marshall, and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 20697
November 2014
JEL No. D72,D78,H41,H76,O17

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of local media outlets on political accountability in Mexico, focusing on malfeasance
by municipal mayors. We study federal grants earmarked for infrastructure projects targeting the poor,
and leverage two sources of plausibly exogenous variation. First, we exploit variation in the timing
of the release of municipal audit reports. Second, and moving beyond existing studies, we exploit variation
in media exposure at the electoral precinct level. In particular, we compare neighboring precincts on
the boundaries of media stations’ coverage areas to isolate the effects of an additional media station.
We find that voters punish the party of malfeasant mayors, but only in electoral precincts covered
by local media stations (which emit from within the precinct’s municipality). An additional local radio
or television station reduces the vote share of an incumbent political party revealed to be corrupt by
1 percentage point, and reduces the vote share of an incumbent political party revealed to have diverted
funds to projects not benefiting the poor by around 2 percentage points. We also show that these electoral
sanctions persist: at the next election, the vote share of the current incumbent’s party continues to be
reduced by a similar magnitude. The electoral costs of diverting resources away from the poor are
especially large for the populist Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) party. However, we find no
effect of media stations based in other municipalities.


Horacio A. Larreguy                                  James M. Snyder, Jr.
Harvard University                                   Harvard University
Department of Government                             1737 Cambridge Street, CGIS
1737 Cambridge Street                                Knafel Building Room 413
CGIS Knafel Building 408                             Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  and NBER
hlarreguy@fas.harvard.edu                            jsnyder@gov.harvard.edu

John Marshall
Institute for Quantitative Social Science
1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
jlmarsh@fas.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20697
        The functionaries of every government have propensities to command at will the liberty
        and property of their constituents. There is no safe deposit for these but with the people
        themselves, nor can they be safe with them without information. Where the press is
        free, and every man able to read, all is safe. (Thomas Jefferson to Charles Yancey,
        1816. ME 14:384).


1       Introduction
A large body of scholarship in political economy asserts that in large democracies: (i) elections
are one of the key institutions for producing political accountability; (ii) in order for elections
to function well, voters must be adequately informed; and (iii) the mass media play an essential
role in informing voters. One important application of this trio, which is especially important in
developing democracies, is the electoral sanctioning of malfeasant behavior such as corruption and
diverting funds away from the projects for which they are earmarked.
    There is, however, little solid evidence that (a) the media actually informs individuals about
the behavior of malfeasant politicians, and that (b) voters react to this information by punishing
politicians at the polling booth. The strongest evidence is from Ferraz and Finan (2008), who
find that incumbent mayors in Brazil who are revealed to be corrupt suffer more at the polls in
municipalities with local radio stations. Other studies find that corrupt politicians are more likely
to be punished electorally when their corruption is covered in the news, or when political corruption
is more salient.1 However, none of these studies are able to exploit exogenous variation in media
or the salience of the media coverage.
    Moreover, it is not clear whether voters care about malfeasance,2 and if so, what types of
malfeasance matter most. Some studies find that when incumbent politicians are exposed as corrupt
then either the incumbents themselves or the incumbent’s party receives significantly fewer votes at
the next election.3 There is also some evidence that information about other aspects of politicians’
performance, such as overall rankings or targeting public spending towards the poor, also affects
vote choice.4 However, other studies find mixed results, or no significant relationship between
evidence of malfeasance and vote shares.5 Theorists have responded by providing arguments to
    1See, e.g., Chang, Golden and Hill (2010), Costas, Solé-Ollé and Sorribas-Navarro (2011), and
Eggers and Fisher (2011) for studies of Italy, Spain and England respectively.
   2 Although 65% of Mexican individuals believe that information about malfeasance is important

(Castañeda Sabido 2011), it is not clear whether such information matters for vote choice.
   3 See, e.g., Ferraz and Finan (2008), Slomczynski and Shabad (2012), and Banerjee et al. (2014).
   4 See, e.g., Banerjee et al. (2011) and Humphreys and Weinstein (2012).
   5 See, e.g., McCann and Domınguez (1998), Dutta and Gupta (2012), de Figueiredo, Hidalgo



                                                    2
explain why voters might not punish politicians exposed as corrupt.6
     In this article we identify large effects of local media stations—the total number of AM radio,
FM radio and television stations which emit within an electoral precinct’s municipality—on po-
litical accountability in Mexico, focusing specifically on malfeasance by municipal mayors. Our
detailed local data allow us to exploit two sources of plausibly exogenous variation. First, as in
Ferraz and Finan (2008), we exploit variation in the timing of the release of municipal audit re-
ports. In particular, we compare mayors who engage in malfeasant behavior—either corruption or
diverting funds to other projects that do not benefit the intended poor recipients—that is revealed
in audit reports published before an election to similar mayors whose audit reports are not pub-
lished until after the election. Second, and moving beyond existing studies, we leverage variation
in the electoral precincts that receive commercial quality radio and television signals from stations
located within the municipality.7 Mexican voters rely largely on such local media, particularly
television, to find out about malfeasance in the use of public funds (Castañeda Sabido 2011). To
ensure that differences in local media coverage are not correlated with precinct-level differences
in development, we compare neighboring precincts that differ only in the number of commercial
quality local media station signals that they receive.
     A significant proportion of government spending is administered by Mexico’s c.2,400 mayors.
In light of widespread concerns about corruption, the Mexican Congress passed a law institution-
alizing independent audits of the use of federal funds in 1999. We focus on audit reports pertaining
to the Municipal Fund for Social Infrastructure (FISM). FISM is a major social program that pro-
vides mayors with funds for infrastructural projects required to benefit impoverished citizens, and
represents about 25% of mayors’ annual budgets. Whether or not a municipality will be audited is
announced the year after the funds have been allocated. The audit reports reveal the share of FISM
money spent “in an unauthorized manner,” as well as the share spent on projects “not benefiting the
and Kasahara (2013), and Chong et al. (forthcoming).
    6 See, e.g., Rundquist, Strom and Peters (1977), Caselli and Morelli (2004), Besley and Prat

(2006), Dutta and Gupta (2012), and Svolik (2013).
    7 Specifically, we provide estimates of the “intention-to-treat” voters with access to media, be-

cause commercial quality coverage boundaries reduce the likelihood that voters receive a media
signal but cannot preclude coverage entirely. As discussed in more detail below, radio and tele-
vision signal strengths decay gradually as a function of geographic distance, but are also affected
by terrain, large obstacles, ground conductivity, and even weather and temperature. Whether or
not a given household can receive a signal may also depend on the equipment—e.g. the type of
antenna—the household has. So, the exact boundaries of each station’s coverage area are never
perfectly accurate (or even completely fixed). Since we lack the data required to compute a first
stage and the exclusion restriction is unlikely to hold, we focus on providing unbiased reduced
form estimates.

                                                 3
poor.” The first figure clearly represents malfeasance, and usually actual corruption. The second
figure indicates malfeasance of a different sort—diverting funds from their intended targets. By
law, 100% of FISM projects must benefit the poor, so any money not spent on the poor represents
illegal misallocation.
    Our results demonstrate that voters punish the party of malfeasant mayors, given mayors can-
not seek re-election, but only in electoral precincts covered by local media stations.8 Our point
estimates imply that each additional local radio or television station reduces the vote share of an
incumbent political party whose mayor was revealed to be corrupt by around half a percentage
point. The effects of misallocating funds away from the poor are even larger: our point estimates
imply that if the incumbent party’s mayor was revealed to have misallocated funds away from the
poor, each additional local radio or television station covering a given precinct reduces the party’s
vote share by between one and two percentage points, depending on the severity of the malfea-
sance. However, when the incumbent’s party’s mayor correctly spent the money on the poor, an
audit report released before an election increases the party’s vote share by half a percentage point
for each additional local media station. In general, exposure to additional television station—the
most prevalent source of political information—has larger effects on electoral sanctioning than an
additional AM or FM radio station. Furthermore, we find that revealing mayoral malfeasance has
longer-term consequences: if anything, the electoral cost associated with an additional local media
station publicizing malfeasant behavior is larger at the next municipal election.
    However, our results demonstrate that non-local media does not affect the sanctioning of mu-
nicipal mayors. While there are large effects for local media stations, we find no evidence that
media stations that cover a precinct but are based outside its municipality matter for municipal
political accountability.
    We also find evidence suggesting that voters punish parties more for behavior that is not only
malfeasant but contrary to the party’s ideological reputation. More specifically, voters punish the
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) for corruption and diverting FISM funds away from the
poor, but do not punish the National Action Party (PAN). The populist PRI has a stronger “pro-
poor” reputation than the more right-wing PAN.9 Thus, it might be more surprising when a PRI
mayor is caught misallocating FISM funds, making it more likely that voters significantly update
their beliefs about the party’s sincerity, commitment, or competence. Alternatively, voters might
simply find this behavior by the PRI to be particularly hypocritical, and therefore more egregious
and deserving of punishment.
   8 Incumbent mayors could not themselves run for re-election in our sample due to term limits.
   9 For example, according to the 2009 CIDE-CSES survey, voters identify the PRI to the left of
the PAN. See the Comparative Manifesto Project codings here.

                                                 4
    We show that these findings are robust to a series of sensitivity checks. First, our results are
robust to using alternative measures of corruption and misallocating funds away from the poor,
and focusing only on incumbents from the PAN and PRI, which are the two strongest parties at the
municipal level. Second, by focusing on neighboring electoral precincts within the same munici-
pality, we show that our estimates are not driven by neighboring precincts that cross municipality
borders. Lastly, we show that our results are not driven by differences in internet access.10
    Our findings contribute to the literature in a variety of ways. First, we exploit a source of
variation for estimating media effects that has not been explored in the literature on political ac-
countability in developing democracies. A number of previous studies have applied the same
general idea—using detailed features of the media market environment to obtain plausibly exoge-
nous variation in the degree of “exposure” to different media outlets or messages—to primarily
study phenomena such as the impact of media bias.11 Snyder and Strömberg (2010) and Fergusson
(2014) also apply this idea to study how the media market environment improves accountability in
the U.S., but do not provide evidence of a direct link to political malfeasance.
    Some of the studies that focus on the degree to which voters respond to corruption and other
types of malfeasance also provide evidence of a media linkage, but as noted above the evidence is
more suggestive than conclusive. At the municipality level, Ferraz and Finan (2008) find that the
number of local AM radio stations located in a given municipality increases the electoral response
to mayoral corruption in Brazil. As the authors acknowledge, however, the presence or absence of
local media stations may be correlated with a variety of potentially confounding municipal charac-
teristics such as education levels or political engagement.12 only some of which can be measured
and included as controls. Although Ferraz and Finan (2008) control for a battery of municipal-level
variables, their empirical strategy cannot rule out the possibility that their estimates are biased due
to the presence of such unobserved confounders. Studies from developed countries similarly sug-
gest that media coverage harms incumbents implicated by corruption scandals (Costas, Solé-Ollé
and Sorribas-Navarro 2011; Eggers and Fisher 2011), but are vulnerable to the concern that the
presence of media coverage is correlated with the severity of the malfeasance.13
  10  Internet access is the only variable that neighboring precincts present an imbalance on.
  11  See, e.g., DellaVigna and Kaplan (2007), Chiang and Knight (2011), and Enikolopov, Petrova
and Zhuravskaya (2011). See DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) for a review of this literature.
   12 Klasnja (2011) and Weitz-Shapiro and Winters (2014) find evidence that voters with greater

“political awareness” or literacy are more likely to punish incumbents in scandals.
   13 Eggers and Fisher (2011) find a statistically significant decline in the vote share for British leg-

islators whose misbehavior in the 2009 expenses scandal was serious enough to be featured in the
news, but not for other implicated legislators. In Spain, Costas, Solé-Ollé and Sorribas-Navarro
(2011) also find that the incumbent’s vote share loss was larger for corruption cases that were


                                                    5
    Second, we demonstrate the importance of local media for local political accountability, rather
than media in general. This is an important consideration because local radio and television are
often the only way in which isolated voters can learn about the performance of their incumbent
politicians, and around 20% and 25% of Mexican electoral precincts are respectively not covered
by a single FM or television station.14 Moreover, understanding the role of local media in sup-
porting political accountability is particularly salient given that local media markets are shrinking
in many countries.15 This trend is particularly worrying given that our evidence provides a clear
rationale for politicians to exploit the weakening economic position of local media and to seek its
control (Besley and Prat 2006), by purchasing radio stations (Boas and Hidalgo 2011) or prevent-
ing “defamation” (Stanig forthcoming).
    Third, we show that voters respond differently to different types of malfeasance. As noted
above, the bulk of the literature on political accountability in developing democracies has focused
on corruption. Two exceptions are Banerjee et al. (2011) and Humphreys and Weinstein (2012).
Humphreys and Weinstein (2012) conducted a field experiment in Uganda, and find that provid-
ing voters with information about the overall performance of their incumbent legislator relative
to other legislators—as measured by an index involving participation in floor debates and votes,
participation in committee debates and votes, and constituency service—leads voters to update
whether they approve of, or intend to vote for, their incumbent. Banerjee et al. (2011) conducted
a field experiment in India, and found that voters living in slums are more likely to vote for their
incumbent legislator if they learn that the incumbent allocates more of her discretionary project
spending funds to slums rather than other areas. Our findings are analogous to those of Banerjee
et al. (2011), since we find that voters are more likely to vote against incumbents who divert funds
away from the poor.16
    Fourth, since whether or not a municipality will be audited is announced after FISM funds
widely reported in the newspapers. While these findings from developed countries are consistent
with a media effect, it is also likely that these correlations reflect differences in the types of mis-
behavior covered by the media. In particular—as the authors of these studies clearly recognize—
media outlets are likely to cover “serious” malfeasance more heavily than “minor” malfeasance.
   14 Local radio is less prevalent in Brazil (Ferraz and Finan 2008).
   15 Over the last 15 years, Mexico has experienced a 40% decline in the share of individuals

claiming to read political news in newspapers. 60% of Latinobarometer respondents claimed read-
ing political news in newspapers 1996, compared to 36% in 2009. In the U.S., daily newspaper
circulation dropped from just over 1.0 newspapers per household in 1950 to about 0.3 per house-
hold in 2010.
   16 The analogy is not perfect, since in our case the diversion of funds away from the poor is a

direct violation of FISM program rules, while in their case it is not—legislators in India are free to
allocate their discretionary project funds anywhere in their districts.

                                                  6
have been allocated, the data suggest that the possibility of being audited is insufficient to prevent
municipal mayors from engaging in malfeasance. Our study thus complements previous research
suggesting that audits can be effective at reducing corruption if politicians know prior to spending
that the reports could result in criminal prosecution (Olken 2007) or will be released before an
election (Bobonis, Fuertes and Schwabe 2014). Rather, the corruption levels we observe in Mexico
are broadly similar to those found in Brazil (Ferraz and Finan 2008), where the municipal audit
scheme was only announced after spending had occurred. This suggests that it is only the certainty
of being audited that causes politicians to alter their malfeasant behavior in anticipation of being
sanctioned if caught. This is consistent with the dynamic optimizing behavior observed in India
(Niehaus and Sukhtankar 2013), but partially contrasts with recent findings from Brazil showing
that increasing the probability of audit reduces corruption but does not affect spending patterns
(Zamboni and Litschig 2014).
    The article proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of local governments in
Mexico, the FISM funds that we study, the audit of such funds, and local media in Mexico. Section
4 details our data and identification strategy. Section 5 presents our main results and robustness
checks. Section 6 concludes.


2        Political accountability in Mexico
Following 70 years of PRI hegemony, national and local politics have become relatively compet-
itive. Elections to the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of Mexico’s national legislature,
are held every three years, while the President and Senate are concurrently elected to six-year
tenures.17 State and municipal elections are instead staggered across the electoral cycle and held
every two or three years. Currently, three main political parties compete for political control: the
left-wing Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), the populist PRI, and the right-wing PAN.
Competition in most parts of the country is generally between only two of these parties, with the
PRI performing best in rural areas and the PAN and PRD performing best in urban areas (Larreguy,
Marshall and Querubı́n 2014).
    17
     In the Chamber of Deputies, 300 members elected via plurality rule from single-member dis-
tricts and 200 members are elected via proportional representation. The Senate comprises 128
Senators, with three elected from each state (including the Federal District) where the largest party
receives two Senators and the second largest receives one Senator, and a further 32 allocated ac-
cording to the national vote share.




                                                  7
2.1    Municipality audits
In Mexico’s federal system, states and municipalities exercise significant control over local policy.
Mexico’s 31 states contain around 2,400 municipalities. Following major fiscal decentralization
reforms in the 1990s, the average municipality annual budget has been around nine million U.S.
dollars, which constitutes 20% of total government spending.18 Municipal governments are led by
mayors, who are responsible for delivering basic public services and managing local infrastructure.
Mayors are normally elected every three years, although they serve four-year terms in some states,
and could not stand for re-election.19
    An important component of a mayor’s budget is the Municipal Fund for Social Infrastructure
(FISM). This represents 24% of a municipality’s total income on average. FISM funds, which are
allocated to municipalities according to the Fiscal Coordination Law (LCF) passed in 1997, are di-
rect federal transfers provided exclusively for the funding of public works, basic social actions, and
investments that directly benefit the socially disadvantaged population living in extreme poverty.
Spending may be allocated in any of the following categories: potable water, sewage, drainage
and latrines, municipal urbanization, electrification or rural and poor suburban areas, basic health
infrastructure, basic education infrastructure, improvement of housing, rural roads and rural pro-
ductive infrastructure. Compared to previous social programs, FISM funding has been relatively
successful at targeting resources at the poor (Wellenstein, Núñez and Andrés 2006). However,
funds are often misallocated. Unlike previous studies focusing on corruption in more general pro-
grams (e.g. Ferraz and Finan 2008; Bobonis, Fuertes and Schwabe 2013), the specific targeting
of FISM funds allows us to examine the electoral response by voters to both corruption and the
misuse of funds intended to serve a disadvantaged population.
    The use of FISM funds is subject to independent audits by Mexico’s Federal Auditor’s Office
(ASF). The ASF, which was established in 1999 in response to widespread concerns regarding
the mismanagement of public resources, is an independent body with constitutionally-enshrined
powers to audit the use of federal funds by the federal, state and municipal governments. In each
year since 2000, the ASF has audited FISM spending in multiple municipalities per state.
    Audits focus on the spending and management of FISM resources in the prior fiscal year, and
the list of municipalities to be audited in a given year is announced the year after the spending
occurred. Although the exact formula for selection is not publicly available, official information
indicates that municipalities are chosen on the basis of the federal transfers they received, the
  18  Education and health were decentralized between 1992 and 1996 and the decentralization of
infrastructure projects followed in 1997 (Wellenstein, Núñez and Andrés 2006).
   19 Re-election will become possible for those running starting in 2015.




                                                  8
importance of these funds relative to the municipal budget, whether they have been audited before,
and their history of misallocated expenditure.20 Since our identification strategy exploits the timing
of audits, rather than comparing audited and non-audited municipalities, the ASF’s selection rule
defines the population to which our estimates apply. Independent ASF auditors check that officials
abide by the rules established for the management of FISM resources (e.g., procurement rules,
accounting procedures), that the status of the funded projects is in accordance with the books, and
that funds are given the use they were intended for. Audit reports are then publicly released two
years after the spending actually occurred, when they are presented in Congress by the last working
day of February each year and made publicly available online at the ASF’s website.21
    Audit reports break down the use of FISM funds across several dimensions. Most importantly,
the reports state the percentage of FISM funds spent on infrastructure projects not benefiting the
poor and the percentage of funds used for unauthorized spending. Spending that does not benefit
the poor ranges from the diversion of resources to support agricultural production (during election
times) to paving the streets of relatively rich urban areas. We interpret unauthorized spending,
which includes the diversion of resources of personal expenses of the mayor and funds that are
unaccounted for, as corruption.22 In the Online Appendix, we provide an example of an audit
report.
    The ASF can impose a variety of punishments on malfeasant public officials. In particular,
the ASF can inflict fines on the municipality to recover FISM funds, recommend that the Min-
istry of Public Function removes, suspends or imposes economic sanctions on officials, or file (or
recommend) a criminal case against culpable individuals. In practice, these punishments have not
been used regularly: between December 2006 and July 2012, the Ministry of Public Function only
recovered two million U.S. dollars, sanctioned 9,000 public employees for serious misdemeanors,
and incarcerated one hundred officials.23
    The largest punishment may be electoral. Since Mexican mayors cannot stand for re-election,
any electoral penalty hits the party of a malfeasant mayor. This feature differentiates our study
from many preceding studies (e.g. Banerjee et al. 2011; Ferraz and Finan 2008; Humphreys and
Weinstein 2012). There are good reasons to believe that a mayor’s political party may be punished
  20  Personal interview with the Licentiate Jaime Alvarez Hernández, General Director of Research
and Evaluation of the Special Audit of Federal Spending, in July 2012.
   21 Guı́a para el ciudadano. Qué es y qué hace la Auditorı́a Superior de la Federación?
   22 This definition resembles Ferraz and Finan (2008) in that we focus on violations that include

procurement fraud, diversion and over-invoicing, but differs in that we quantify the relative impor-
tance of such corruption. Rather than the percentage of unauthorized spending, Ferraz and Finan
(2008) count the number of corruption violations.
   23 El Universal, “A la cárcel, solamente 100 ex servidores”, 29th May 2014, link.




                                                  9
by voters at the next election. First, political parties do not disappear with mayors. Although the
local coalitions between parties uniting behind a mayoral candidate can change across elections,
political parties always back a particular candidate. Second, the top-down internal structure of
Mexican parties at the state level ensures that within-party candidate choice is highly correlated
(Langston 2003). Finally, previous evidence shows that at least in some cases political parties are
punished for the actions of their leaders (e.g. Chong et al. forthcoming).


2.2    Local media
As in many developing countries, radio and television stations are the principal source of news
in Mexico. Conditional on providing news, both radio and television stations provide around 12
hours of news coverage a week.24 While a few television stations are predominantly national in
focus, the focus of radio stations and most television stations is predominantly local.
    Voters in Mexico are generally unaware of mayoral responsibilities and the use of public funds
(Chong et al. forthcoming), as well as the institutions that are responsible for auditing the use
of public resources (Castañeda Sabido 2011). Most public spending is invisible and inaccessible
to most voters. A study by Castañeda Sabido (2011) indicates that only 33.6 % of surveyed in-
dividuals think that municipal governments are transparent about the use of public resources.25
Moreover, only 25% of surveyed individuals can mention a public institution in charge of auditing
the use of public funds, and only 1.4% of those individuals mention the ASF as the main institution
responsible for that task.
    Voters learn about public spending primarily through media coverage. Figures from the 2009
Latinobarometer indicate that 83% of respondents gather political information from television,
41% gather political information from radio, 30% gather political information from newspapers,
and 41% gather political information from family, friends and colleagues (many of whom, of
course, gather their information from television, radio and newspapers).26 Internet is not widespread:
  24  These figures are based on IFE monitoring of a non-random sample of 200 radio and television
stations providing news coverage during the 2012 Mexican Federal election.
   25 In principle, local governments are required to inform the public about the arrival of FISM

funds. However, only about 50% comply with this requirement. Moreover, among those that do
comply, the main communication channels used are newspapers and the internet—i.e., two types
of mass media. Furthermore, media relies extensively on the ASF audit reports since governments
are extremely reluctant to release information about their expenses to the public (Lavielle, Pirker
and Serdán, 2006).
   26 These are the only four responses to an open-ended question that received a non-negligible

number of mentions.


                                                10
according to the 2010 Census, only 24% of households in the average electoral precinct have in-
ternet access, and this number is lower in the sample we analyze here. Additionally, according to
Castañeda Sabido (2011), 83% of individuals report that they receive information about malfea-
sance in the management of public resources through media, and 61% regard the information as
reliable. We thus expect that television may be the most the important media source for political
accountability.
    The annual release of municipal audit results each February is a much-anticipated media event.
This is particularly true for television stations, which widely broadcast footage of the release.
However, many types of news reports covering the outcomes of the audits are published in February
and March each year. Consistent with this claim, Figures 1a and 1b show that trends in Google
searches for the ASF and FISM spike around February and March of each year. We still found
many news reports from later in the year, indicating that the results of the audits continue to be
salient.

                                      [Figure 1 about here.]

    Media reports, which generally cover mayors within a given state or the local vicinity, almost
exclusively focus on cases of corruption and mayors not spending FISM funds on projects targeting
the poor. Most reports accurately cite the proportions of unauthorized spending and spending on
projects not targeted at the poor, and many dig deeper to describe the nature of the malfeasance.27
Little mention was made of other features of the reports such as the the degree of participation of
the community in the allocation of funds or the share of FISM funds that were spent.
    The bulk of news reports focus on particularly egregious cases of corrupt and neglectful may-
ors.28 For example, in 2013 BBM radio station reported that Oaxaca de Juarez’s mayor had created
a fake union to collect payments, presided over many public works contracts without offering open
tender, diverted payments for advertising and consulting fees, and failed to provide details of con-
siderable quantities of spending.29 While this particular case represents one of the most corrupt
mayors, such behavior was not uncommon: many reports pointed to mayors diverting payments,
using FISM funds for personal and family expenses and manipulating tender processes. Failures to
  27  For example, see: BBM Noticias, “ASF: desvió Ugartchechea 370.9 mdp”, October 21st 2013,
here; El Informador, “Hallan irregularidades en gasto tapatı́o contra pobreza”, February 28th 2013,
here; Revolución Tres Punto Cero, “En 2012, se desviaron a campañas 29 millones de pesos para
combate a la pobreza en Tabasco”, March 6th 2014, here.
   28 Because of this, media coverage may be biased toward large municipalities where the sums

involved are large in nominal terms or smaller municipalities where the proportion of FISM funds
misallocated is especially large.
   29 BBM Noticias, “ASF: desvió Ugartchechea 370.9 mdp”, October 21st 2013, here.



                                                11
spend FISM funds on the poor were just as common in media reports. In many cases, public works
projects were undertaken in urban and affluent parts of the city. In others, the alleged project never
materialized despite being paid for, or was diverted for alternative uses such as supporting local
candidates from the incumbent’s party.
    While most media stations cover audit reports relating to their own municipality, an additional
local media source may still substantially affect voter beliefs about the incumbent party. First,
even in relatively large markets, new media exposes new listeners. Supporting this claim, Prat and
Strömberg (2005) show that the introduction of commercial television disproportionately attracts
relatively uninformed voters, causing them to become more politically knowledgeable and increase
their political participation. Second, local information may be useful to voters and cause them to
gravitate toward such media stations. Durante and Knight (2012) similarly show that voters are
willing to change their media consumption patterns in response to changes in the types of avail-
able media. Third, receiving the same information from multiple sources should increase voter
certainty regarding incumbent performance, especially when the information is consistent across
outlets with different political biases (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2006; Gentzkow, Shapiro and Sink-
inson 2014). Ultimately, if additional access to additional media stations alters voter beliefs, then
coverage from an additional media station may cause voters to sanction the party at the election.
    We now turn to our data, and to the empirical strategy we use to identify the effects of the
release of audit reports in electoral precincts that differ in the number of local media outlets they
are covered by.


3     Data
This section describes our main sources of data: electoral results at the electoral precinct level;
municipality audit reports released just before and just after an election; and precinct-level radio
and television coverage.


3.1    Mayoral election outcomes
Mexico’s municipalities (and Congressional districts) are divided into approximately 67,000 elec-
toral precincts. Using data from the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) and State Electoral Institutes,
we collected electoral returns for every available precinct in each municipal election between 2002
and 2012. We thus accumulated up to four election results per electoral precinct, which enabled
us to identify the municipal incumbent and incumbent’s past vote share in all the elections in our



                                                 12
period of analysis, 2007-2012.30
     We focus on two main electoral outcomes: the change in incumbent party’s vote share at the
precinct level, and whether the incumbent party was re-elected at the municipal level. The for-
mer measure quantifies the extent of precinct-level voter sanctioning, while the latter captures the
municipality-level implications for the identity of the office-holder. When exploiting fine-grained
variation in media coverage across precincts, our analysis focuses on changes in the incumbent
vote share. We define the vote share as a proportion of voters that turned out.31 The average in-
cumbent in our sample received 48% of votes in their electoral precinct, and the average decline in
the vote share of the incumbent mayor’s party was 4.7 percentage points.
     Since Mexico’s mayors cannot stand for re-election in our sample, we focus on the party of
the incumbent mayor. Municipal politics often entail the formation of local coalitions between
political parties, and this can change across elections. For example, in 2009 the incumbent mayor
of the municipality of Colima represented a two-party coalition containing the PRI and the Green
Party (PVEM). However, the 2009 election saw six groups stand for election: the PT, PVEM
and PC all stood separately against three coalitions, PAN-ADC, PRI-PANAL and PRD-PSD.32 To
code such cases where the incumbent coalition split at the next election, we determined the party
affiliation of each mayor by researching, first, their identity, and second, their party ties.


3.2    Audit reports
Since audit reports are released with a two year lag, reports released in the February of a municipal
election year generally refer to the first year the incumbent mayor was in office.33 Since municipal
elections take place later in the calendar year, we define a pre-election audit report release by
whether an audit was released in February of an election year.34 Typically, the report is released
4 months before the election. Our control group will be mayors in municipalities where the audit
was released in February the year following the election. In such cases, the audit report generally
pertains to their second year in office.
  30  By ending our sample in 2012, our sample does not feature any mayors that can seek re-
election.
   31 We obtain similar results when measuring vote share as a proportion of registered voters.
   32 After being revealed as malfeasant, we find some evidence that the coalition is more likely to

change, and that the number of coalition partners of the largest party actually may increase at the
next election.
   33 In Coahuila, where mayors are elected to four-year terms, the report refers to the second year

of their term.
   34 Although states differ in the month in which they hold elections, only Baja California Sur

holds elections before mid-February. We adjust for Baja California Sur accordingly.

                                                 13
    The results of audit reports, which quantify the use of FISM funds, are publicly available
on the ASF’s website. We extracted the proportion of funds spent in an unauthorized manner
and the proportion of funds not spent on projects benefiting the poor from every available report
between 2005 and 2012.35 This yielded a total of 1,050 municipal audits, which were relatively
evenly spread across years and covered 432 unique municipalities. Of these, 429 reports from 297
different municipalities were released in an election year or the year after. We henceforth restrict
attention to this subsample of audits, which are shaded by their levels of malfeasance in Figure 2.

                                       [Figure 2 about here.]

    We operationalize malfeasance using indicators to capture severity. For corruption, we define
indicators for precincts with mayors in the third and fourth quartiles of the distribution of unau-
thorized FISM spending. For neglectful spending, we similarly define indicators for mayors in
the third and fourth quartiles with respect to FISM funds not allocated to spending on the poor.
In our sample, only mayors above the median engaged in non-negligible corruption or neglect-
ful spending.36 We prefer binary performance metrics—which are more also flexible than linear
measures—identifying more egregious cases of bad performance since standard theoretical models
suggest that voter sanctioning involves cut-off rules (e.g. Barro 1973; Ferejohn 1986). Further-
more, our examination of media reports indicates that only relatively serious cases are widely
reported. Nevertheless, we find similar results using a continuous measure where we instead allow
sanctioning to be a linear function of revealed performance.


3.3    Media coverage
In addition to our fine-grained electoral data, a key feature of this study is the detail of our media
coverage data. Following a major media reform in 2007 (see Serra 2012), the IFE required that
every AM and FM radio station and every television station in the country provide signal coverage
data.37 Specifically, for each media station we are able to code the municipality from where the
station broadcasts, and define the commercial quality coverage range of their signal.38 Inside a
  35  We did not collect earlier audit reports because they did not present those figures in a system-
atic way.
   36 The level of corruption in the median precinct was 0.4% of FISM funds, while neglectful

spending in the median precinct was 0%. For both corruption and not spending on the poor, the
25th percentile of the distribution is 0; hence we do not use an indicator for the second quartile.
   37 For only a small number of FM and television stations did the same station broadcast from

multiple municipalities. No electoral precincts received the same signal from multiple antennae.
   38 The IFE defines the boundary of the coverage area using a 60 dBµ threshold for signal

strength. This is the threshold commonly used to determine a radio station’s audience and sell

                                                 14
station’s coverage area the signal is of high quality, so precincts inside the area have good access to
the station’s broadcasts. Precincts outside the coverage area experience increasingly poor coverage
as the distance from the boundary increases. See Larreguy, Marshall and Snyder Jr. (2014) for
further details of the coverage data.
    Figures 3-5 map the location and coverage of each of the 852 AM, 1097 FM and 1255 television
stations. Although media coverage is extensive, with most precincts receiving at least one media
signal and most municipalities containing at least one media station, there is considerable variation
in the number of media stations covering each precinct that emit from within the precinct’s own
municipality.39 The figures also clearly indicate that the commercial quality coverage range of
AM radio is substantially greater than for FM and television. If AM radio stations thus cater to a
broader geographic audience, the sanctioning effects of local AM coverage may be smaller than
for FM and television stations because the latter are more focused on local issues.

                                  [Figures 3, 4 and 5 about here.]

    Our principal measure of local media coverage is the total number of AM, FM or television
stations covering a given electoral precinct that broadcast from within the precinct’s municipality.
The average precinct is covered by 4.4, 5.4 and 2.4 local AM, FM and television stations respec-
tively, while the total number of local media stations covering a precinct ranges from 0 to 40.
Given these precinct totals are highly correlated across media types, simply adding the total to-
gether yields similar results to examining each type of media separately.40 As a robustness check,
we also examine each type of media separately.
    To compare the effects of local media to other types of media, we computed the number of
media stations that broadcast within a precinct’s state but are not located within its municipality and
the number of media stations covered by a precinct that broadcast from outside the precinct’s state.
The average precinct receives as many FM and television signals from inside their municipality as
outside, although the greater signal range of AM stations means that precincts are typically covered
by twice as many AM stations emitting from outside their municipality.
advertising space commercially in the U.S., where it “is recognized as the area in which a reliable
signal can be received using an ordinary radio receiver and antenna” (NTIA link).
   39 Since the number of radio and television stations has remained constant between 2003 and

2010, we cannot exploit temporal variation in media coverage.
   40 This procedure yielded a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.84. The minimum pairwise correlation be-

tween the variables is 0.65.




                                                  15
4        Empirical strategy
Our goal is to identify the effect of local media coverage of municipal audits on the incumbent
party’s electoral performance. To achieve this, we exploit exogenous variation in both the release of
audit reports and access to local media. We combine the difference-in-differences (DD) design of
Ferraz and Finan (2008) with plausibly exogenous variation in the number of local media stations
covering neighboring electoral precincts.


4.1      Identifying the effects of audit reports
The DD component of our design rests upon exogenous variation in the timing of audit report
releases. To identify the effects of audits we compare municipalities where an audit report was
released just before a municipal election to a control group of municipalities where the audit was
released after a municipal election. We then move beyond this first difference by also comparing
municipalities where the mayor is corrupt or neglectful. The DD sample contains 45,935 precinct-
election observations.
    As noted above, the types of Mexican municipalities chosen for audits are not random. How-
ever, we only examine municipalities that have been audited at least once. Consequently, to identify
the causal effects of an audit being released we require only that the timing of audits is effectively
random. Given the political independence of the ASF, this appears to be a reasonable assumption.
Table 1 confirms that differences in the political, demographic, media coverage and economic
characteristics between electoral precincts in municipalities where an audit was released in the
year before an election and those where an audit was released the following year are consistent
with chance. The variables in the final seven rows are taken from the precinct-level Census data
from 2010, and are described in greater detail in the Online Appendix.

                                        [Table 1 about here.]

    A second potential concern is that the content of audit reports differs across election and non-
election years. For example, auditors could be more lenient or more meticulous in the knowledge
that a report will be released in an election year. Alternatively, mayors anticipating the release of
an audit report in an election year may spend more appropriately. To examine these possibilities
we compare audit reports released just before an election to reports released just after an election in
Figure 6.41 The distribution of unauthorized spending and spending not on the poor is very similar.
    41The graphs are very similar if we compare audits from election years to all non-election years
(i.e. not just including audits released in the year after a municipal election).

                                                  16
Combined with our randomization check, this strongly suggests that the audits results released in
election years are typical of “normal” auditing.

                                          [Figure 6 about here.]

    To identify the effect of revealing a mayor to be corrupt or neglectful before an election, we
estimate the following DD equation using OLS:

       Yp,m,t = β1 auditm,t + β2 audit outcome Q3m,t + β3 audit outcome Q4m,t
                                                                                    
                +β4 auditm,t × audit outcome Q3m,t + β5 auditm,t × audit outcome Q4m,t
                 +Xp,m,t γ + ζt + ε p,m,t ,                                                         (1)

where Yp,m,t is the incumbent party’s vote share in precinct p in municipality m in year t (or whether
the incumbent party won the municipal election), auditm,t is an indicator for an audit being released
before the election, and audit outcome Q3m,t and audit outcome Q4m,t are indicators for municipal-
ities in the third and fourth quartiles of the distributions of corrupt or neglectful mayors (regardless
of whether the audit was released before or after the election). We include year fixed effects ζt to
ensure that we are comparing municipalities where an audit report was released just after an elec-
tion to municipalities where the audit was released before the election. To increase the efficiency
of our estimates, X p,m,t includes the demographic and socioeconomic variables listed in Table 1 as
controls. Throughout, we cluster by municipal election to account for spatial correlation between
precincts in the same municipality.
    Our main coefficients of interest are β4 and β5 , which identify the effect of an audit conditional
upon it revealing corruption or that the mayor did not spend FISM money on the poor. We are also
interested in β1 , which identifies the effect of an audit conditional upon it revealing no malfea-
sance. By not weighting our observations, our estimates reflect the effect of an audit in an average
precinct.42


4.2      Identifying the effects of local media stations revealing audit reports
To examine the heterogeneous effects of revealing corruption or neglectful behavior, Ferraz and
Finan (2008) further interact auditm,t × audit outcomem,t with the number of AM stations located
in a municipality. If the number of AM stations were effectively randomly assigned, then this
  42This contrasts with Ferraz and Finan (2008), whose unit is the average municipality. We favor
equally weighting precincts because this more accurately captures the average Mexican voter’s
sanctioning behavior, rather than disproportionately weighting smaller municipalities.

                                                   17
would estimate the average effect of an audit report being released for each additional local media
station.43
    However, media stations are not randomly assigned across municipalities. The number of
local media stations is significantly positively correlated with smaller precinct area sizes, literacy
rates, and living in households with basic necessities and luxury amenities. These correlations
may upwardly bias our estimates of local media’s effects if, for example, the better educated and
informed citizens in such precincts are more willing or able to sanction incumbent mayors (e.g. Alt,
Lassen and Marshall 2014; Weitz-Shapiro and Winters 2014).44 Since controlling for observables
cannot necessarily address this concern, we instead exploit plausibly exogenous variation in the
number of local media stations.
    To generate plausibly exogenous variation in local media coverage, we compare neighboring
electoral precincts that differ in the number of local media stations they are covered by. Figure 7
illustrates this design, identifying electoral precincts 1571 and 1583 in the municipality of Villa
de Tututepec de Melchor Ocampo as neighbors that differ because only precinct 1583 is covered
by a television station emitting from within the municipality. Since some neighbors differ by
more than one local media station,45 we exploit only within-neighbor variation to ensure that our
estimates are not confounded by differences in the types of area where neighbors differ by one as
opposed to two (or more) local media stations. This design is therefore similar to previous studies
exploiting differences in media market boundaries (e.g. Ansolabehere, Snowberg and Snyder 2006;
Enikolopov, Petrova and Zhuravskaya 2011; Fergusson 2014; Snyder and Strömberg 2010) or
geographic borders without a continuous forcing variable (e.g. Dell 2010; Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou 2013).

                                       [Figure 7 about here.]

    Although our design shares some features with a geographic regression discontinuity, there
are two important differences. First, differences in the number of commercial quality local media
signals between neighbors are non-binary because neighbors can differ by more than one media
station. Second, because of this non-binary difference, the distance to the coverage border is often
  43  Furthermore, unlike our precinct-level data, this strategy rests upon between-municipality dif-
ferences in media coverage.
   44 In theory, these correlations could also downwardly bias our estimates if such precincts contain

voters with stronger prior belief about their incumbent’s quality (Zaller 1992).
   45 54% of neighbor pairs differ by more than one local media station. Therefore, we cannot

simply compare treated and control units because the difference in the number of media stations
between the two groups (or the treatment intensity) is not constant.


                                                 18
multidimensional. Beyond the problem that any spatial discontinuity is defined by both latitude
and longitude (see Dell 2010), this multidimensionality means that it is not clear how a continuous
running variable could be defined.
    Broadcast signals decay gradually rather than abruptly, so discrete differences in commercial
quality signal coverage do not imply that neighboring precincts differ strictly between receiving
or not receiving a station’s signal. Rather, we are comparing differences in the proportion of
an electoral precinct that can access additional local media. Given the drop-off in coverage across
most precincts is relatively substantial, and we are using the information that politicians themselves
possess, differences in commercial quality coverage are important in their own right.
    Ideally, we could also identify the electoral effect of receiving or consuming an additional
media station using instrumental variable techniques. To estimate the relevant first stage, we would
need to measure either the proportion of voters in each precinct that can access all media stations or
the proportion of voters that actually listen to each radio stations or watch each television station.
Unfortunately, such detailed individual-level data is not available. Survey datasets typically cover
only 1-2% of all electoral precincts and never ask specifically about which radio or television
stations voters have access to or actually consume.46 Furthermore, since voters are likely to discuss
the news that they receive with their friends and family, the exclusion restriction requiring that
a commercial quality coverage signal only affects electoral outcomes through either access or
especially consumption is hard to sustain.
    Operationally, we define a “treated” precinct as one which differs from at least one neighboring
precinct in terms of the number of local media stations that it receives. For each such precinct, we
then select the best neighboring “control” precinct receiving a different number of local media
stations. The best control unit is defined as the neighboring precinct with the smallest Malhanobis
distance in terms of the economic and demographic variables at the foot of Table 1.47 This control
strategy increases the efficiency of our estimates and reduces any remaining imbalances. Together,
this yields a neighbors sample size of 19,922 observations.
    To combine variation in the timing of audit and the number of media stations covering a given
electoral precinct, we estimate the following triple-difference (DDD) specification using the neigh-
  46 Although the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems and Mexican Panel surveys did ask
whether respondents listen to the radio or television, the surveys are predominantly urban and
cover only 1-2% of electoral precincts. The Latinobarometer, which also asks basic questions
about media consumption, does not provide precinct-level identifiers for its respondents. Even if
such surveys had greater coverage, none of the surveys could identify the number or identity of the
media available to voters—such measures would be necessary to compute the relevant first stage.
  47 Since these variables are time-invariant, neighboring pairs are identical for each year.




                                                 19
bor sample:
                                                                                    
  Yp,k,m,t   = β1 auditm,t + β2 audit outcomem,t + β3 auditm,t × audit outcome Q3m,t
                                                                                            
               +β4 auditm,t × audit outcome Q4m,t + β5 media p,m + β6 auditm,t × media p,m
                                                               
               +β7 auditm,t × audit outcome Q3m,t × media p,m
                                                               
               +β8 auditm,t × audit outcome Q4m,t × media p,m + Xp,m,t γ + ξk + ζt + ε p,k,m,t , (2)

where ξk is a neighbor fixed effect, which ensures our estimates identify only off within-neighbor
variation in media coverage. To estimate the effect of local media, media p,m is the total number of
local media stations. We also examine the effect of the total number of media stations within the
state (excluding those broadcasting within the municipality) and also the number received from
outside the state. Since our sample contains some precincts at municipality borders to maximize
our sample size, we exploit both within- and across-municipality variation. However, if we only
allow within-municipality neighboring pairs or include municipality fixed effects, we obtain very
similar results.
    Our identifying assumption is that neighboring precincts differ only in their local media cover-
age. Restricting attention to within-neighbor variation a wide variety of potential confounds. The
main concern is sorting, such that certain types of voters choose to live in areas with better local
media coverage or media stations strategically choose the strength of their signal to exclude certain
types of voters. However, such sorting is very unlikely. First, if voters were migrating according to
media availability, they would likely move further than the neighboring precinct to a location with
guaranteed high-quality signal coverage. Second, media stations lack the technology to precisely
target certain types of voters: beyond the fact that excluding voters is challenging when signals are
not discontinuous, the antennae strengths that media stations purchase are highly discrete.48

                                        [Table 2 about here.]

    Furthermore, we find no evidence for such concerns. Controlling for neighbor and year fixed
effects (as in equation (2)), Table 2 shows that the correlations between the number of local media
stations and audit, political, demographic and economic variables is consistent with chance. Im-
portantly, there is no significant difference in the number of non-local media stations, ensuring that
  48The power output in watts for the AM, FM and television stations in our sample are almost
exclusively round thousands and divisible by 5.



                                                 20
the presence of non-local media stations is not driving our estimates.49 For the two cases of slight
imbalance, our robustness checks demonstrate that neither can explain our estimates.


5        Results
We first examine whether audits revealing a mayor to be corrupt or neglectful before an election
reduce a mayor’s vote share and probability of re-election. However, our main contribution is
to identify the effect of local media in holding politicians to account. Our results demonstrate
that an additional media station significantly increases the electoral punishment that the party of a
corrupt or neglectful mayor faces. Furthermore, we find that this punishment continues to affect
the incumbent party at the next election. Reinforcing the importance of local media, we also show
that non-local media do not enhance electoral accountability.


5.1      Audits and political accountability
Table 3 presents our DD of the average effect of an audit revealing a mayor to be corrupt or
neglectful of the poor on the mayor’s electoral prospects. The outcome in columns (1) and (2) is
the change in the mayor’s vote share at the precinct level, while the outcome in columns (3) and
(4) is whether the mayor was re-elected in the municipality.

                                        [Table 3 about here.]

    The results indicate that an audit released before an election can have substantial electoral
implications. Column (1) shows that revealing a mayor to be in the most corrupt quartile before the
election, on average, reduces the vote share of a corrupt mayor by four percentage points. Although
effect is not statistically significant, the magnitude represents 9% of the average incumbent’s initial
vote share. Column (2) finds that revealing that a mayor is neglectful before an election also
reduces their vote share: the vote share of mayors in the third quartile declines by nearly five
percentage points, while mayors in the fourth quartile lose a further four percentage points. In
both cases, however, the audit coefficient in the first row—which captures the baseline category
of essentially zero or negligible malfeasance—shows that the parties of mayors whose reputations
    49The Online Appendix shows that the effective random assignment of audits continues to hold
in the neighbors sample. Note that the DD and neighbors samples differ somewhat: corruption
is five percentage points less prevalent in the neighbors sample, while precincts are generally less
socio-economically developed.


                                                  21
are not negatively affected by the audits increase their vote share, especially when they actually
spent the FISM funds on its intended poor recipients.
    Looking at the probability of re-election similarly suggests that voters may severely punish
mayoral malfeasance. Measured at the municipal level, the change in incumbent vote share maps
to large reductions in the probability of being re-elected. Column (3) finds that revealing a mayor
as one of the most corrupt reduces their re-election probability by 22 percentage points, although
this is again not statistically significant.50 Column (4) shows that the publication of an audit report
showing that a mayor did not spend FISM federal transfers on the poor is 26 percentage points less
likely to be re-elected. For both audit outcomes, the effect is much larger for mayors in the fourth
quartile relative to the third.
    The substantial electoral sanctioning implied by these results is broadly similar in magnitude to
that found by Ferraz and Finan (2008) in Brazil, although we measure corruption in terms of stolen
funds rather than the number of corrupt spending violations. However, our results also suggest that
incorrectly spending money earmarked for the poor evokes sanctioning of similar magnitude to
corruption.51 However, our DD estimates are relatively noisy. A plausible explanation for our
lack of precision is that audit reports only affect voter behavior when the information is clearly
conveyed.


5.2    The effects of local media coverage of audit reports
We now address the central question of this article: is the party of a malfeasant mayor more likely
to be sanctioned by voters who live in areas covered by media stations that publicize audit reports
revealing the mayor’s behavior in office? Combining our DD and within-neighbor designs, we
first examine the effects of local media stations—those emitting from the same municipality as an
electoral precinct—before turning to within-state and out-of-state media stations. Since mayoral
corruption and neglect are primarily important local issues, we expect to find that local media is
more effective at facilitating electoral accountability.
     Table 4 provides our estimates for the sanctioning effect of an additional media station emitting
from the precinct’s own municipality. Since we now focus on precinct-level variation in media
coverage, our analysis focuses on the change in the incumbent’s vote share at the precinct level.
  50  The relative lack of precision reflects the fact that we have 481 audited municipalities, of
which only 51 had mayors that were revealed to be corrupt before the election.
   51 The Online Appendix reports quantitatively similar, but far noisier, estimates for the neighbors

sample, which includes only a selection of precincts from 330 municipality elections and only
identifies out of within-neighbor variation.


                                                  22
                                        [Table 4 about here.]

    The results for revealing a corrupt mayor provide some evidence that local media supports
electoral accountability. In column (1), mayors in the third quartile of the corruption distribution
experience a significant loss in their vote share—almost one percentage point for each additional
local media station. A standard deviation increase in the number of media stations, which entails
11.5 more media stations, thus reduces the vote share of an incumbent revealed to be corrupt
by nine percentage points. The positive interactions between our audit dummy and a mayor’s
corruption quartile indicate that revealing a mayor to be corrupt is not punished electorally in
precincts covered by no media stations. Although there is also a negative coefficient for more
egregious cases of corruption, in Q4, the effect is not statistically significant. However, we find
below that the weakness of this result reflects the fact that only additional television stations induce
voters to sanction the most corrupt mayors.
    In precincts where local media reveals a mayor to have neglected the poor, the effect is larger
and increasing in the severity of a mayor’s neglect. Column (2) shows that an additional local
media station reduces a neglectful mayor’s vote share by 1.1 percentage points for mayors in the
third quartile and 1.9 percentage points for mayors in the most neglectful quartile. A standard
deviation increase in the number of local media stations thus entails a 22 percentage point decrease
in the vote share of the most neglectful mayors if their behavior is revealed before an election. This
represents a decline of almost half their vote share. Again, the positive interaction between the pre-
election audit release and not spending on the poor shows that in locations with zero local media
stations the party of the mayor is not sanctioned electorally. Furthermore, the significant positive
interaction between revealing an audit and the total number of local media stations shows that
parties that were revealed to spent FISM funds on the poor are boosted at polls, although not as
much as malfeasant mayors are punished. Consistent with the DD estimates in Table 3, these
results thus clearly indicate that the media-induced electoral response to revealing neglect of the
poor is larger than the electoral response to corruption.52

                                        [Table 5 about here.]

    These results provide clear evidence that local media coverage is necessary for voters to punish
the parties of malfeasant mayors. However, it remains possible that coverage from any type of
media source is equally effective. To test whether non-local media also facilitates electoral sanc-
tioning, we again implement our neighbors identification strategy to isolate variation in within-state
  52It is possible that corruption is punished less in this context because our measure—
unauthorized spending—is broader than those used in previous studies.

                                                  23
and out-of-state media coverage. The results of these tests are presented in Table 5. The triple in-
teraction between revealing an audit before the election, the audit’s outcome and non-local media
provides no evidence that either the number of media stations broadcasting from within the state
(excluding those within the municipality) or from outside the state affect the incumbent party’s vote
share. Comparing these estimates to those for local media in Table 4, the effect of such non-local
media is always smaller than for local media and is never significantly negative.53


5.3    Robustness checks
By exploiting two sources of plausibly exogenous variation, there are good reasons to be confi-
dent in our estimates. Nevertheless, we now show that our local media estimates are robust to a
variety of specification checks. Table 6 presents the results of these checks, focusing on the triple
interactions identifying the effects of local media revealing mayoral malfeasance.
    First, we show that the results are not being driven by small parties. Accordingly, we restrict
attention to incumbents containing the PAN or PRI, which are the two strongest parties at the
municipal level. Panel A of Table 6 shows that our estimates slightly increase in magnitude for the
88% of precincts where the PAN or PRI were incumbents.

                                       [Table 6 about here.]

    Second, panels B-D examine different types of media separately. As noted above, television
may be more effective for sanctioning voters because voters report that television is their main
source of political information (Castañeda Sabido 2011). Furthermore, AM radio stations may
provide less locally-targeted news because its relatively extensive coverage ranges may cause such
stations to appeal to a broader geographic demographic. For both an additional FM and especially
an additional television station, we observe that corruption—especially the most egregious cases—
is punished substantially. Consistent with these expectations, local media’s effects are generally
largest for FM radio and especially television. However, we treat such estimates with caution since
neighbors that differ in terms of their FM and television coverage may be more located in more
urban areas where voters are more able or willing to act upon information concerning their mayor’s
performance.
  53We also find the same results when using the neighbors sample used to estimate the effect of
local media. Similarly, the Online Appendix shows that the effects of local media are robust to
simultaneously controlling for the interaction of audit outcomes with both measures of non-local
media.



                                                 24
    Third, it is possible that our local media estimates are driven by neighboring units that cross
municipality borders. Such neighbors could be picking up unobservable features of their respective
municipalities. To demonstrate that this is not the case, panel E shows similar results when the set
of potential neighboring pairs is restricted to precincts within the same municipality.
    Fourth, our balance checks highlighted a significant imbalance in internet access. Given au-
dit reports were also released online, it is possible that local media coverage is simply a proxy
for internet access. However, since the imbalance is extremely small in magnitude and internet is
not prevalent in Mexico, it is hard to believe that this correlation could account for our large es-
timates. Furthermore, panel F shows that controlling for a triple interaction between audit results
and the proportion of the precinct with internet access barely affects our point estimates, although
the Q3 corruption coefficient now falls slightly outside statistical significance. The internet coef-
ficients suggest that precincts with greater internet access are more likely to punish corrupt, but
not neglectful, mayors. However, since internet access may still be correlated with precinct char-
acteristics like education and political interest, further work is required to establish whether the
association with internet access is causal.
    Fifth, we consider a linear specification of the audit report results. In particular, we use the
share of unauthorized spending and spending not on the poor instead of the binary approaches
used above. This allows for alternative types of voter punishment strategies. Panel G shows sub-
stantively similar results, supporting our claim that media facilitates voter sanctioning of worse
behavior in office.
    Sixth, at the cost of losing randomization in local media, we estimate equation (1) in the larger
DD sample to check the external validity of the neighbor sample estimates. The results, provided
in the Online Appendix, are broadly similar to the neighbor estimates. For both corruption and
spending not on the poor, a mayor revealed to be in the most malfeasant quartile experiences
a significant decrease in their vote share for each additional local media station. Although the
neighbors and DD samples yield relatively similar results, the estimates suggest that not accounting
for differences correlated with media availability slightly downwardly biases media’s amplifying
effects of spending not on the poor.


5.4    Heterogeneity by party
Our main finding shows that electoral punishment of malfeasance requires the presence of local
media stations publicizing the results of independent audit reports. However, it is possible that
punishment differs by party, given that parties vary in their political platforms and reputations. For
example, voters might be more likely to update their beliefs about the sincerity, commitment, or

                                                 25
competence of parties when the incumbent’s behavior in office contradicts the campaign promises
of their party or voter expectations of politicians.54 Alternatively, voters might find some behavior
particularly hypocritical, and therefore more egregious and deserving of punishment.
    In the context of Mexican politics, the main parties differ in the extent to which they promise
to support the poor. Since the PRI is a populist party appealing to the relatively disadvantaged
masses, we might expect revelations of failing to spend on the poor to hurt the PRI more than other
parties. The PAN, which also has a significant number of mayors, is instead the party of richer
voters. Although most parties have been linked with corruption, the audit reports suggest that PRI
mayors engage in the least municipal malfeasance. This contrasts with the PRI’s association with
electoral fraud. However, it is possible that voters expect populist parties like the PRI to be more
reluctant to steal funds. Accordingly, voters may also be more likely to punish PRI corruption.
    Table 8 examines these relationships by comparing the effects of local media between PRI
and non-PRI incumbents.55 Although PRI municipalities could be correlated with other relevant
characteristics, the results suggest that electoral sanctioning is primarily driven by the precincts
with a PRI incumbent. In particular, for each additional media station the PRI loses approximately
two percentage points more when its incumbents are revealed as corrupt or negligent. Except in the
case of the most egregious cases of not spending on the poor, the results indicate that only the PRI is
being punished for malfeasance in office. This evidence implies that voters are particularly willing
to punish politicians that claim to support poorer voters but which ultimately neglect them—either
by not spending on the poor or engaging in corruption.

                                        [Table 8 about here.]

    These results also provide evidence consistent with voters updating in a relatively sophisticated
way. In addition to voters linking the current mayor to their party, voters also appear to understand
that malfeasance is not equally likely among all parties. This suggests that voters are not simply
punishing a party they can link to malfeasance.
  54  See, e.g. Alt, Lassen and Marshall (2014), who show that opposition claims that the econ-
omy is performing well or government claims that the economy is performing badly have larger
effects on voter evaluations of government. Similarly, Chiang and Knight (2011) for evidence that
“surprising” newspaper endorsements have a significant effect on voter behavior but “expected”
endorsements do not.
   55 Although the PRD is perhaps the most left-leaning party, the number of PRD mayors is quite

small and these mayors often hold office in coalition with other local parties.




                                                  26
5.5      Longer-run effects
Finally, we turn to the longer-run effects of audits revealing poor mayoral performance. In par-
ticular, we look at the performance of the incumbent political party one further election into the
future. Theoretically, there are good reasons to believe that negative electoral shocks can persist.
One potential avenue is incumbency advantage (e.g. Lee, Moretti and Butler 2004): if incumbency
bolsters incumbent performance through exposure or resources, losing office could cause the cur-
rent incumbent party to continue to suffer in the future. Alternatively, voters may permanently
update their beliefs about political parties, and continue to punish the party of a malfeasant mayor
at the next election. Table 9 presents our estimates for equation (2), where the outcome is the
incumbent’s vote share at the next election after an audit is revealed.

                                        [Table 9 about here.]

    The results show that effects of revealing malfeasance are if anything felt harder at the fol-
lowing election. We again find that each additional local media station publicizing corruption or
negligence substantially reduces the incumbent’s vote share. With the exception of Q3 not spend-
ing on the poor, the longer-run coefficient estimates are larger in magnitude. Unfortunately, our
research design is not able to differentiate alternative explanations for these large longer-run ef-
fects.56


6        Conclusion
Many scholars call media “the fourth estate,” due to its potential to inform voters about the behavior
of politicians in office. Both national and local media are needed: while national media outlets
cover national level actors, local media are necessary to inform voters about the performance of
local politicians. However, since local media is often monopolistic or oligopolistic, it may be
especially vulnerable to capture in developing democracies (Besley and Prat 2006).
    Using detailed local data and an identification strategy that exploits differences in signal cov-
erage across neighboring electoral precincts, we identify the impact of the media environment on
    56
     To do so, we would need two of the following sources of variation. First, to control for incum-
bency, we could use random variation in incumbency that is orthogonal to the audit information.
However, we are unaware of such a source of variation. Second, we could use variation on audit
information that does not affect incumbency. However, since mayors typically last three years in
office, and there is a two-year lag between the year the money is spent and the year that information
is released, it is not possible to generate such variation within a mayor’s term.

                                                 27
political accountability. We show that voters punish the party of malfeasant mayors, but only in
electoral precincts covered by local media stations. In particular, we find that each additional local
radio or television station reduces the vote share of an incumbent political party revealed to be
corrupt by nearly one percentage point, and reduces the vote share of an incumbent political party
revealed to have diverted funds away from the poor by about 1-2 percentage points. Furthermore,
we find that these electoral costs do not abate by the election. However, we find no effect of me-
dia stations that cover the municipality but are based in other municipalities. Thus, our findings
demonstrate the importance of media, especially local media, in supporting political accountability
by sanctioning malfeasant behavior.
    The electoral costs of diverting resources away from the poor are especially large for the pop-
ulist PRI party. One interpretation of this finding is that voters punish parties more for behavior
that is not only malfeasant but contrary to the party’s ideological reputation. This raises important
questions about voter sophistication and, therefore, about the scope for politicians to engage in
malfeasant behavior in office. Further work is clearly needed to understand the conditions under
which different types of politicians are punished by voters.




                                                 28
References
Alt, James E., David D. Lassen and John Marshall. 2014. “Information sources, belief updating,
  and the politics of economic expectations: Evidence from a Danish survey experiment.” Working
  paper.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Erik C. Snowberg and James M. Snyder. 2006. “Television and the incum-
  bency advantage in US elections.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 31(4):469–490.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Donald Green, Jeffrey McManus and Rohini Pande. 2014. “Are Poor Voters
  Indifferent to Whether Elected Leaders are Criminal or Corrupt? A Vignette Experiment in
  Rural India.”. Working paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande and Felix Su. 2011. “Do Informed Voters Make
  Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India.” Working paper.

Barro, Robert J. 1973. “The control of politicians: an economic model.” Public choice 14(1):19–
  42.

Besley, Timothy and Andrea Prat. 2006. “Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media capture and
  government accountability.” American Economic Review 96(3):720–736.

Boas, Taylor C. and F. Daniel Hidalgo. 2011. “Controlling the airwaves: Incumbency advantage
  and community radio in Brazil.” American Journal of Political Science 55(4):869–885.

Bobonis, Gustavo J., Luis R. Camara Fuertes and Rainer Schwabe. 2013. “Monitoring Corruptible
  Politicians.” Working paper.

Bobonis, Gustavo J., Luis R. Cámara Fuertes and Rainer Schwabe. 2014. “Monitoring Corruptible
  Politicians.” Working paper.

Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli. 2004. “Bad politicians.” Journal of Public Economics
  88(3):759–782.

Castañeda Sabido, Fernando. 2011. “Investigación sobre la percepción ciudadana acerca de la
  transparencia, rendición de cuentas y fiscalizacin en el uso de los recursos públicos en México.”
  Reporte para la Auditorı́a Superior de la Federación .

Chang, Eric C.C., Miriam A. Golden and Seth J. Hill. 2010. “Legislative malfeasance and political
  accountability.” World Politics 62(2):177–220.

                                                 29
Chiang, Chun-Fang and Brian Knight. 2011. “Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper
  endorsements.” Review of Economic Studies 78(3):795–820.

Chong, Alberto, Ana De La O, Dean Karlan and Leonard Wantchekon. forthcoming. “Does Cor-
  ruption Information Inspire the Fight or Quash the Hope? A Field Experiment in Mexico on
  Voter Turnout, Choice and Party Identification.” Journal of Politics .

Costas, Elena, Albert Solé-Ollé and Pilar Sorribas-Navarro. 2011. “Do voters really tolerate cor-
  ruption? Evidence from Spanish Mayors.” Working paper.

de Figueiredo, Miguel F.P., F. Daniel Hidalgo and Yuri Kasahara. 2013. “When Do Voters Punish
  Corrupt Politicians? Experimental Evidence from Brazil.” Working paper.

Dell, Melissa. 2010. “The persistent effects of Peru’s mining mita.” Econometrica 78(6):1863–
  1903.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ethan Kaplan. 2007. “The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3):1187–1234.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow. 2010. “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence.” Annual
  Review of Economics 2(1):643–669.

Durante, Ruben and Brian Knight. 2012. “Partisan control, media bias, and viewer responses:
  Evidence from Berlusconi’s Italy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10(3):451–
  481.

Dutta, Bhaskar and Poonam Gupta. 2012. “How Do Indian Voters Respond to Candidates with
  Criminal Charges: Evidence from the 2009 Lok Sabha Elections.” University Library of Munich,
  MPRA Paper Series, No. 38417.

Eggers, Andrew and Alexander C. Fisher. 2011. “Electoral Accountability and the UK Parliamen-
  tary Expenses Scandal: Did Voters Punish Corrupt MPs?” SSRN working paper.

Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2011. “Media and political per-
  suasion: Evidence from Russia.” American Economic Review 101(7):3253–3285.

Ferejohn, John. 1986. “Incumbent performance and electoral control.” Public choice 50(1):5–25.

Fergusson, Leopoldo. 2014. “Media markets, special interests, and voters.” Journal of Public
  Economics 109(C):13–26.

                                                30
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2008. “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s
  Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2):703–
  745.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2006. “Media bias and reputation.” Journal of Political
  Economy 114(2):280–316.

Gentzkow, Matthew, Jesse M. Shapiro and Michael Sinkinson. 2014. “Competition and ide-
  ological diversity: Historical evidence from U.S. newspapers.” American Economic Review
  104(10):3073–3114.

Humphreys, Macartan and Jeremy Weinstein. 2012. “Policing Politicians: Citizen Empowerment
  and Political Accountability in Uganda Preliminary Analysis.” Working paper.

Klasnja, Marko. 2011. “Why Do Malfeasant Politicians Maintain Political Support? Testing the
  “Uninformed Voter” Argument.”.

Langston, Joy. 2003. “Rising from the ashes? Reorganizing and unifying the PRI’s state party
  organizations after electoral defeat.” Comparative Political Studies 36(3):293–318.

Larreguy, Horacio, John Marshall and James M. Snyder Jr. 2014. “Leveling the playing field: How
  equalizing access to political advertising helps locally non-dominant parties in consolidating
  democracies.” Working paper.

Larreguy, Horacio, John Marshall and Pablo Querubı́n. 2014. “What is the Effect of Turnout
  Buying? Theory and Evidence from Mexico.” Working paper.

Lavielle, Briseida, Kristina Pirker and Alberto Serdán. 2006. “Monitoreo de Programas Sociales
  en Contextos Electorales.” Fundar Working paper.

Lee, David S., Enrico Moretti and Matthew J. Butler. 2004. “Do voters affect or elect policies?
  Evidence from the U.S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 807–859.

McCann, James A. and Jorge I. Domınguez. 1998. “Mexicans react to electoral fraud and political
 corruption: an assessment of public opinion and voting behavior.” Electoral Studies 17(4):483–
 503.

Michalopoulos, Stelios and Elias Papaioannou. 2013. “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Con-
 temporary African Development.” Econometrica 81(1):113–152.


                                               31
Niehaus, Paul and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2013. “Corruption Dynamics: The Golden Goose Effect.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5(4):230–269.

Olken, Benjamin A. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indone-
  sia.” Journal of Political Economy 115(2).

Prat, Andrea and David Strömberg. 2005. “Commercial Television and Voter Information.”. CEPR
  Discussion Paper No. 4989.

Rundquist, Barry S., Gerald S. Strom and John G. Peters. 1977. “Corrupt politicians and their
  electoral support: some experimental observations.” American Political Science Review pp. 954–
  963.

Serra, Gilles. 2012. “The Risk of Partyarchy and Democratic Backsliding Mexico.” Taiwan Journal
  of Democracy 8(1):93–118.

Slomczynski, Kazimierz and Goldie Shabad. 2012. “Perceptions of political party corruption and
  voting behaviour in Poland.” Party Politics 18(6):897–917.

Snyder, James M. and David Strömberg. 2010. “Press Coverage and Political Accountability.”
  Journal of Political Economy 118(2):355–408.

Stanig, Piero. forthcoming. “Regulation of Speech and Media Coverage of Corruption: An Empir-
  ical Analysis of the Mexican Press.” American Journal of Political Science .

Svolik, Milan W. 2013. “Learning to love democracy: electoral accountability and the success of
  democracy.” American Journal of Political Science 57(3):685–702.

Weitz-Shapiro, Rebecca and Matthew S. Winters. 2014. “Discerning corruption: Credible Accu-
 sations and the Punishment of Politicians in Brazil.” Working paper.

Wellenstein, Anna, Angélica Núñez and Luis Andrés. 2006. Social Infrastructure: Fondo de
 Aportaciones para la Infraestructura Social (FAIS). In Decentralized service delivery for the
 poor, Volume II: Background papers, ed. The World Bank. Mexico City: The World Bank
 pp. 167–222.

Zaller, John R. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge University Press.

Zamboni, Yves and Stephan Litschig. 2014. “Audit Risk and Rent Extraction: Evidence from a
  Randomized Evaluation in Brazil.” Working paper.

                                              32
                                                       3
              Standardized search activity (sigma)
                                                       2
                                                       1
                                                       0
                                                       -1
                                                       -2




                                                                           Feb 06   Feb 07   Feb 08   Feb 09   Feb 10   Feb 11   Feb 12


                                                                                              (a) Searches for ASF
                                                       3
                                    Standardized search activity (sigma)
                                        0            1 -1           2




                                                                           Feb 06   Feb 07   Feb 08   Feb 09   Feb 10   Feb 11   Feb 12


                                                                                              (b) Searches for FISM


         Figure 1: Google searches related to audit reports by month, 2006-2012
Notes: Extracted using Google Correlate (http://correlate.googlelabs.com) on 15th July 2014. The data
cover Google searches in Mexico for the period used in our sample.




                                                                                                        33
              Figure 2: Distribution of audit report outcomes by municipality.

Notes: Only the 268 municipalities in our final sample are included. Where more than one audit occurs,
we take the average audit outcome.

                                               34
Figure 3: AM radio signal coverage areas (source: IFE).




   Figure 4: FM radio signal coverage (source: IFE).



                          35
Figure 5: TV signal coverage (source: IFE).




                    36
          15
          10




                                                                            10
Density




                                                                  Density
          5




                                                                            5
          0




                                                                            0




               0      .2       .4       .6      .8       1                       0        .2      .4       .6       .8        1
                   Proportion of spending unauthorized                               Proportion of spending not on the poor


                                             Non-election                                 Election


                                    Figure 6: Distribution of audit report results

 Notes: The distributions are based on the 202 audits released in election years and the 227 that were
 released the year after the election that comprise our DD sample.




                                                             37
                          Figure 7: Identification strategy example

Note: Both precincts are from the municipality of Villa de Tututepec de Melchor Ocampo in the state of
Oaxaca. While precinct 1583 is covered by the television emitting from within the municipality, 1571
is not.




                                               38
                   Table 1: Summary statistics by audit status (DD sample)


                                               Control (no audit) mean        Audit difference
   Unauthorized spending                                 0.106                -0.026 (0.030)
   Corrupt Q3                                            0.223                 0.059  (0.068)
   Corrupt Q4                                            0.297                -0.080 (0.077)
   Spending not on the poor                              0.094                 0.022  (0.032)
   Not poor Q3                                           0.247                 0.007  (0.074)
   Not poor Q4                                           0.246                 0.000  (0.076)
   Incumbent precinct vote share (lag)                   0.478                 0.004  (0.014)
   Incumbent victory margin (lag)                        0.146                -0.003 (0.022)
   Coalition partners                                    1.740                 0.041  (0.228)
   Registered voters                                   1,328.15               -40.88 (77.16)
   Area (km2 )                                          19.982                 0.074  (4.332)
   Local media                                          10.403                 3.190  (2.308)
   Non-local media                                      20.603                -2.008 (3.383)
   Share employed                                        0.952                 0.001  (0.002)
   Share illiterate                                      0.059                -0.002 (0.006)
   Share with household necessities                      0.801                 0.031  (0.023)
   Current schooling scale                               0.760                 0.006  (0.006)
   Completed schooling scale                             0.280               -0.012** (0.006)
   Share with household amenities                        0.605                 0.023  (0.017)
   Share with internet                                   0.222                 0.021  (0.018)

Notes: The audit difference results are from regressions of the outcome variables on the left-hand-side
of the table on an indicator for an audit being released the year before an election, where standard errors
clustered by municipality election are in parentheses. There are 45,935 observations for each variable.
* denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.




                                                 39
                 Table 2: Linear balance over local media (neighbor sample)


                                                        Coefficient on local media
                Unauthorized spending              0.000                 (0.002)
                Corrupt Q3                         0.001                 (0.003)
                Corrupt Q4                        -0.001                 (0.006)
                Spending not on the poor          -0.001                 (0.003)
                Not poor Q3                        0.009                 (0.006)
                Not poor Q4                       -0.001                 (0.004)
                Incumbent vote share (lag)         0.001                 (0.001)
                Win margin (lag)                   0.000                 (0.001)
                Coalition partners                -0.003                 (0.017)
                Registered voters                  16.28                 (11.39)
                Area (km2 )                       1.583*                 (0.868)
                Non-local media                   -0.054                 (0.104)
                Share employed                     0.000                 (0.000)
                Share illiterate                   0.000                 (0.000)
                Share with household necessities   0.000                 (0.001)
                Current schooling scale            0.000                 (0.000)
                Completed schooling scale          0.000                 (0.000)
                Share with household amenities     0.000                 (0.001)
                Share with internet              0.002***                (0.001)

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate OLS regression of the variable in each row on the total number
of local media stations, controlling for neighbor and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by
municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.




                                                 40
   Table 3: The effects of audits revealing malfeasance before an election (DD sample)


                               Change in incumbent vote share        Incumbent re-elected
                                (1)             (2)                    (3)        (4)
     Audit                      0.030             0.059**             0.082        0.106
                               (0.021)            (0.024)            (0.116)      (0.107)
     Corrupt Q3                 0.011                                 0.038
                               (0.026)                               (0.147)
     Audit × Corrupt Q3        -0.000                                 0.121
                               (0.042)                               (0.181)
     Corrupt Q3                 0.007                                 0.159
                               (0.043)                               (0.151)
     Audit × Corrupt Q4        -0.038                                -0.221
                               (0.051)                               (0.205)
     Not poor Q3                                   0.026                           -0.117
                                                  (0.024)                         (0.159)
     Audit × Not poor Q3                           -0.048                          0.104
                                                  (0.038)                         (0.191)
     Not poor Q4                                   0.042                           -0.028
                                                  (0.040)                         (0.142)
     Audit × Not poor Q4                          -0.088*                          -0.255
                                                  (0.048)                         (0.185)

     Observations              45,935               45,935           45,935       45,935

Notes: All specifications include demographic and socioeconomic controls and year fixed effects, and
are estimated using OLS. Similar estimates for the neighbor sample are provided in the Online Ap-
pendix. The omitted category for corruption and not spending on the poor is Q1 and Q2. Standard errors
are clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.




                                               41
Table 4: Effects of local media publicizing audits reports revealing malfeasance before an election
(neighbor sample)


                                                       Change in incumbent vote share
                                                         (1)             (2)
             Audit                                       -0.028            -0.023
                                                        (0.034)           (0.031)
             Local media                                 0.000             -0.003
                                                        (0.003)           (0.003)
             Audit × Local media                         0.001            0.005*
                                                        (0.003)           (0.003)
             Corrupt Q3                                -0.108**
                                                        (0.052)
             Audit × Corrupt Q3                        0.120**
                                                        (0.050)
             Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media          -0.008**
                                                        (0.003)
             Corrupt Q4                                  0.058
                                                        (0.052)
             Audit × Corrupt Q4                          0.001
                                                        (0.060)
             Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media            -0.004
                                                        (0.006)
             Not poor Q3                                                   -0.078
                                                                           (0.057)
             Audit × Not poor Q3                                          0.137**
                                                                           (0.068)
             Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                            -0.011*
                                                                           (0.006)
             Not poor Q4                                                   -0.017
                                                                           (0.042)
             Audit × Not poor Q4                                            0.044
                                                                           (0.068)
             Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                           -0.019***
                                                                           (0.006)

             Observations                               19,922             19,922

   Notes: All specifications include demographic and socioeconomic controls and neighbor and year fixed
   effects, and are estimated using OLS. The omitted category for corruption and not spending on the
   poor is Q1 and Q2. Standard errors are clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes
   p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.
                                                  42
Table 5: Effects of within-state and out-of-state media publicizing audits reports revealing malfea-
sance before an election (neighbor sample)


           Panel A: Within-state media                   Change in incumbent vote share
                                                           (1)             (2)
           Audit × State Media                           0.005***             0.004
                                                          (0.002)            (0.003)
           Audit × Corrupt Q3 × State Media               -0.002
                                                          (0.005)
           Audit × Corrupt Q4 × State Media               -0.004
                                                          (0.003)
           Audit × Not poor Q3 × State Media                                  0.005
                                                                             (0.003)
           Audit × Not poor Q4 × State Media                                  -0.001
                                                                             (0.005)

           Observations                                    7,983              7,983
           Panel B: Out-of-state media                   Change in incumbent vote share
                                                           (1)             (2)
           Audit × Non-state media                        -0.003              0.005
                                                          (0.004)            (0.003)
           Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Non-state media            0.000
                                                          (0.005)
           Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Non-state media            0.001
                                                          (0.006)
           Audit × Not poor Q3 × Non-state media                              -0.003
                                                                             (0.005)
           Audit × Not poor Q4 × Non-state media                              -0.008
                                                                             (0.007)

           Observations                                    4,634              4,634

   Notes: The estimates in this table are computed using the neighbors research design for the number of
   out-of-state media stations covering a precinct. All specifications include demographic and socioeco-
   nomic controls and neighbor and year fixed effects, and are estimated using OLS. The omitted category
   for corruption and not spending on the poor is Q1 and Q2. Lower order interaction terms are omitted,
   but available in our replication code. Standard errors are clustered by municipal election. * denotes
   p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.



                                                  43
                          Table 6: Robustness checks (neighbor sample)


                  Panel A: PAN and PRI incumbents         Change in incumbent vote share
                                                             (1)             (2)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media        -0.008**
                                                           (0.004)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media          -0.008
                                                           (0.006)
                  Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                          -0.010
                                                                             (0.007)
                  Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                        -0.026***
                                                                             (0.006)
                  Panel B: AM radio                       Change in incumbent vote share
                                                             (1)             (2)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q3× Local AM              0.005
                                                           (0.010)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q4× Local AM              0.021
                                                           (0.018)
                  Audit× Not poor Q3 × Local AM                              -0.020
                                                                            (0.019)
                  Audit× Not poor Q4 × Local AM                             -0.028*
                                                                            (0.017)
                  Panel C: FM radio                       Change in incumbent vote share
                                                             (1)             (2)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local FM           -0.033***
                                                            (0.010)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local FM              -0.008
                                                            (0.010)
                  Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local FM                            -0.021*
                                                                             (0.012)
                  Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local FM                           -0.032***
                                                                             (0.008)
                  Panel D: television                     Change in incumbent vote share
                                                             (1)             (2)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local TV             -0.016
                                                           (0.015)
                  Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local TV            -0.028*
                                                           (0.014)
                  Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local TV                             -0.027*
                                                                             (0.015)
                  Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local TV                            -0.037**
                                                                             (0.016)


Notes: All specifications are estimated using OLS and include demographic and socioeconomic controls and
neighbor and year fixed effects. All regressions have 19,922 observations except Panel A which contains 17,597
observations. The omitted category for corruption and not spending on the poor is Q1 and Q2. Standard errors are
clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.

                                                    44
                  Table 7: Robustness checks (neighbor sample) (continued)


       Panel E: within-municipality neighbors                Change in incumbent vote share
                                                                (1)            (2)
       Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media                      -0.012**
                                                              (0.006)
       Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media                        0.000
                                                              (0.007)
       Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                                          -0.015**
                                                                                   (0.007)
       Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                                          -0.020**
                                                                                   (0.010)
       Panel F: control for internet access                  Change in incumbent vote share
                                                                (1)            (2)
       Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media                         -0.006
                                                               (0.005)
       Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media                         -0.001
                                                               (0.007)
       Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Internet                            -0.152
                                                               (0.158)
       Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Internet                         -0.438***
                                                               (0.138)
       Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                                          -0.012**
                                                                                   (0.006)
       Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                                         -0.022***
                                                                                   (0.006)
       Audit × Not poor Q3 × Internet                                               0.173
                                                                                   (0.155)
       Audit × Not poor Q4 × Internet                                               0.128
                                                                                   (0.157)
       Panel G: linear audit measures                        Change in incumbent vote share
                                                                (1)            (2)
       Audit × Unauthorized × Local media                      -0.008
                                                              (0.020)
       Audit × Spending not poor × Local media                                   -0.044***
                                                                                   (0.015)

Notes: All specifications are estimated using OLS and include demographic and socioeconomic controls and
neighbor and year fixed effects. All regressions have 19,992 observations, except Panel G which contains 16,314
observations. The omitted category for corruption and not spending on the poor is Q1 and Q2. Standard errors
are clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.
                                                   45
Table 8: Heterogeneous effects of local media publicizing audits reports revealing malfeasance
before an election, by political party (neighbor sample)


                                                              Change in incumbent vote share
                                                                (1)             (2)
         Audit × Local media                                    -0.011             0.002
                                                               (0.010)            (0.005)
         Audit × Local media × PRI                             0.018*              0.003
                                                               (0.010)            (0.006)
         Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media                       0.007
                                                               (0.010)
         Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media × PRI               -0.032**
                                                               (0.015)
         Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media                       0.014
                                                               (0.009)
         Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media × PRI               -0.027**
                                                               (0.011)
         Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                                         0.001
                                                                                  (0.009)
         Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media × PRI                                -0.031***
                                                                                  (0.012)
         Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                                       -0.019**
                                                                                  (0.009)
         Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media × PRI                                  -0.015
                                                                                  (0.012)

         Observations                                          17,597             17,597

   Notes: The sample includes only PRI and PAN incumbents. All specifications include demographic and
   socioeconomic controls and year fixed effects, and are estimated using OLS. The omitted category for
   corruption and not spending on the poor is Q1 and Q2. Lower order interaction terms are omitted, but
   available in our replication code. Standard errors are clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1,
   ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.




                                                    46
Table 9: Longer-run effects of local media publicizing audits reports revealing malfeasance before
an election (neighbor sample)


                                                Change in incumbent vote share at next election
                                                   (1)                     (2)
     Audit × Local media                        0.013***                       0.005
                                                  (0.004)                     (0.003)
     Audit × Corrupt Q3 × Local media           -0.023***
                                                  (0.008)
     Audit × Corrupt Q4 × Local media              -0.008
                                                  (0.012)
     Audit × Not poor Q3 × Local media                                         -0.005
                                                                              (0.008)
     Audit × Not poor Q4 × Local media                                       -0.019**
                                                                              (0.008)

     Observations                                 10,999                      10,999

   Notes: All specifications include demographic and socioeconomic controls and neighbor and year fixed
   effects, and are estimated using OLS. The omitted category for corruption and not spending on the poor
   is Q1 and Q2. Lower order interaction terms are omitted, but available in our replication code. Standard
   errors are clustered by municipal election. * denotes p < 0.1, ** denotes p < 0.05, *** denotes p < 0.01.




                                                    47
