                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       EXPORTING AND FIRM PERFORMANCE:
                       EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED TRIAL

                                       David Atkin
                                    Amit K. Khandelwal
                                      Adam Osman

                                     Working Paper 20690
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20690


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2014




We thank Abdelrahman Nagy, Magdy El-Mezain, Atef Helmy, Salah El-Gazar, Aslam Ismail,
Mabrook Abou Shaheen, Sherif Abou Shady and the firms who participated in our sample. We
also thank the staff at Aid to Artisans including Lisa Smith, Shereen Shirazy, Mary Cockram,
Maud Mabika, and Bill Kruvant at Creative Learning. We are grateful to Josephine Gantois for
her excellent research assistance. We also wish to thank Nicholas Bloom, Juan Carlos Hallak,
David McKenzie, Nina Pavcnik, Jim Tybout, Eric Verhoogen, Christopher Woodruff, and
multiple seminar participants for useful comments. We acknowledge generous funding from the
International Growth Centre, Private Enterprise Development for Low-Income Countries,
Innovations for Poverty Action, Economic Growth Center at Yale University, McMillan Center at
Yale University and the Jerome A. Chazen Institute for Global Business at Columbia Business
School. Yale IRB Approval #1001006247 (Atkin and Osman were at Yale University during the
experiment), Columbia IRB Approval #AAAE9678. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by David Atkin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exporting and Firm Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Trial
David Atkin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Adam Osman
NBER Working Paper No. 20690
November 2014, Revised June 2016
JEL No. F10

                                         ABSTRACT

We conduct a randomized experiment that generates exogenous variation in the access to foreign
markets for rug producers in Egypt. Combined with detailed survey data, we causally identify the
impact of exporting on firm performance. Treatment firms report 16-26 percent higher profits and
exhibit large improvements in quality alongside reductions in output per hour relative to control
firms. These findings do not simply reflect firms being offered higher margins to manufacture
high-quality products that take longer to produce. Instead, we find evidence of learning-by-
exporting whereby exporting improves technical efficiency. First, treatment firms have higher
productivity and quality after controlling for rug specifications. Second, when asked to produce
an identical domestic rug using the same inputs and same capital equipment, treatment firms
produce higher quality rugs despite no difference in production time. Third, treatment firms
exhibit learning curves over time. Finally, we document knowledge transfers with quality
increasing most along the specific dimensions that the knowledge pertained to.


David Atkin                                   Adam Osman
Department of Economics, E52-550              Department of Economics
MIT                                           University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
77 Massachusetts Avenue                       109 David Kinley Hall, 1407 W. Gregory
Cambridge, MA 02139                           Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER                                      aosman@illinois.edu
atkin@mit.edu

Amit K. Khandelwal
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ak2796@columbia.edu
1   Introduction
    There are large differences in productivity across countries (Hall and Jones 1999, Bloom and
Van Reenen 2007). The belief that access to high-income markets can help firms in developing
countries close this gap is one motivation behind the large resources now flowing to market ac-
cess initiatives. For example, the WTO’s Aid-for-Trade Initiative secured $48 billion in annual
commitments to help developing countries overcome “trade-related constraints”, and the last two
decades have seen a tripling in the number of national export-promotion agencies that help do-
mestic firms match with foreign buyers (Lederman et al., 2010). Central to these programs achiev-
ing this goal is the belief that exporting improves the productivity of firms, a mechanism called
learning-by-exporting (Clerides et al. 1998, de Loecker 2007, Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare 2010).
In the presence of learning-by-exporting, trade generates efficiency gains which narrow this pro-
ductivity gap and magnify the gains from trade relative to models without learning such as those
explored by Arkolakis et al. (2012) (e.g. see Alvarez et al. 2013).
    Despite the pervasiveness of these initiatives, there is still an ongoing debate as to whether ex-
porting has a causal impact on measures of firm performance. Moreover, if performance does im-
prove, it is unclear whether such improvements occur through learning-by-exporting—outward
shifts in the production possibility frontier (PPF)—or simply through movements along the PPF.
There are two central challenges in answering these questions. First, more productive firms
select into exporting (for example, see Melitz (2003)). This selection has plagued empirical at-
tempts to identify the causal impact of exporting on firm performance because what appears to be
higher productivity among exporters may simply be self-selection. The second difficulty is that
researchers typically lack detailed information required to isolate changes that occur within firms
due to exporting. The literature commonly uses revenue-based total factor productivity (TFPR)
measures which also reflect changes in markups, the product mix, and product quality (de Loecker
and Goldberg 2014). This is problematic for identifying learning-by-exporting since the interna-
tional trade literature suggests all three are likely to change with exporting.1 While quantity-based
total factor productivity measures (TFPQ) solve problems related to changing markups, standard
datasets do not provide the level of detail required to account for changes in product specifi-
cations or quality.2 Hence, if trade causes firms to change along these dimensions, measured
improvements in quantity-based productivity measures may simply reflect movements along the
PPF, rather than outward shifts of the PPF.
    This paper conducts a randomized control trial (RCT) on rug manufacturers in Egypt to exam-
ine how exporting affects profits and productivity. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to
generate exogenous firm-level variation in exporting. As explained in detail below, we achieved
this through an intervention that reduced matching frictions between foreign buyers and a ran-
dom subset of Egyptian firms. Using this experimental variation, we uncover if and how an
    1 See Edmond et al. (2015), Bernard et al. (2011), and Fajgelbaum et al. (2011) for examples of models where trade

affects markups, the product mix and product quality, respectively.
    2 One solution is to restrict attention to homogenous goods, such as concrete, block ice or gasoline (e.g. Foster et al.,

2008). This is unappealing for the study of learning-by-exporting since there is likely to be less scope for learning and
there are fewer trading frictions in homogenous goods industries.


                                                             1
economic primitive—firm productivity—responds to exporting.
   The random assignment into exporting directly addresses the first of the two challenges de-
tailed above: selection of firms into exporting. We provided a subset of firms with the opportunity
to export handmade carpets to high-income markets. To provide this opportunity, we partnered
with a US-based non-governmental organization (NGO) and an Egyptian intermediary to secure
export orders from foreign buyers through trade fairs and direct marketing channels. With or-
ders in hand, we surveyed a sample of several hundred small rug manufacturers located in Fowa,
Egypt. A random subsample of these firms was provided with an initial opportunity to fill the or-
ders by producing 110m2 of rugs (approximately 11 weeks of work). As in a standard buyer-seller
relationship, firms were offered subsequent orders provided they were able to fulfill the initial or-
ders to the satisfaction of the buyer and intermediary. Prior to our study, only a limited number of
firms had ever knowingly exported their products. Hence, we interpret our experimental design
as providing non-exporting firms with the opportunity to sell to high-income markets.
   To address the second challenge in identifying the impact of exporting—measurement—we
tracked performance measures through periodic surveys of both treatment firms (those who re-
ceived the opportunity to export) and control firms (those who received no such opportunity). Our
production-line level data allow us to record not just quantity data, but also detailed specifications
for the rugs being produced at the time of each survey round. These specifications include prod-
uct categories within the flatweave-rug segment and attributes, such as the thread count, which
a buyer chooses when the order is placed. This level of detail allows us to control for changes in
the product mix due to exporting with much more accuracy than is possible in typical datasets
(e.g. using HS-10 product codes in trade datasets). To further guarantee we are not conflating
changes in productivity with changes in the product mix, at the end of the study all firms were
paid to make an identical domestic-market rug using the same inputs and equipment. To analyze
changes in product quality with exporting, we collect direct measures of product quality along
11 dimensions from a skilled quality assessor who visited each firm in each survey round. These
quality measures capture a combination of both specifications and hard-to-codify attributes that
depend on the technical skill of the firm, such as how flat the rug lies on the floor or how sharp
the corners are. Finally, we collect data on information flows between buyers, the intermediary
and producers that include transcripts of buyer feedback and the content of discussions between
the intermediary and the producers. Taken together, these data allow us to address directly the
measurement challenges noted above.
   Thanks to the randomization procedure, the causal effects of exporting are identified by com-
paring mean outcomes between treatment and control firms. We find that the opportunity to
export raises the overall performance of firms as measured by profits—treatment firms report 16-
26 percent higher profits relative to control firms. The substantial increase in profits is perhaps not
surprising given that firms were provided with a positive demand shock, but is interesting given
the more moderate profit impacts the literature has found when exploring supply-side interven-
tions such as credit access (Banerjee, 2013).


                                                  2
   The primary focus of this paper is to understand the mechanisms driving the profit increases.
Despite increases in output prices and labor hours, we observe a decline in total output (m2 of rugs
produced) among treatment firms. These findings suggest that buyers from high-income countries
demand higher-quality rugs that take longer to produce. Indeed, our quality assessments show
that the rugs produced by treatment firms score significantly higher along virtually every quality
dimension. At the same time, “unadjusted” productivity measures—those that do not control for
rug specifications and quality (e.g. output per hour)—fall by 24-28 percent among treatment firms.
   A simple theoretical framework shows that the quality upgrading we find is consistent with
two distinct mechanisms that have not been disentangled in the literature to date. The first mech-
anism amounts to a movement along the PPF. We posit that the output per unit input of a firm
depends on both rug specifications and an output efficiency parameter χ a ; high-specification rugs
take longer to weave and, ceteris paribus, firms with higher χ a produce more output per unit input.
Quality also depends on rug specifications and a quality efficiency parameter, χq , and is increas-
ing in both. The export opportunity exposes firms to buyers in high-income markets, and these
buyers are willing to pay more for quality than domestic buyers. As long as firms find it profitable
to do so, they will raise specifications, and hence improve quality. Under this first mechanism,
firms already know how to manufacture high-quality rugs and the opportunity to export simply
induces a movement along the PPF. That is, there is no change in either efficiency parameter.
   A second mechanism involves an increase in the efficiency parameters induced by exporting:
learning-by-exporting. This learning can come about through transfers of knowledge from buyers
to producers, or from learning-by-doing if such learning would not have happened without ex-
porting (a distinction we return to). Learning-by-exporting is an outward shift of the PPF which
can occur either by raising χ a (producing more output per input conditional on specifications) or
raising χq (producing higher quality conditional on specifications). When these increases in effi-
ciency are biased towards the production of high-quality rugs, both rug quality and profits will
rise. Of course, the two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, but the presence of learning-by-
exporting is important because it implies larger gains from trade.
   We present five pieces of evidence to show that the improvements in performance come, at
least in part, through learning-by-exporting. The first is that both quality and productivity rise af-
ter adjusting for product specifications (recall that “unadjusted” productivity falls). If firms only
moved along the PPF, specification-adjusted quality and productivity would remain constant. Sec-
ond, to ensure specifications were fully controlled for, at the end of our experiment we asked all
firms to manufacture an identical-specification rug for the domestic market using identical inputs
and a common loom in a workshop that we leased (a “quality lab”). The rugs that treatment firms
produce received higher scores along every quality metric and were more accurate in terms of
the desired size and weight; moreover, treatment firms do not take longer to produce these rugs
despite their higher levels of quality. Third, we explore the evolution of quality and productivity
over time. Inconsistent with a movement along the PPF, where quality and productivity should
immediately jump and then stay fixed, we document learning curves for both. Fourth, we draw


                                                  3
on correspondences between foreign buyers and the intermediary, as well as a log book of discus-
sions between the intermediary and producers, to document that our results come, in part, from
knowledge flows. In particular, we show that treatment firms improve quality most along the par-
ticular quality dimensions discussed during meetings between the intermediary and the producer,
and that the vast majority of these discussions were about specific weaving techniques to improve
quality. This, coupled with more anecdotal reports of knowledge passed from foreign buyers to
the intermediary, suggests that the improvements in efficiency occur partly through knowledge
transfers from intermediaries and foreign buyers. Fifth, we rule out investment explanations by
showing that treatment firms make no monetary or time investments in upgrading; nor do they
pay, even implicitly, for the knowledge they receive from the intermediary. Taken together, the
evidence strongly supports the presence of learning-by-exporting.
    As with any industry- or country-specific study, it is important to acknowledge issues relating
to external validity. In terms of the context of our study, the firms in our sample are small—
typically having only one full-time employee—and production is not automated. Hence, our
study has little to say about learning-by-exporting for large firms manufacturing complex prod-
ucts. Of course, it is precisely their small size that allows us to assemble a large sample necessary
for inference; and the fact that they manufacture products using the same technology allows us to
design more specific surveys and improves statistical power. The firms also export via an inter-
mediary, rather than directly, but indirect exporting is common for the Egyptian rug industry and
in other industries and countries.3
    In terms of the experiment itself, our treatment induces exporting by reducing matching fric-
tions between firms and sophisticated foreign buyers. Such frictions are of interest both for theo-
retical and policy reasons. As noted by Allen (2014), matching frictions comprise a sizable com-
ponent of trade frictions,4 while Lederman et al. (2010) note that reducing matching frictions for
small- and medium-sized firms (SMEs) is a key goal for export promotion agencies. That said, our
experiment does not reduce the trade frictions more typically studied in the trade literature such
as tariffs or transport costs. While ultimately an empirical question requiring further research, we
conjecture that exporting to high-income markets will generate similar learning for developing-
country SMEs however they are induced to export (whether by reducing tariffs, trade costs or
matching frictions).
    Two more caveats are necessary. Given the difficulties we document in generating orders and
the implicit labor costs of our time, it is unclear if it is efficient for our sample firms to pay the
fixed costs required to find sophisticated foreign buyers. The goal of this paper is not to carry
out a cost-benefit analysis of export facilitation programs, or to isolate market failures preventing
firms from exporting in the absence of assistance (both questions that would require an entirely
different experimental design involving a large number of NGO-led interventions). Instead, the
goal is to identify the presence of learning-by-exporting. Second, given the nature of our experi-
   3 World   Bank Enterprise Surveys (2006-2014) reveal that 36 percent of exporters across countries and sectors use an
intermediary (and 62 percent for exporting firms with 5 or fewer employees).
    4 Allen (2014) estimates that such frictions explain half of the overall variation in trade costs.



                                                           4
ment, we are unable to distinguish exporting from selling to sophisticated domestic buyers—i.e.
domestic buyers who demand high quality and possess knowledge about how to achieve such
quality. However, these buyers are scarce in developing countries, and as the literature on quality
upgrading we discuss below suggests, the presence of such buyers may be the most pronounced
difference between internal and external trade for developing-country firms.
    Our results relate to a number of papers that span the trade and development literatures. Most
directly, we contribute to a voluminous literature that seeks to identify the existence of learning-
by-exporting. The evidence from these studies is mixed5 , in part due to the severe selection and
measurement issues highlighted above. We directly confront selection through random assign-
ment; and directly confront measurement both by collecting very detailed data on the production
process and by setting up a quality lab that allows us to perfectly control for product specifica-
tions. In doing so, we follow Syverson (2011) and Bloom and Van Reenen (2010) who advocate
improving our understanding of productivity through more careful measurement.
    Our findings also relate to the literature on quality upgrading. Studies using country- or
product-level data show that product quality positively co-varies with export destination income-
per-capita (Schott 2004, Hallak 2006 and Hallak 2010); and firm-level studies suggest that export-
ing exposes firms in developing countries to sophisticated buyers who demand higher quality.6
Unlike much of this literature that must infer quality from price data or certifications, or through
structural models that back out quality from prices and quantities, we collect direct measures of
quality.7 In addition, the combination of our randomization methodology, the quality lab and the
rich survey data allow us to contribute to this literature by showing quality upgrading occurs, at
least in part, through improvements in technical efficiency rather than through movements along
the PPF alone.
    Finally, although the use of RCTs is novel in the trade literature, the methodology has been
used to understand supply constraints in firms (e.g. de Mel et al., 2008, 2010, 2014 and Bloom
et al. 2013 explore credit constraints, input market frictions and managerial constraints). We com-
plement this literature by providing the first experimental evidence for the importance of demand
constraints and the effects of relaxing those constraints through expanding market access.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the research setting. Section 3
explains our experimental intervention and introduces the data. Section 4 examines the impact on
profits and Section 5 decomposes the profit changes. Section 6 presents a theoretical framework
that then guides our five step approach to detecting learning-by-exporting. Section 7 concludes.
   5 For  example, Clerides et al. (1998) and Bernard and Jensen (1999) conclude that firms self-select into export
markets. In contrast, several other papers using alternative approaches to deal with selection (e.g. matching estimators
or instrumental variables) find some support for the learning hypothesis; see de Loecker (2007), Park et al. (2010),
Marin and Voigtlander (2013) and de Loecker (2013). Keller (2004), Wagner (2007) and Harrison and Rodriguez-Clare
(2010) survey the literature.
    6 For example, see Verhoogen (2008), Manova and Zhang (2012), Crozet et al. (2012), Brambilla et al. (2012), Hallak

and Sivadasan (2013), and Bastos et al. (2014). The one exception is Marin and Voigtlander (2013), who find that rather
than quality rising, marginal costs decline because Columbian firms make investments to lower marginal costs of
production at the same time as they enter export markets.
    7 Papers that infer quality in these ways include Verhoogen (2008), Manova and Zhang (2012), Khandelwal (2010),

Hallak and Schott (2011), and Feenstra and Romalis (2014).


                                                           5
2     Research Setting
2.1     Finding a Viable Setting
      In order to carry out a randomized evaluation of the impact of exporting, we partnered with
Aid to Artisans (ATA), a U.S.-based NGO with a mission to create economic opportunities for pro-
ducers of handmade products in developing countries. Discussions began in October 2009, and
ATA had just received funding to implement a market-access program in Egypt.
      ATA’s program in Egypt followed their standard protocol for generating successful export-
ing relationships between small-scale developing-country producers and high-income markets.
First, ATA explores the country in question for products that would both appeal to consumers
in high-income markets and be priced competitively. Once candidate products are found, ATA
identifies a lead intermediary based in the developing country. The lead intermediary assists in
finding small-scale producers to manufacture the products, is the conduit for passing information
and orders between the producers and the buyers, and handles the export logistics required to
ship the products to importers or retailers abroad. ATA then works closely with the intermedi-
ary to design and market appealing products. Working through a lead intermediary firm, rather
than matching individual producers directly with foreign buyers, is an important aspect of ATA’s
model. By matching local intermediaries with foreign buyers, the intermediaries can aggregate
orders to spread the fixed costs of exporting across many small producers. The ultimate objective
is to foster self-sustaining relationships whereby ATA can pull out and the local intermediaries
maintain or even expand their export sales.
      The process of exporting via an intermediary is common for handmade products and among
small firms more generally. For example, Chinese customs data show that 52 percent of Chinese
exports in the specific HS code that the rugs in our study are classified under—HS 570231 (“Car-
pets and other textile floor coverings, wool”)—go through intermediaries (compared to 20 percent
of overall Chinese exports).8 Across sectors, World Bank Enterprise Survey data reveal that 62 per-
cent of exporters with 5 or fewer employees export their products through intermediaries.
      Alongside ATA, we searched for viable Egyptian products and identified handmade carpets
from Fowa as having potential. In terms of the industry choice, both the handmade craft indus-
try and the rug industry are large and important sources of employment in Egypt, as well as in
many other developing economies (see Online Appendix B). Turning to the location, Fowa is a
peri-urban town with a population of 65,000 located two hours southeast of Alexandria.9 The
town is well known for its carpet cluster which contains hundreds of small firms that use wooden
foot-treadle looms to manufacture flat-weave rugs—a product in which Egypt has a strong his-
torical reputation. Crucially, we also identified a local firm, Hamis Carpets, to serve as the lead
intermediary. Hamis is the largest intermediary in Fowa and accounts for around 20 percent of the
market. At the time, Hamis earned 70 percent of its sales in the domestic market, mostly selling
      8 These
           numbers come from the data described by Ahn et al. (2011) who show that smaller firms use intermediaries
in order to avoid large fixed costs associated with directly exporting. The need for such intermediation between
suppliers and buyers has also been noted by Rauch (1999) and Feenstra and Hanson (2004).
    9 Average income per capita in the governorate is $3,600, well below the national average of $6,500 (PPP-adjusted).



                                                          6
to distributors and retailers in Cairo, Alexandria and Luxor.
      The firms in Fowa typically consist of a single owner who operates out of a rented space or
sometimes his (all producers in our sample are men) home. Family members or hired labor assist
with setting up the loom and the finishing stage. The process of producing rugs is standardized
across firms. The two key inputs beyond the loom and labor are warp thread—wool or cotton
thread that spans the length of the rug and is not visible on the final rug but is necessary to hold
the rug together and weft thread—the colorful threads weaved between the warp threads using a
shuttle. Online Appendix C provides additional details regarding the production process.
      Firms self-identify as specialists in one of four flat-weave rug types: duble (the focus of this
paper), tups, kasaees and goublan.10 The average duble rug destined for domestic markets is sold
by firms for LE42.5 (about $7 at the prevailing exchange rate)11 and requires 5.9 hours of labor, per
m2 . After accounting for input costs, hourly wages are roughly LE3 ($0.48).
      Within a particular rug type, quality can vary substantially. There are two determinants of
quality. First, higher quality is associated with more demanding specifications. Specifications are
codifiable attributes of the rug that are typically chosen by the buyer; for example, the number of
colors, the thread count or the type of input thread. Figure 1 shows one such specification sheet
from a foreign buyer in our experiment. Second, higher quality is associated with better weaving
technique. For example, how flat the rug lies on a hard surface is determined by how skillfully the
warp and weft thread are installed on the loom, and whether the threads are held correctly while
weaving. Similarly, how well defined the corners are, how accurately the design was followed,
and whether the rug adheres to the desired size specifications depend on weaving skill. These
attributes of the rug are both difficult to codify and depend on the skill of the firm.
2.2    Generating Export Orders
      It took the combination of ATA and Hamis more than two years to generate sustained export
orders from clients in high-income countries. Generating sustained orders was not guaranteed.
The textile market is competitive and conversations with ATA’s staff revealed that only 1 in 7
matches lead beyond trial orders. This is consistent with Eaton et al. (2013) who estimate that only
1 in 5 importer-exporter matches result in successful business relationships.
      ATA first brought the CEO of Hamis to the US for a training course that covered marketing
and distribution. At the same time, ATA hired an Italian consultant to design rug samples. Hamis
was then provided with marketing support—both by displaying these samples at various inter-
national gift fairs and by directly introducing Hamis to foreign importers or retailers through a
US-based rug intermediary.12 Hamis and potential foreign buyers would discuss pricing, delivery
   10 Duble  and tups rugs are the most common; kasaees rugs are the cheapest and woven from rags; goublan rugs are
the most expensive and are works of art hung on walls. See Figure C.1 for examples.
    11 As discussed below, there are two baseline surveys that were run in July 2011 and February 2013. The exchange

rate on July 1, 2011 was 5.94 Egyptian pounds (LE) to 1 U.S. dollar. The exchange rate on February 1, 2013 was LE 6.68.
We will apply an average exchange rate of 6.31 throughout the paper.
    12 ATA’s grant expired and in September 2012 it formally ended its involvement in this project and closed its Cairo

office. However, Hamis Carpets agreed to continue participating in the research experiment after ATA exited for
several reasons. First, we sponsored the CEO’s visit to the New York International Gift Fair in January 2013. Second, we


                                                           7
time, and product specifications (design, colors, materials, and so forth; recall Figure 1 provides
an example of how these specifications are codified after these discussions). Hamis would then
organize the production of sample orders, either from its in-house weavers or from one of the
treatment firms in our sample.13
      The majority of rugs demanded by foreign buyers are duble rugs, although one client ordered
kasaees rugs. There have been no orders for goublan rugs, even though the local market in Egypt
perceives these rugs to require the most skilled weaving techniques; the painting-like style of gou-
blan rugs is unlikely to appeal to buyers in high-income countries (see Figure C.1 for an example).
Likewise, domestic-style duble rugs did not attract interest from abroad. Instead, it appears that
foreign buyers prefer “modern” designs, as illustrated in Figure 2.14
      After one-and-a-half years of searching, in June 2012 Hamis Carpets secured its first large ex-
port order (3,640m2 ) from a German buyer. As of June 2014, multiple buyers continue to place
large, regular orders. Figure 3 reports that cumulative export production between December 2010
and June 2014 (the end of our experiment) has totaled 33,227m2 , resulting in cumulative payments
to the producers of LE982,351 ($155,682).15 As described in the next section, these orders were en-
tirely sourced from our treatment firms, which forms the basis of our experiment.

3     The Experiment
3.1    Experimental Design
      We designed the following export-market-access intervention. We drew a sample of small rug-
producers (described in more detail in the next section). The firms were divided into two groups,
treatment and control. As described above, the local intermediary, Hamis Carpets, secured export
orders with ATA’s marketing assistance. Treatment firms were then visited by a representative
of Hamis Carpets and provided the opportunity to fill an initial export order. More precisely,
Hamis Carpets showed them the rug design, explained that the carpet would be exported to a
high-income country, and offered them an order of 110m2 which translates to about 11 weeks of
work. The 110m2 was chosen by trading off the desire to have a reasonable sized initial order
and the need to have enough orders to treat the firms. Hamis was free to choose the price offered
to the producers based on the specifications of the rugs (we analyze prices below). To ensure
all rug orders were consistent across producers, Hamis provided the input thread and two loom
components that are design-specific, the reed and the heddle (Online Appendix C describe these
components).16 At the same time, as is typical in buyer-producer relationships, Hamis would dis-
provided a quarter of the capital ($7,000) to finance a sample order for a new client which was ultimately unsuccessful.
Third, we provided $500 a month to offset costs of participating in the experiment (conducting rug quality surveys,
filling out order books etc.). Finally, the CEO believes that showing how exporting improves the livelihoods of the
local population will be good for promoting Fowa’s weaving industry.
     13 Throughout the project, Hamis carpets has employed a small number of workers who work on its premises

producing samples and orders outside this research project.
     14 One rug style produced by our sample firms retailed for $1,400 in a high-end U.S. furniture chain.
     15 The revenues received by the intermediary from these orders were significantly larger. As shown in Table E.2 and

explained further below, Hamis reports applying a 33 percent markup on export orders after paying for materials.
     16 It is standard practice in Fowa for intermediaries to provide design-specific reeds and heddles, and the cost to the

intermediary does not depend on the design.


                                                             8
cuss the technical aspects of the specific rug order and answer any questions the firm may have.
Firms would deliver rugs to Hamis with payment upon delivery.
      As further export orders were generated, we tried to mimic a normal buyer-seller relationship
as closely as possible. Hamis was allowed to continue to place orders with treatment firms but
was not bound to make subsequent purchases from firms whose quality was below par or who
could not deliver on time.17 (And firms were informed of this arrangement.) In other words,
the experiment protocol simply required Hamis to offer an initial order to the treatment firms. In
contrast, the control firms were not contacted by Hamis Carpets about an initial order, and Hamis
Carpets was forbidden from sourcing from them through the duration of the experiment.18 The
experimental protocol is described in more detail in Online Appendix D.1.
      As we show later, very few firms had ever knowingly exported at baseline. Thus, the inter-
vention provided treatment firms with the opportunity to produce rugs for the export market.
Comparing outcomes between treatment and control firms allows us to identify the causal effects
of being provided with such an opportunity.19
      An alternative experiment would be to provide our control firms with a similar quantity of rug
orders but from domestic rather than foreign sources. We did not pursue this approach for reasons
both theoretical and practical. Trade models typically model exporting as a demand shock (e.g.
Krugman 1979, Melitz 2003), sometimes with features distinct from domestic demand shocks. In-
creasing demand is also the primary motivation for many export promotion policies (e.g. sending
trade delegations or analyzing opportunities for domestic firms in foreign markets). Therefore, to
assess the impacts of exporting, it is natural to include the increased demand it brings. In terms of
the practical limitations, if we were to provide equally-sized initial domestic orders, it is unclear
on what dimension they should be equal given the different profit margins and hours required per
rug. And then it would have been almost impossible to match subsequent foreign and domestic
orders over time, not least because of the fluctuations in the Egyptian economy that would have
made it extremely difficult to obtain $155,682 of firm orders from new domestic sources.
3.2    Sample Details and Takeup
      To obtain the sample of firms, we carried out a recruitment drive in Fowa in July 2011. To
be eligible, the firm had to have fewer than 5 employees, work on their own account (meaning
    17 On a more practical note, it would also have been infeasible to demand that Hamis continue to work with a firm

that was clearly not able to produce at an acceptable standard. Hamis’ foreign buyers are demanding and would not
accept subpar rugs.
    18 A project coordinator and Fowa-based survey team ensured that the protocols were followed. However, one

control firm was incorrectly treated due to an error by Hamis. In the empirical analysis we make the most conservative
assumption and keep this firm in the control group.
    19 Although the initial order is random, subsequent orders are not. Hence, treatment effects are potentially heteroge-

nous if some firms are better able to take advantage of the initial opportunity than others. If there was a constraint on
the total export orders, better firms may receive subsequent orders at the expense of worse firms. Under the reasonable
assumption that learning is concave in export orders (an assumption supported by the learning curves we estimate
below), this will lead us to underestimate the impacts of the experiment compared to a setting with unconstrained
orders. To mitigate this concern, when admitting more firms into the sample once we had generated sustained orders
in July 2012 (see Section 3.2), we restricted the size of the treatment group to ensure that constraints on offering orders
to all treatment firms would not be binding.


                                                            9
that they bought their own inputs when an order required), and never previously worked with
Hamis. The recruitment drive generated a sample 303 firms that specialized in one of the four rug
types described in Section 2.1.20 Anticipating that we would not secure orders for every type of
rug, we stratified the sample on the type of rug produced and the loom size (which determines
the maximum width of rug that can be produced). Within each stratum we randomized firms into
treatment and control using a random number generator with strata containing an odd number
of firms assigned one additional control firm. For reasons that will become clear momentarily, we
refer to these 303 firms as “Sample 1”. The first two rows of columns 1-4 of Table 1 show the total
number of firms by rug type and treatment status.
    It proved difficult to secure sufficient export orders to treat every firm in the treatment group
with an 110m2 initial order. As detailed in Section 2.2, we were only successful in generating large
and sustained orders for one of the four rug types, duble rugs, and even then only one and a half
years after the baseline survey. For this reason, we were only able to offer firms the opportunity to
produce duble rugs and we could only offer each firm multiple smaller orders of 10-20m2 spread
out over many months instead of the full 110m2 order in one go. This resulted in very low takeup
(16 percent) among specialized producers of the three non-duble rug types (firms not taking up
cited an unwillingness to switch rug types; for a more detailed discussion, see Online Appendix
D).21 Even among the 79 specialist duble producers, only 14 of the 39 treated firms firms took up.
The firms not taking up cited an unwillingness to jeopardize their existing dealer relationships for
the small 10-20m2 order sizes we were able to offer at the time.
    Once large and sustained export orders for duble rugs arrived in June 2012, it was feasible to
offer the full 110m2 initial order in one go. Given the opportunity to implement the experimental
design we originally intended, we asked our surveyors to locate every remaining duble firm in
town that satisfied our sample criteria (i.e. less than 5 employees, works on own account, and
never worked with Hamis). We found 140 additional duble firms in this manner which we refer
to as “Sample 2”. We stratified on loom size as before, and used a random number generator to
select 35 firms for the treatment group (with the number of treated firms determined by Hamis’
capacity constraints). Consistent with the claim that takeup in Sample 1 was low due to the small
order sizes, column 5 of Table 1 shows that 32 of the 35 treated Sample 2 firms took up when
offered the full 110m2 initial order in one go. All of the duble firms in both Sample 1 and Sample
2 that took up the opportunity were “successful” in the sense that they both delivered the 110m2
that constituted the initial order and then received subsequent orders from Hamis.
    Given that we only secured large and sustained export orders for duble rugs and that very few
non-duble firms were willing to manufacture this rug type, we were essentially unable to treat the

   20 We  hired a local NGO to go street by street looking for rug-making firms in homes and workshops. Firms were
asked about the number of employees, type of rugs being produced, width of loom and whether they would be willing
to be part of a research experiment on exporting in the rug industry. We stopped the recruitment drive when the NGO
had identified 300 firms. As there are far more than 300 rug-making firms in Fowa, the first recruitment drive provided
us with a sample of firms in central areas of Fowa that were operating and observable at the time of recruitment.
    21 We were able to offer the 19 treated kasaees firms initial orders for kasaees rugs, but we were unable to secure

follow-up orders for the 5 firms who took up.


                                                          10
non-duble strata and so exclude them from our analysis. To be clear, if the focus of this paper was
to simply evaluate an export-market-access program, it would be important to understand why
the intervention only generated sustained exports for one of the four products (and to answer that
question, our randomization would have to be over many products not many firms). Instead,
we use the random variation our experiment generates to investigate a long-standing question in
international trade: does exporting improve firm productivity?
      For the analysis in the rest of the paper, we combine the firms in the duble strata from Sample
1 with the firms in Sample 2—who are exclusively duble producers—to form the Joint Sample of
219 firms (74 in treatment, 47 of which took up). This is essentially all the duble producers in Fowa
willing to identify themselves to our surveyors (minus ten firms who refused to participate). By
focusing on the Joint Sample instead of only Sample 2 (the sample that received the treatment
closest to the one we initially intended) we mitigate internal validity concerns arising from unob-
servable differences between the two samples. For completeness, Online Appendix F presents the
results for duble firms in the two samples separately,22 as well as results for the non-duble strata.
3.3    Data
      We collected multiple rounds of data at around 4-month intervals. In total, Sample 1 was inter-
viewed seven times and Sample 2 four times. The baseline round occurred before treatment firms
were provided with the opportunity to export and included questions on: (a) firm production; (b)
rug quality; and (c) household and demographic characteristics. We repeated this full survey for
follow-up round 5 of Sample 1 and follow-up round 3 of Sample 2. In all other follow-up rounds
we administered an abbreviated survey on firm production and rug quality. The survey timeline
is shown in Table 2.23
      The production module records production activity for the month preceding the survey inter-
view. All nominal variables are converted to real values using the official Egyptian CPI. We collect
measures of profits, revenues, expenses, output quantity and prices, input quantity and prices,
total labor hours worked, and the specifications of the rugs produced that month. These specifi-
cations include: (1) the type of rug being produced; (2) how difficult the rug is to make rated on
a 1-5 scale by a master artisan accompanying the surveyors (see below); (3) the amount of weft
thread used per m2 of the rug (thread count); (4) the type of weft thread used (e.g. Egyptian wool,
cotton, etc.); (5) the number of colors used in the rug; and (6) which segment of the market the rug
is aimed at as reported by the master artisan (normal, mid, or high).
   22 Itis important to note that although the two samples look very similar in terms of characteristics (see Table F.1),
Sample 1 received a fundamentally different treatment—a treatment of multiple smaller export orders spread over
time—from Sample 2. Nevertheless, other than the lower take up, results are similar across the two samples. Out of 43
comparisons of treatment-on-the-treated coefficients between the two samples, three are significantly different at the
10 percent level and one is significant at the 5 percent level (in line with the number of Type 1 errors we would expect).
    23 We hired an Egyptian survey company to conduct the baseline survey on Sample 1. The company trained a new

enumerator who was responsible for the first follow-up on Sample 1. Unfortunately, we discovered that this enumerator
did not actually interview all of the firms and entered in fake data for some, so we discard this round. We immediately
fired the enumerator and hired new employees in January 2012 who conducted all subsequent surveys. We managed
these employees directly and implemented a stricter auditing procedure as well as back checks using external evalua-
tors to ensure data integrity. We have no reason to believe that there were problems with the subsequent data collection.


                                                           11
      The quality module records the quality of the rugs being produced by firms at the time of the
survey. Rug quality is assessed by a master artisan under our employ who is a well-known and
respected member of the rug community in Fowa. Quality was measured along 11 dimensions:
(1) corners; (2) waviness; (3) weight; (4) touch; (5) packedness; (6) warp thread tightness; (7) firm-
ness; (8) design accuracy; (9) warp thread packedness; (10) inputs; and (11) loom.24 The quality
along each dimension is scored on a 1 to 5 scale, with higher numbers denoting higher quality.
These quality metrics capture differences across rugs that are vertical in nature; for example, at
equal prices, both foreign and domestic consumers would prefer a flatter-lying rug or a more ac-
curate design. As discussed in Section 2.1, higher quality scores reflect a combination of better
specifications and greater weaving skill.
      For takeup firms, a second quality module is available at higher frequency. These firms de-
liver rugs to Hamis on a weekly basis. Upon receiving each batch of rugs, Hamis records the size
accuracy, design accuracy, packedness, and weight accuracy.
      We collected a third set of quality and productivity measures in June 2014 by asking firms
to manufacture an identical domestic rug using identical inputs and a common loom in a work
space we had rented (our quality lab, see Section 6.3 for further details). Production was timed
and upon completion the rugs were measured, anonymized and then sent to be scored along the
same quality dimensions by both the master artisan and a Professor of Handicraft Science from
Domietta University.
      Finally, we collect information on knowledge flows—the number of visits Hamis made to firms
and what was discussed during each visit—that we discuss in Section 6.5.
3.4    Summary Statistics
      Table 3 shows baseline balance between the treatment and control groups. The table reports
regressions of each variable on a treatment dummy and strata fixed effects, and reports the con-
stant (the mean of the control firms) and treatment coefficient (the difference between control and
treatment means). Panel A shows summary statistics for the household characteristics of the firm
owner. The mean age in the control group is around 51 years and, on average, firm owners have
slightly more than 37 years of experience working in the rug industry. Roughly 63 percent of firm
owners are illiterate. The average household size is 4.2 and the average total monthly household
income from all activities is LE1090 ($173).
      Panel B reports statistics from the rug business. Monthly profits from the rug business average
LE646 ($102) in the control group. Firms report 247 labor hours in the previous month, which
amounts to around 22 days of work at 11 hours per day. As noted earlier, firm sizes are small
    24 The Sample 1 baseline survey recorded 6 quality metrics to which we subsequently added 5 more metrics.

Corners captures the straightness of where the rug edges meet. Waviness captures how flat the rug lies when placed
on a hard surface. Weight captures how close the actual weight of the rug is to the intended weight. Touch reflects the
feel of the rug. Packedness measures how well the rug holds together (poorly packed rugs have small holes). Warp
thread tightness measures the tightness of the warp thread which helps determine how tightly held the weft thread
is. Firmness measures the firmness of the rug when held. Design accuracy captures how accurate the design is to the
intended pattern. Warp thread packedness measures how visible the warp thread is (it should not be visible at all).
Inputs measures the quality of the input threads. Loom measures the quality of the loom.


                                                          12
because this was an explicit criterion in choosing our sample: the average firm has just over one
worker. Total output per month is 50m2 and only about 12 percent of firms have ever knowingly
produced rugs for the export market. The final row of Panel B reports the average rug quality
across the 11 dimensions.
      Across both panels we find no statistical differences between treatment and control firms with
one exception: treatment firms report lower quality scores at baseline. The final row of Table 3
reports attrition across survey rounds (Table E.3 reports attrition by round). Attrition has been
relatively low with a non-response rate of approximately 11 percent per round which does not
vary across treatment and control groups, while attrition in the quality lab is similar at 14 percent
and balanced across groups.

4     Causal Impacts of Export-Market Access on Profits
4.1    Empirical Specifications
      The randomization methodology allows us to use a straightforward specification to assess the
impact of the export-market access on firm profits:
                                yit = α1 + β 1 Treatmenti + γ1 yi0 + δs + τt + ε it ,                                 (1)
where yit is the profit measure, Treatmenti is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if firm i is
in the treatment group, τt are time period fixed effects, δs are strata fixed effects and yi0 is the value
of the dependent variable at baseline.25 We are essentially combining all follow-up survey rounds
to increase precision, and we cluster standard errors at the firm level to take account of the fact
that errors may be correlated within firms. As (1) controls for the baseline value of the dependent
variable, we cannot include observations from the baseline survey in the regression.26 Since not
all firms who were offered the opportunity to export took up that offer, (1) is an intent-to-treat
(ITT) specification.
      We also present results from the treatment-on-the-treated specification (TOT) which scales up
the treatment effect to take account of the fact that not everyone took up the treatment:27
                                 yit = α2 + β 2 Takeupit + γ2 yi0 + δs + τt + νit ,                                   (2)
where Takeupit takes the value 1 if a firm took up the opportunity to export. This is a time-varying
measure that turns on when a firm first produces carpets for the intermediary and stays on sub-
   25 We note that any effects we find will be attenuated if there were spillovers to control firms. However, we find no

support for geographic spillovers between treatment and control firms (see Table E.4).
   26 Alternatively we could use all survey rounds, include firm fixed effects, and interact Treatment with a post-
                                                                                                          i
baseline dummy. We prefer a specification with baseline controls because if the dependent variable is measured with
noise and not strongly autocorrelated, as is the case for business profits (an autocorrelation of 0.33 among control
firms in our data), the fixed effects estimator will perform more poorly in an experimental study than the ANCOVA
estimator in (1); see McKenzie (2012). For comparison we also report the key results using firm fixed effects in Table E.5
and find that results are very similar. When the baseline value is missing for a firm, our specification drops that firm
from the regression, leading the number of observations to vary across estimates. In cases where the baseline value
is missing for an entire strata, we include the firm but code the missing value as zero (so it is swept out by the strata
fixed effects). We find no evidence that missing values at baseline are correlated with treatment when testing the eight
main outcomes of the paper (i.e. those in Table E.5).
   27 The TOT will be an upper bound if the firms who took up the intervention were the ones with most to gain from

exporting (although we find no evidence of selection into takeup based on observables).


                                                           13
sequently. Of course takeup is not random and may be correlated with unobservables, and so
we instrument Takeupit with the variable Treatmenti that is uncorrelated with the error (and the
baseline control) thanks to the randomization procedure.
      Before showing results on profits and other metrics, we first show that indeed the intervention
worked, in so far as treatment firms were more likely to manufacture rugs for export markets. To
do so, we replace yit with a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if a firm ever knowingly made
rugs for export. As shown in Table 4, being in treatment raises the probability of ever exporting
by 55 percentage points from a baseline of 13 percent. We also report the TOT specification, which
suggests even more dramatic increases.28
4.2    Profit Results
      Following de Mel et al. (2009)—who assess the performance a variety of methods to elicit prof-
its from small firms—we construct four profit measures. The first measure directly asks firm own-
ers to report profits from the previous month (excluding wage payments to themselves).29 This
is the measure most strongly advocated by de Mel et al. (2009) as it avoids error due to the tim-
ing mismatch between revenues and expenses. The second measure constructs profits from two
survey questions that ask firms to report their total revenues and total costs from the previous
month. The third measure constructs profits from the production modules that contain detailed
information on prices and quantities of inputs and outputs.30 The fourth measure, hypothetical
profit, is based on a question that asks firms how much profit they would earn from selling rugs
if they purchased a specific quantity of inputs.31
      The top panel of Table 5 shows the results of running specifications (1) and (2) on logged val-
ues of the four profit metrics, and for each we report the ITT and TOT. The first two columns
(1A and 1B) report the specifications using the (log) direct monthly profit measure. The ITT co-
efficient is 0.26 and significant at the 1 percent level, implying that the export treatment increases
monthly profits by approximately 26 percent. The TOT coefficient is, not surprisingly, larger at 42
percent and also statistically significant. Column 2 reports specifications using the profit measure
constructed from total revenues and costs in the previous month and Column 3 reports specifi-
cations using the profit measure constructed from prices and quantities. The ITTs are 21 and 19
percent, respectively, very similar to the direct profits results. This similarity suggests that any
timing mismatch between revenues and expenses is not severe in our setting where firms store
little inventory, and that rug inputs are not diverted to household consumption. Finally, we ex-
   28 Note that the ITT and TOT do not perfectly scale up by the takeup rates shown in Table 1 since a handful of firms
that eventually took up had not yet done so by the first follow-up rounds.
   29 Firms were asked: “What was the total income from the rug business last month after paying all expenses (inputs,

wages to weavers but excluding yourself). That is, what were your profits from this business last month?”
   30 This measure is valuable if there is less noise in recalling prices and quantities than total revenues and expenses.

This measure is also free of the concern that firms might use business expenses for household consumption (or use
business revenues to pay for household expenses) that may be an issue for the other two measures.
   31 We construct this measure by asking firms how much it would cost to purchase 25 kilograms of the thread they

used in the previous month, how long it would take to weave this output, and how much they would earn from selling
the output. Although not the realized profits of the firm, this measure alleviates potential concerns regarding the timing
of when revenues are earned and costs are incurred, and serves as a check against the other three profit measures.


                                                           14
amine the hypothetical profit measure in column 4. Although these estimates are slightly higher
(the ITT is 37 percent), it is reassuring that all four measures increase by economically and statisti-
cally significant amounts. We also note that the treatment effects reflect profits rising more among
treatment firms rather than profits falling among control firms; control firm profits increased in
real terms across baseline and post-baseline survey rounds (regressing log profits of control firms
on a post-baseline dummy yields a coefficient of 0.470 (s.e. of 0.190)).
    These regressions indicate that the export treatment causally increases measured profits by
between 19-37 percent. Of course, profits may have risen partly because firms increased their la-
bor hours. This is an issue for our profits measures since most firms are owner-operated and the
profit measures do not account for the implicit wages paid to the owner. If we focus on profits per
owner hour, these concerns are mitigated since the value of the owners’ time will be similar across
treatment and control due to the randomization.32 Therefore, the lower panel of Table 5 examines
profits per owner hour by dividing each profit variable by the total hours worked by the owner
(or other unpaid family members when recorded) in the previous month. Using the direct profit
per owner hour measure in columns 1A and 1B, we find that the ITT estimate is 20 percent and
again significant at the 1 percent level. This estimate is lower than the corresponding estimates for
profits which implies that owners of treatment firms worked more hours. The remaining columns
also show lower estimates. However, the basic message remains the same: the opportunity to ex-
port raised profits per owner hour by 16-25 percent. The differences between the panels suggests
that total owner hours increased by around 5 percent, a result we confirm in the next section when
we analyze labor hours.
    Before turning to mechanisms, and in particular whether or not these improvements in firm
performance occur through learning-by-exporting, we note that it is not surprising that provid-
ing firms with a demand shock increases profits. What is surprising is the magnitude of the effect.
Many supply-side interventions on similar samples of firms have had limited profit impacts. A re-
cent literature, surveyed by McKenzie and Woodruff (2013), has carried out impact evaluations of
business training programs for small firms. These programs had a statistically significant impact
on profits in only two out of nine studies that measured profits. Another popular supply-side
intervention is expanding access to credit. The literature on the impacts of credit on profits for
small firms also finds mixed results. For instance, de Mel et al. (2008) find returns to capital of
around 5 percent per month while Banerjee (2013) cites several credit interventions that produced
no statistically significant increases in profits. One possible interpretation of these mixed results
and our findings of substantial increases in profits is that supply-side interventions may only be
effective where there are no constraints on demand. Thus, demand-side interventions such as our
market-access program may be complementary to more-standard supply-side interventions.

   32 Of course this measure will still be misleading if owners of treatment firms increased their effort per hour worked.

We were unable to devise survey questions that could accurately capture worker effort, but we did ask about job
stress measured on a scale of 1 to 5. Reassuringly, when we regress job stress on log output per hour, treatment and
the interaction of the two (plus round and strata fixed effects), the coefficients are neither individually nor jointly
significant (F-stat of 1.40).


                                                           15
5     Sources of Profit Changes
5.1    Prices, Output, and Inputs
      This section explores the proximate sources of the increase in profits. To fix ideas consider the
following profit function for a firm:
                                       max π = px (l, k ) − wl − rk − F                                        (3)
                                        l,k

where p is the price a firm receives for one unit of rug. The quantity of rugs produced is x, w
is the wage paid for each hour of labor l, r is the rental rate on capital k, and F is a fixed cost of
production. Although we analyze inputs below, we do not include input costs in (3) since a large
majority of firms (91 percent) receive raw material inputs from their intermediary and hence do
not pay for these expenses.33
      Panel A of Table 6 uses our survey data to examine these various components of profits.
Columns 1A and 1B evaluate the impact of the intervention on the log output price. The ITT
specification indicates 43 percent increase in prices with the opportunity to export while the TOT
indicates a 78 percent increase. Thus, part of the profit increase from exporting is coming from
significantly higher prices per m2 . Columns 2A and 2B examine the impact of the opportunity to
export on the log total output weaved by the firm in the previous month (measured in m2 and un-
adjusted for product specifications). The ITT estimate is -26 percent while the TOT is -47 percent;
there is a large decline in output in treatment firms relative to control firms.
      Columns 3 to 5 document the impact of the intervention on firm scale, as captured by labor
and capital usage. Column 3 shows the log of total hours l worked by all employees in the firm
in the previous month. The ITT estimate indicates a labor increase of 5 percent and the TOT is 8
percent. This increase in labor hours comes on the intensive margin: as shown in column 4 there
is no change in the number of employees (inclusive of the owner). Since most firm owners are
the primary weavers, and helpers are often family members, we have very few observations of
the wage w that may also be responding to the opportunity to export. (We already showed that
profits per owner hour increase but this combines the shadow wage with firm profits). In contrast
to labor, we find no increase in capital usage k, as measured by the log number of active looms
in use (column 5). The fact that expansion occurs primarily along the intensive margin suggests
there may be large non-convexities associated with hiring additional workers, particularly since
an additional weaver is likely to need his own loom and requires owners to manage a full-time
employee for the first time.
      Finally, we turn to fixed costs F in columns 6A and 6B. We try to capture economies of scale
via a proxy for the length of the production run. Firms place a warp thread ball on the loom at
the beginning of a production run. A larger warp thread ball enables firms to amortize the costs
of re-stringing the loom over more units. We find that the size of the warp thread ball increases
by 15 percent in the treatment group, indicating that the opportunity to export lowers fixed costs

    33 For
         the subset of firms that do purchase inputs themselves, we subtract the prices of the warp and weft thread
inputs from p to make these prices comparable across all firms.


                                                        16
through longer production runs that require less frequent re-stringing.
      Panel B of Table 6 examines input prices and quantities. As noted above, most firms do not
purchase the material inputs, but we did ask these firms to estimate the price of the weft and warp
thread inputs. The first two columns use these data to explore the impact of the intervention on
thread prices. Reported weft thread prices increase 20 percent. In contrast, there is no evidence
that warp thread prices are higher among treatment firms. These two findings are sensible given
the production technology. The warp thread is critical to maintain the rug structure but is not ob-
servable in the finished rug. Meanwhile, the weft thread is observable and can vary by both mate-
rial type (cotton, wool, polyester, etc.), material grade (e.g. Egyptian wool or New Zealand wool)
and thickness. Note that although columns 3-4 suggest that input quantities (measured in grams)
do not increase with the opportunity to export, the output decline implies that the rugs produced
by treatment firms use more material inputs and are heavier than those produced by control firms.
      The increases in prices, labor input usage and the length of production runs appear consistent
with two workhorse models used to study international trade. Comparative advantage models,
such as the Ricardian model, would predict that export prices are higher for products that Egypt
has a comparative advantage in (and it is reasonable to think handmade flat-weave rugs are such
a product). In this framework, the opportunity to export would also raise the quantity of labor
being used in rug production, as we find. Similarly, our findings on scale and fixed costs are con-
sistent with a standard scale effects story whereby exporting enables firms to reach larger markets
and spread fixed costs over more units (e.g. Krugman 1979). However, the reduction in output is
not consistent with either of these frameworks. The results are also not consistent with exporting
simply being a generic demand shock (which would also yield an increase in output).
      The reductions in output accompanied by rising output (and input) prices point to export-
induced quality upgrading. If high-quality rugs require more labor inputs, rug output can fall
alongside increasing revenues and input usage. If high-quality rugs also require more expensive
inputs (as shown by Kugler and Verhoogen 2012), the rise in material input prices provides further
evidence of quality-upgrading. In the next subsection we confirm this conjecture.
5.2    Quality and Unadjusted Productivity Measures
      We first draw on the detailed quality metrics described in Section 3.3 to confirm that treatment
firms are indeed manufacturing higher quality products. We have 11 different quality metrics that
are ranked on a 1-5 scale with 5 being the best for that dimension of quality.
      Table 7 presents the quality results. Instead of implementing specifications (1) and (2) sepa-
rately for each quality metric, we regress a stack of all 11 metrics on interactions of the treatment
(or takeup for the TOT) with indicator variables for each quality metric. We also include inter-
actions of the quality-metric indicators with baseline values, strata fixed effects and round fixed
effects. The resulting coefficients are identical to those from running separate regressions for each
quality metric, but run this way we can cluster standard errors by firm to account for any firm-
level correlations within quality metrics across time or across quality metrics within a period.
      For 10 of the 11 quality metrics, quality is significantly higher among treatment firms (all at the


                                                    17
1 percent level). The one exception is loom quality. The lack of a treatment effect on loom quality
is consistent with our understanding of the technology for rug production. Although the loom
size determines the maximum rug width, it matters little for rug quality.
      Since it is difficult to parse all 11 quality metrics separately, Panel B of Table 7 restricts the co-
efficients on the treatment dummy to be identical across all 11 quality metrics (recall they were all
run in a single stacked regression).34 Given the previous results, it is not surprising that we obtain
positive and statistically significant ITT and TOT estimates when we do this. On average, quality
(on a scale of 1 to 5) is 0.79 points higher among treatment firms. These are substantial increases
in quality given a standard deviation of quality of 0.55 at baseline.
      We also examine two simple productivity measures, measures that do not adjust for changes
in product specifications or quality: unadjusted output per labor hour and unadjusted total factor
productivity (TFP). Unadjusted output per labor hour comes from firms’ responses to the ques-
tion: “how long does it take you to make 1m2 ?”35 The second measure also accounts for capital
inputs (although recall there is limited variation in capital across firms with 92 percent of firms
using only one loom).36 Specifically, unadjusted TFP is equal to the residual from an estimated
Cobb-Douglas production function that includes both labor and capital (see Appendix A for a full
description of the procedure). Table 8 shows that both of these productivity measures fall in treat-
ment relative to control. Looking at the ITTs, unadjusted output per hour is 24 percent lower and
the unadjusted TFP is 28 percent lower, with even larger TOT effects.
5.3    Quality-Upgrading Mechanisms
      The finding that quality rises and unadjusted productivity falls alongside rising profits is con-
sistent with two different quality-upgrading mechanisms, and the distinction is important for
understanding how exporting improves firm performance. In the first mechanism, firms always
knew how to manufacture the high-quality rugs demanded by rich-country buyers. If foreign
buyers pay higher prices, but particularly so for high-quality products, firms will upgrade quality
as long as the returns offset any costs (e.g. more expensive inputs or more labor inputs). This is a
movement along the PPF. Under this mechanism, the export opportunity raises the relative price
of high-quality rugs and profit-maximizing firms respond by producing rugs with specifications
associated with high-quality. What does not change through this mechanism is technical efficiency.
      While it is challenging to provide a direct mapping between profit margins and quality levels,
we provide some suggestive evidence for this phenomenon by analyzing Hamis’ (self-reported)
cost structure for domestic and foreign orders. Hamis reports 9 percent profit margins on (lower-
quality) domestic orders and substantially higher margins of 33 percent on (higher-quality) foreign
orders. (The full cost structure is broken down in Table E.2). Although these are Hamis’ profit mar-

    34 This method is similar to estimating the impact of treatment on a standardized index of quality (e.g. Kling et al.

2007), but we prefer our method as it produces more conservative estimates in our data (i.e. higher standard errors).
    35 Another way to measure output per hour is to divide total output by total hours worked in the month. Related

to the discussion of the profit measures above, we believe the direct measure is less noisy. We find virtually identical
results using the alternative measure (available on request).
    36 Looms do vary by size but we control for loom sizes through strata fixed effects in the analysis below.



                                                           18
gins, not the firms, if there is profit sharing there would be a similar relationship between profit
margins and rug quality for producers.
      A second mechanism is learning-by-exporting, which we follow the literature and define as an
export-induced change in technical efficiency (Clerides et al. 1998, de Loecker 2007). This is a shift
out in the PPF and can include both transfers of information from buyers to producers and learning-
by-doing that would not have happened in the absence of exporting (e.g. if export products have
steeper learning curves). If such changes in technical efficiency are biased towards the production
of high-quality rugs, quality upgrading can also occur through these learning processes.
      We emphasize that these two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. In fact, a rise in the price
of quality is potentially a precondition for the learning-by-exporting described above. In these
contexts, where the opportunity to export raises the price of quality, learning-by-exporting gener-
ates further profit increases beyond those from simply moving along the PPF. In the next section,
we define learning-by-exporting more precisely and provide evidence it is present in our setting.

6     Detecting Learning-by-Exporting
6.1    A Framework for Detecting Learning-by-Exporting
      In order to be explicit about the learning-by-exporting mechanism, we enrich the profit func-
tion as follows:
                                             max π = px − wl − F                                                   (4)
                                             l,k,λ

                                                     x = a(λ; χ a ) f (l, k )                                      (5)
                                                     q = q(λ; χq )                                                 (6)
                                                     p = p0 + bq(λ)                                                (7)
Rug output x and rug quality q are determined by separate production functions. Prices, p, are
determined by a price function that is exogenous to the firm and is increasing in the quality of the
rug, with b > 0 determining the price of quality.37
      Each of the two production functions depend on efficiency parameters, χ a and χq , that capture
the skill of the firm, as well as on a choice variable: the product specifications of the rug indexed
by λ. (Recall that specifications are codifiable rug attributes that buyers agree upon before or-
dering; see Figure 1 for an example of such an agreement.) High-λ rugs have more demanding
specifications, in the sense that they require more inputs, primarily labor hours, to produce, and
we assume that these high-λ specifications are also associated with high-quality rugs.
      More precisely, the production function for output x has two components. Labor and capital
inputs are mapped to output through f (l, k ) and output per unit input is determined by the func-
tion a(λ; χ a ), a TFP metric that is “unadjusted” for rug specifications.38 Unadjusted TFP a(·) is
decreasing in λ since rugs with more demanding specifications require more inputs and increas-
ing in the efficiency parameter χ a which governs how quickly a firm produces rugs of a particular
    37 See
         Verhoogen (2008) for a microfoundation for this relationship between price and quality.
    38 Weabstract from material inputs in the production function since, as discussed earlier, intermediaries typically
provide the raw materials to firms.


                                                            19
set of specifications with a given set of inputs. Collecting these two derivatives:
                                                     ∂a(λ; χ a )             ∂a(λ; χ a )
                                                                 <0                      > 0.                                                (8)
                                                        ∂λ                     ∂χ a
   Quality is determined by the function q(λ; χq ) which we assume is increasing in product spec-
ifications as quality is achieved in part through more demanding specifications. Additionally,
quality increases in the efficiency parameter χq which governs a firm’s ability to make quality
given a particular set of specifications. Collecting these two derivatives:
                                                     ∂q(λ; χq )              ∂q(λ; χq )
                                                                >0                      > 0.                                                 (9)
                                                        ∂λ                     ∂χq
   With this structure in hand, it is straightforward to clarify what constitutes a movement along
the PPF due to exporting and what constitutes a shift out (i.e. learning-by-exporting). Firms move
along the PPF when there is an increase in b, the price of quality (due to, for example, foreign buy-
ers higher willingness to pay for quality). This leads firms to choose higher specifications λ, and
by (9), quality rises. In contrast, learning-by-exporting occurs when exporting raises χ a and/or
χq , the two efficiency parameters, and hence shifts out the PPF. As mentioned earlier, this process
can occur as firms move into high-quality products with steep learning curves or through trans-
fers of knowledge from foreign buyers to domestic producers. We expect transfers of knowledge
about quality, χq , to be particularly relevant for firms in low-income countries that sell to buyers
in high-income countries since these buyers are likely to demand such high-quality products and
possess knowledge about how to produce them. Despite the different theoretical implications, we
are unaware of earlier work that seeks to distinguish these two quality-upgrading mechanisms.
   To see that this theoretical framework can generate reductions in unadjusted TFP alongside
improvements in quality through either mechanism, we rearrange the total derivatives of the first
order conditions with respect to λ and l. First, consider an increase in the price of quality b. As
long as there are diminishing marginal returns to raising specifications (i.e, concavity of q and
a in λ), firms choose to raise specifications and so equilibrium quality q∗ rises and equilibrium
unadjusted TFP a∗ falls:39
                            dq∗      dλ           da∗      dλ
                                = qλ     >0           = aλ    < 0.
                             db       db           db      db
Now consider an increase in the quality efficiency parameter χq . As long as the complementar-
ity between λ and χq in producing quality is sufficiently large—i.e. weaving skill is particularly
                                                                                   ∂2 q
valuable for the production of high specification rugs,    > 0 (e.g. higher thread-counts require
                                                                                  ∂λ∂χq
more dexterity to weave)—firms also choose to raise specifications and so q∗ rises and a∗ falls:40
                        dq∗              dλ          da∗        dλ
                            = q χq + q λ     >0          = aλ      < 0.
                        dχq              ∂χq         dχq       dχq
Intuitively, the strong complementarity ensures that it is profitable for the firm to raise specifica-
tions since quality, and hence price per m2 , increases faster than a declines. The same pattern can

  39 More                dλ           −(qa)λ
            precisely,   db   =   b(qa)λλ + p0 aλλ
                                                     > 0 if qλλ < 0 and aλλ < 0, where subscripts denote partial derivatives.
  40 Specifically,                                                          dλ          −b(qa)λχq
                     we require qa is supermodular in (λ,χq ) for           dχq   =   b(qa)λλ + p0 aλλ
                                                                                                         > 0 (in addition to the concavity in λ).


                                                                       20
arise with an increase in the output efficiency parameter, χ a , as long as there is a sufficiently large
                                                        ∂ a                                   2
complementarity between λ and χ a in producing output— ∂λ∂χ a
                                                              > 0; for example, skill matters
more for speed when producing less-familiar high-specification rugs—to ensure that the slow-
down from raising specifications exceeds the direct increase in speed from higher χ a .41
    Our model does not allow for investments that raise the χ parameters. For the production
function for physical output, x, investments that increase output should be fully captured by in-
creases in some type of capital or labor in a well-specified production function. If the returns to
such investments rise with the opportunity to export, any resulting changes should not be classi-
fied as learning-by-exporting under our definition since these potential investments were already
accounted for in the PPF. (A similar argument can be made for the quality production function if
we amend (6) to include labor and capital.) Hence, purchasing a more efficient weaving machine
or paying for a training course in response to the export opportunity would not be considered
learning-by-exporting. In contrast, tacit knowledge passed on by a buyer or intermediary which
is neither anticipated nor paid for by the firm, even implicitly, would be.42 Such a categorization
is consistent with the learning-by-exporting literature that considers these types of knowledge
transfers archetypal.
    Empirically detecting learning-by-exporting is challenging for two reasons. First, firms with
high efficiency parameters are likely to self-select into export markets making it difficult to disen-
tangle treatment effects of exporting from selection (Melitz, 2003). The most convincing analyses
to date rely on matching techniques which requires that researchers fully specify the underlying
selection model (e.g. see de Loecker 2007). Here, we exploit the randomization to ensure that the
opportunity to export is uncorrelated with initial levels of χ a and χq .
    Second, even if self-selection were not an issue, researchers typically measure technical effi-
ciency through residual-based TFP. TFP measures that do not adjust for prices (which is rarely the
case) may suggest learning-by-exporting when firms are just moving along the PPF or obtain a
higher markup in export markets. In the few cases where price adjustments are made, measuring
quantity-based TFP requires comparing products with identical specifications and quality-levels.
This is typically achieved by focusing on homogenous goods like concrete and block ice (e.g. Fos-
ter et al., 2008) where trade frictions and learning may be limited; or by categorizing products
based on administrative classifications and using a demand model to infer quality from prices
and market shares (e.g. de Loecker et al., 2006). In contrast, we exploit our rich panel data and
quality lab to solve these measurement issues.
    We test several implications of the framework to detect learning-by-exporting:

   1. In Step 1, we use our detailed data on product specifications to show that although our un-
   41 Specifically,                           aχ a                        dq∗          dλ             da∗               dλ
                      we require ( pa)λχa >   aλ     ( pa)λλ for both     dχ a =    qλ dχ a
                                                                                            > 0 and   dχ a   = aχa + aλ dχ a
                                                                                                                             < 0 to be satisfied
                                                 dλ         −b(qa)λχa − p0 aλχa
(in addition to the concavity in λ), where       dχ a   =    b(qa)λλ + p0 aλλ
                                                                                .
   42 It
       is for this reason that the framework excludes marketing capital as a factor in the production function. We
believe, consistent with the learning-by-exporting literature, that the knowledge generated from matching with foreign
buyers is not anticipated by the firms and hence should not be reflected in productivity. See Appendix A for a more
detailed discussion.


                                                                        21
        adjusted productivity measure—corresponding to a(·) above—falls with the opportunity to
        export (recall Table 8), specification-adjusted productivity rises—consistent with χ a increas-
        ing. We also show that specification-adjusted quality rises consistent with χq increasing. If
        there is no learning-by-exporting, specification-adjusted productivity and quality should be
        unchanged as there is no change in the efficiency parameters.

  2. In Step 2, we demonstrate that when asked to produce identical-specification domestic rugs
        using the same loom and the same inputs, treatment firms produce higher quality products
        and do not take longer to do so. Again, if there is no learning-by-exporting, treatment and
        control firms should produce identical-specification domestic rugs at the same quality.

  3. In Step 3, we use time-series data to establish that quality and productivity evolve over time
        as cumulative export production increases, consistent with a learning process. In contrast, if
        firms simply moved along the PPF we would expect a discontinuous jump upon exporting
        as firms immediately move to new quality and productivity levels.

  4. In Step 4, we draw on correspondences between foreign buyers and Hamis, as well as a
        log book of discussions between Hamis and the firms, to document that our results come,
        in part, from knowledge transfers (information that would be irrelevant if firms were only
        moving along the PPF). In particular, we show that treatment firms improve quality most
        along the particular quality dimensions that are discussed during meetings with Hamis.
        This evidence also strongly suggests that learning-by-exporting is not solely driven by learning-
        by-doing (triggered by the export orders), but in part through transfers of knowledge.

  5. In Step 5, we rule out alternative hypotheses that there were adjustment costs, scale effects,
        or that firms made investments to raise output and quality that were not adequately cap-
        tured by our labor and capital measures. In particular, we show that treatment firms make
        no monetary or time investments in upgrading, and do not pay, even implicitly, for the
        knowledge they receive from the intermediary.

6.2    Step 1: Conditioning on Rug Specifications
      If firms are only moving along the PPF, changes to unadjusted productivity and quality should
                                                        da      dq
occur only through changes in rug specifications:       db |λ , db |λ
                                                                  = 0. That is, producers always knew
how to produce the particular rugs demanded by foreign buyers, but previously chose not to be-
cause domestic buyers did not value these rugs. If there is learning-by-exporting, then we would
expect productivity and/or quality to rise, conditional on rug specifications, due to an increase in
             da        dq
χ a or χq : dχ a
                 |λ , dχ q
                           |λ > 0.
     To separate these two hypotheses, we now repeat the quality and productivity regressions
above but control in various ways for the specifications of the rug being manufactured at the time
of the survey visit. Recall from Section 3.3 that we have six dimensions of rug specifications. Al-
though imperfect, we note that many studies simply control for product differences through prod-
uct fixed effects based on statistical classifications. Our first specification—the type of rug—is the

                                                   22
analogous control, although it uses a much finer classification than standard trade classifications
(e.g. all of our seven rug types would fall within the U.S. HS ten-digit classification 5702311000).
The remaining specifications, such as thread count or design difficulty, are rarely observed by re-
searchers. Such controls are possible because there is overlap in rug specifications across firms
selling to domestic and foreign markets. This overlap can be seen in Figure 4 which plots the dis-
tribution of each of the six specifications separately for firms that are producing rugs for export
(i.e. Takeupit = 1) and those that are not. Note that if our specification controls are very crude,
that will tend to bias our findings towards the unconditional results we found in Tables 7 and
8. Hence, the prediction that productivity should rise conditional on specifications is particularly
informative since unadjusted productivity falls. (Step 2 deals more directly with the possibility
that the specification controls are imperfect.)
    We present three sets of results. The first approach regresses quality and the two unadjusted
productivity measures on treatment (or treatment instrumented with takeup) as in Section 5.2 but
now also includes controls for the six specifications.43 The second approach goes further towards
ensuring that the treatment and control firms we compare are making identical rugs by including
fixed effects for each of the 435 unique combinations of the six specifications. Since approximately
one third of firm-round pairs are making unique rugs, the cost of this approach is that we lose a sig-
nificant number of observations. The third approach follows from equation (5) which suggests that
we can directly infer χ a from the residual of a production function estimation that includes spec-
ifications. As discussed in more detail in Appendix A, we use control firms to estimate this pro-
duction function and then calculate specification-adjusted TFP for each firm and round using the
estimated coefficients on labor, capital and specifications. We construct similar measures for qual-
ity and output per hour by regressing these variables on rug specifications in the control group
and use the resulting coefficients to construct adjusted metrics (actual minus predicted). This pro-
cedure also partially addresses a second issue. Although treatment is exogenous by design, the
specification controls in the first two approaches may be endogenous. Of course, if higher-ability
firms selected into higher-specification rugs in the control group, the coefficients on rug specifica-
tions will be biased. However, if anything, this bias will lead us to find no productivity gain.44
    Panel A of Table 9 reports the approach with specification controls, Panel B the approach with
fixed effects for specification combinations, and Panel C the approach with specification-adjusted
dependent variables. Before discussing the effects on quality and productivity, it is reassuring
to note that the specification controls in Panel A have the signs we assumed in the model: More
difficult rugs are associated with higher quality and lower unadjusted productivity, while those
destined for lower segments of the market are associated with lower quality and higher unad-
justed productivity. And, the R-squared rises substantially compared to the regressions without
   43 Since the regressions also include controls for the baseline values of the dependent variable, we also include

baseline values of the specifications in the controls.
   44 Specifically, due to this selection, the productivity penalty for making a high-specification rug will be larger than

the coefficients imply. If our experiment induced lower-ability firms to make high-specification rugs, the ITT that com-
pares specification-adjusted productivity between treatment and control would likely be biased downward (because
lower-ability firms in treatment would “appear” less productive when using the biased coefficients for the adjustment).


                                                            23
specification controls in Tables 7 and 8 (increasing from 0.39 to 0.64 in the quality ITT, and from
0.18 and 0.26 to 0.57 and 0.62 in the productivity ITTs); this suggests that the rug specifications
have substantial explanatory power.
      Turning to the treatment effects in Table 9, recall that without conditioning on specifications
(i.e. Panel B of Table 7 and Panel A of Table 8) quality rises and the productivity measures fall.
Conditioning on specifications using the three approaches described above, quality again rises
significantly but the signs on the productivity measures flip from significantly negative to signif-
icantly positive in all three cases. (The productivity ITTs correspond to productivity increases be-
tween 14 and 31 percent.) That is, conditional on making similar rugs, treatment firms are making
them faster than control firms. These results suggest a rise in the efficiency parameters χ a and χq .
6.3    Step 2: Production of Identical-Specification Domestic Rugs (the Quality Lab)
      The second step exploits our experimental setting to compare quality and productivity across
firms producing identical-specification domestic rugs (rather than relying on specification data to
control for the type of rug). If firms are only moving along the PPF, when asked to make rugs
with identical specifications, quality and productivity should not differ across treatment and con-
trol firms (since treatment was randomly assigned). In order to carry out this test we brought the
owners of each firm to a rented workshop in June 2014 and asked them to produce an identical-
specification rug using identical inputs and the same loom. We chose rug specifications that mim-
icked a popular rug design sold at mid-tier domestic retail outlets in Egypt (the rug is shown in
Figure 2) and told the firms the orders were for a new buyer in Cairo. The master artisan assigned
a difficulty rating of 3 for this rug (below the 4.28 average rating of export orders). We hired a
new staff member to implement the quality lab and gave identical instructions to treatment and
control firms. Owners were given a fixed payment a little above the market wage to compensate
for producing in an external location. We provide the experimental protocol used for this step in
Online Appendix D.3.
      As discussed in Section 3.3, each completed rug was given an anonymous identification num-
ber and the master artisan was asked to score it along the 9 of the 11 quality dimensions discussed
previously (we provided the inputs and the loom so the last two dimensions were not relevant).
The identification system ensured that the master artisan had no way of knowing whether the rug
was made by a treatment or control firm. We also sent the rugs to be scored by a second external
quality assessor, a professor of handicraft science at Domietta University located two hours from
Fowa, to cross check the accuracy of the master artisan’s scoring.
      Panel A of Table 10 reports ITT and TOT results separately for each of these 9 quality metrics.45
Using the master artisan’s scores, quality is significantly higher among treatment firms for all di-
mensions. Reassuringly, treatment firms also score significantly higher along every dimension
using the professor’s quality assessments.
      Panel B of Table 10 constrains the coefficients on treatment to be the same across all the qual-
   45 As
       before, we account for correlations across quality metrics by stacking our metrics, interacting treatment with
each metric and a strata fixed effect, and clustering standard errors by firm.


                                                         24
ity metrics. Unsurprisingly, this average effect is positive and statistically significant. In terms of
magnitudes, the point estimate from the master artisan’s scores is 0.64 and the standard deviation
is 0.75 among the control group, implying that the opportunity to export increases quality levels
by 0.85 standard deviations. For the professor’s scores, the increase is 0.5 standard deviations.
      Panel C of Table 10 reports the accuracy of rugs in terms of the length, width and weight that
we requested. We define these variables as the negative of the absolute deviation from the target
value, so higher values reflect greater accuracy. Treatment firms produce rugs that are closer to
the requested length and weight. We do not observe statistical differences in the width of the rugs,
but this is expected since the loom size determines the width (and all firms used the same loom).
      Finally, we recorded the time taken to produce the rug. Since the rug specification, material
inputs and loom are identical for all firms in this setup, the time taken reflects firm productivity.
The 4th row of Panel C shows that, on average, firms took 4 hours to produce the rug. Although
the ITT is not significant, treatment firms took 6 minutes less. That is, despite manufacturing rugs
with higher quality metrics, treatment firms spend if anything less time weaving, not more.
      In the absence of learning-by-exporting, we would not expect differences between treatment
and control firms when producing identical-specification rugs for the domestic market using the
same inputs, the same loom, and at the same scale. If anything we might expect control firms to
produce these rugs quicker or at higher quality since they have recent experience manufacturing
domestic designs and specifications. It also seems unlikely that treatment firms put more effort
into weaving the rug because they were worried poor performance would jeopardize their rela-
tionship with Hamis. Firms were not informed of any link between the quality lab and Hamis
Carpets—recall we hired a new staff member to run the lab in order to disassociate it from the
export opportunity randomization as much as possible and we told firms that the order was from
a new buyer in Cairo—and if firms did believe there was a link it is just as plausible that control
firms put in extra effort to impress Hamis in order to gain export orders.
      In contrast, we find strong evidence of higher quality levels among treatment firms that persist
even when manufacturing rugs for the domestic market, indicative of an increase in χq . As treat-
ment firms do not take longer to produce these rugs, these results imply that a broader productiv-
ity measure that adjusts for both specifications and quality would rise substantially. Note that the
lack of a significant treatment effect for time taken does not contradict the increase in productivity
we found in Step 1. In the presence of a complementarity between λ and χ a , the additional skill
acquired through exporting will only translate into faster production for more demanding export
rugs and not these simpler domestic rugs that they were already familiar with.
6.4    Step 3: Learning Curves
      The third step examines the time paths of quality upgrading. Unlike a movement along the
PPF which should be instantaneous (see Section 6.6 for a discussion of adjustment costs), learning
processes typically take time. In the most obvious formulation, the efficiency parameters change
with the opportunity to export through the cumulative production of export rugs. This captures
the idea that efficiency improves with repeated interactions with buyers and/or because learning


                                                   25
curves are steeper among export rugs that are less familiar to our sample firms. Therefore, if there
is learning-by-exporting, productivity and quality is likely to rise with cumulative exports. If there
is no learning,although quality may immediately jump with the first export order (or unadjusted
productivity may fall), the levels should remain constant with subsequent export orders.
    To investigate potential learning curves in a non-parametric manner, we carry out a two-stage
procedure. In the first stage, we regress our quality or productivity measures on both firm and
round fixed effects.46 In the second stage, we plot a kernel-weighted local polynomial regression
of the residuals against cumulative export production. Since cumulative export production is only
available for takeup firms, we only include these firms in the second stage (although all firms are
included in the first stage when we demean by survey round). Online Appendix E presents similar
plots using the partially linear panel data estimator proposed by Baltagi and Li (2002).
    Figure 5 shows these residual plots for the productivity measures as well as the stacked qual-
ity measure.47 The upper and middle left plots show the two unadjusted productivity measures;
the plots indicate a decline in productivity until about 600m2 after which it starts to rise. The sec-
ond column uses the specification-adjusted measures described in Section 6.2. Both specification-
adjusted output per hour and TFP rise with cumulative exports, consistent with the initial dip
in unadjusted productivity being driven by the move to more difficult product specifications de-
manded by foreign buyers. The bottom row of Figure 5 presents the analogous learning curves
for the stacked quality measures. Both the unadjusted and specification-adjusted plots show a rise
in quality up until 200m2 of exports and then a leveling off. The typical firm weaves 10-15m2 per
week, which suggests that firms learn how to produce the quality demanded by foreigners within
about five months. Overall, the learning curves suggest faster learning about quality efficiency χq
than about output efficiency χ a .48
    In contrast to the ITT results in Steps 1 and 2, the fact we allowed Hamis to allocate follow-up
orders means that more orders may have been given to firms whose quality or productivity was
improving. With that caveat in mind, we see the evolution of productivity and quality among
takeup firms as suggestive of a learning explanation. Figures E.2 and E.3 complement these re-
sults by showing similar patterns using four higher-frequency quality metrics collected by the
intermediary for each batch of rugs delivered by each takeup firm.


    46 We use firm fixed effects here rather than baseline controls so that we can visualize the changes between baseline

and the follow-up survey rounds which would not be possible with baseline controls.
    47 Analyzing the Joint Sample is complicated here by the different timelines across samples. Figure E.4 shows the cdf

of total export production across the two samples and Figure E.5 plots days since first order against export production
for each firm. As Sample 1 firms started exporting earlier they drive all the variation at high values of cumulative
exports but not at lower values, leading to a spurious discontinuity around this transition. Accordingly, Figure 5
restricts attention to the common support; the range of cumulative exports achieved by Sample 2 firms (0-727m2 ).
Figures F.1 and F.2 present the two samples separately across their full ranges.
    48 The finding that learning about quality occurs quickly is consistent with other recent studies. In a randomized

study of management practices in Indian textile firms, Bloom et al. (2013) find reductions in quality defects after just 10
weeks. Likewise, Levitt et al. (2013) document a 70 percent decline in defect rates in an automobile manufacturing firm
just 8 weeks after new production processes were introduced. See Table E.6 for a parametric version of these results that
interacts the treatment indicator with round dummies and finds most learning occuring by the first follow-up round.


                                                            26
6.5    Step 4: Knowledge Transfers
      The results in Steps 1-3 indicate that learning-by-exporting is present in our context. In this
step, we distinguish between two types of learning-by-exporting discussed in the literature. The
first is a learning-by-doing story where learning curves are particularly steep for the high-quality
items demanded by foreigners and so the learning-by-doing is induced by exporting. The second
is a story where actual knowledge is transferred between buyers, the intermediary and producers.
Of course, we believe both are occurring, and this subsection simply provides evidence that some
of the learning comes from knowledge transfers.
      To measure knowledge flows, we tracked information flowing between buyers and Hamis, as
well as between Hamis and the producing firms. The data on flows between buyers and Hamis
come from email correspondences Hamis shared with us. Here we provide several excerpts relat-
ing to various aspects of rug quality. In one correspondence, a foreign buyer complained that the
rug was packed too tightly which results in wavy rugs:
       Wrapping the kelims tightly and strongly leaves waving marks on them, so please roll
       kelims and wrap them softly to avoid waviness.
On a separate occasion, the same buyer also noted that the edges of some carpets had frayed:
       We have a problem with our client. As you remember, this client asked for two carpets
       with fringes in the colour uni 2 and 3. Now after one and a half year using the carpets,
       the fringes crumble away, as you see on the pictures [reproduced in Figure E.6]. They
       will have two new pieces and give the whole problem to an lawyer. What to do? (sic)
These conversations suggest that buyers are passing along both information on how to manufac-
ture high-quality rugs (e.g. packing that is not too tight) as well as information on what a high-
quality product is (e.g. the importance of long-term durability). However, the correspondences
are more suggestive in nature and are incomplete—we have no records of the information flows
resulting from Hamis Carpets’ export experiences prior to our study (although Hamis reports hav-
ing learned about both weaving techniques and quality control from previous interactions with
foreign buyers).49
      We have more detailed data on information flows between the intermediary and the firms.
Hamis provided us with a log book of the visits made to each of the treatment firms as well as
the subject discussed during that visit. In particular, we know the total number of conversations,
their average length, and the topics discussed over the project period (Table E.7 presents summary
statistics from this dataset).50 The topics are categorized according to 10 of our 11 quality metrics
(the intermediary did not discuss input quality since it provided the inputs). All takeup firms
were visited at least seven times, with the average firm visited 11 times. A visit lasted 28 minutes
   49 For example, Hamis learned how to reduce the waviness of rugs by regularly adjusting the tenseness of the warp

thread from a large furniture distributor near Bonn, Germany; and how to ensure consistency of designs over large
orders by using measuring sticks and folding the rugs over to check for symmetry from a small artisan rug shop near
Mannheim, Germany.
   50 Unfortunately, due to a miscommunication, Hamis Carpets failed to record the date of these interactions so we

are only able to examine cumulative interactions.


                                                        27
on average. They talked about issues related to design accuracy, the weight of the rug and the
tightness of the warp thread on at least half of the occasions.
    To find out more about the nature of these discussions, in August 2014 we asked firms whether
their conversations along each of these dimensions involved the intermediary providing “infor-
mation on techniques to improve quality” or just involved the intermediary “pointing out flaws”.
The data show that 89.4 percent of discussions were of the former type, discussions about pro-
duction techniques to improve quality. The intermediary has provided us with multiple exam-
ples of the techniques passed on in these conversations. For example, the intermediary provided
knowledge about the optimal way to weave the weft thread through the warp so as to achieve the
correct firmness of the rug, about how to hold the weft thread to reduce waviness, and about how
to maintain the integrity of the rug corners.
    We can use these data to examine whether the knowledge imparted on these visits correlates
with the improved performance of takeup firms. We match the dataset of topics discussed during
visits with each firm to the quality metrics recorded in the final survey round. This match allows
us to test whether quality increased most along the particular quality dimensions discussed with
Hamis. To perform this test, we once more stack the quality (or specification-adjusted quality)
measures, indexed by d, and run the following cross-sectional regression:
  Qualityid = α3 + β 3 Takeupi × 1[ Talked_About_Dimension]id + γ3 Qualityid0 + δi + δd + ε id . (10)
We include firm fixed effects δi so that we are comparing improvements in quality across the dif-
ferent dimensions d within the same firm. We also include quality metric fixed effects δd to control
for different means across dimensions.51 A significant β 3 coefficient is supportive of the presence
of knowledge transfers as it implies that quality improves more along dimensions that are dis-
cussed than along dimensions that are not (and inconsistent with a simple movement along the
PPF, where quality would be independent of knowledge flows).
    The results in Table 11 support the hypothesis that knowledge is transferred from the inter-
mediary to the firm. We find a positive and statistically significant association between changes
in quality and whether the intermediary discussed that quality dimension with the firm, using
either our standard quality metrics in column 1 or our specification-adjusted ones in column 2.
The size of the coefficient implies that quality levels improve by 16 percent more when the inter-
mediary spoke to the firm about that dimension.52 Columns 3 and 4 allow the β 3 coefficient to
differ depending on whether the intermediary provided information on techniques or was just
pointing out flaws. We find that both types of information are associated with improvements in
quality, with the magnitudes of the two coefficient virtually identical. Finally, columns 5-8 repeat
the analysis but include additional interactions between Takeupi and each quality metric to allow

   51 Note that we do not include controls for cumulative production or the takeup main effect since both vary only

across firms and so are swept out by the firm fixed effects (as would any specification controls).
   52 There is no evidence that firms achieve higher quality on the talked about dimension by reducing effort on other

dimensions: there is a positive and significant coefficient on the interaction term if quality is regressed on Takeupi
and Takeupi interacted with a dummy for whether Hamis discussed any quality dimension with them (with baseline
controls in lieu of firm fixed effects). This result is available upon request.


                                                         28
for differential treatment effects by dimension. The coefficients in columns 5-6 are almost identical
to those in columns 1-2 and highly significant. While the coefficients actually become larger than
uninteracted coefficient when the type-of-information interactions are included in columns 7-8,
the higher standard errors mean that significance levels decline, with the technique interaction for
specification-adjusted quality falling just below the 10 percent threshold.
      We provide one additional piece of evidence that suggests our results are not driven by learning-
by-doing alone. Under learning-by-doing, we would expect firms who were already producing
high-quality rugs at baseline to see smaller treatment effects as they had less to learn. This pre-
diction is not borne out by the data: When we regress the stacked quality metrics on a treatment
dummy, baseline quality and an interaction of the two, the interaction coefficient is insignificant.53
      It is hard to completely dismiss the possibility that these discussions communicate what firms
can get away with or the rug preferences of foreigners. However, the picture painted by these
knowledge flows results is fully consistent with the quality lab results in Step 2. The examples
above of superior weaving techniques discussed during these visits are all techniques that once
acquired are costless to implement. Given that the majority of discussions are of this type, it is little
surprise that treatment firms produced substantially higher quality domestic rugs in the quality
lab despite having no incentive to do so.
6.6    Step 5: Ruling Out Alternative Hypotheses
      In this final step, we rule out alternative explanations that could explain the patterns in the
data. There are three main competing hypotheses. The first is that firms incur an adjustment cost
while moving along the PPF which could generate learning curves of the type we found in Step
3. While a reasonable story, adjustment costs alone cannot explain our findings in the other steps.
For example, adjustment costs would not lead treatment firms to produce identical domestic rugs
at higher quality many months after the intervention (Step 2).
      The second hypothesis is that we are simply picking up scale effects poorly captured by our
production function. But we found no evidence that, relative to control firms, treatment firms in-
creased scale by hiring more workers or expanding the number of looms (see Table 6). Although
treatment firms did increase scale through more labor hours and longer production runs, it is im-
plausible to attribute the Step 2 results to this greater scale since every firm had the same-length
production run in the quality lab.
      A third closely-related hypothesis is that the opportunity to export raised the returns to invest-
ments that raise output or quality but are not adequately captured by increases in our simple mea-
sures of capital and labor inputs. These investments could take the form of purchasing equipment,
investing time in learning new techniques, or hiring consultants to teach new skills. If we do not
account for these investments, we may spuriously conclude that there was learning-by-exporting.
      Our data allow us to dismiss a simple investments hypothesis. First, we regularly surveyed
firms about investments or costs incurred throughout the study. There is no quantitative (or qual-
itative) support indicating that treatment firms undertook any such investments. For example, no
  53 We   find a coefficient on the interaction of 0.05 (s.e. 0.04). As elsewhere, we include round and strata fixed effects.


                                                             29
firm reports investing in a new loom or paying to repair existing looms over the duration of the
sample. Additionally, we asked treatment firms about the extent to which they practiced weaving
techniques, and none report ever practicing techniques.
    A more complicated variant of the investments hypothesis would be that our intermediary
provided a teacher or consultant to train treatment firms in weaving skills. If the intermediary
deducted training costs from payments to the firm this would be equivalent to an investment by
the firm. However, we find no evidence of this type of payment: the price paid to firms is uncorre-
lated with the number of hours the firm was visited by the intermediary.54 Instead, the knowledge
transfers occurring during these interactions appear to be flows of information that are not priced,
exactly the type of information flows described in the classic learning-by-exporting literature (e.g.
Clerides et al. 1998).
    A final variant of the investments hypothesis is that firms invest their time to raise the quality
of their labor (i.e. trade off slower production now for higher returns from exporting once they
can produce high-quality rugs with their improved labor). Inconsistent with this hypothesis is the
fact that the benefits of the knowledge transfer, even in the domestic market, exceed the likely time
costs incurred if higher quality could be purposefully learned. To determine the value of improv-
ing quality for a firm that sells to the domestic market, we regress profits per hour for non-takeup
firms (i.e. those selling to the domestic market) on our quality metrics.55 Combining these esti-
mates of the domestic returns to quality with the treatment effects estimated in the quality lab, the
benefit for control firms to move to the quality levels achieved by treatment firms would be 9.96
percent higher profits on the domestic market. We assume that it takes 5 months to learn how to
produce high quality (the approximate time taken to weave the 200m2 after which learning stops
in the bottom row of Figure 5). Even if firms we assume that firms do not benefit at all from higher
profits per hour until this learning period is over, profits would fall by only 5 percent in the learn-
ing period (taking the productivity drop between 0 and 200m2 in the first row of Figure 5) and
the firm would recover the investment in quality upgrading after 8 months using an annualized
discount rate of 10 percent. Also note that, using the wage the intermediary pays their employees
who visit the firms and assuming all the time spent on firm visits is spent discussing techniques,
the cost of providing this training is only LE103 ($16) compared to a lifetime net present value for
firms of LE10,070 ($1,596). Hence, these calculations suggest that if firms were choosing whether
or not to invest in learning the skills needed for high-skill production, they should have already
chosen to make this investment to produce for the domestic market.

7   Conclusion
    This paper conducts the first RCT that generates exogenous variation in the opportunity to ex-
port in order to understand the impacts of exporting on firm performance. The random variation,

    54 A regression among takeup firms of the log price received on log total hours of visits by the intermediary and

specification controls gives a negative and insignificant coefficient of -0.06 (s.e. 0.06).
    55 This is a regression of log profits per hour on the 9 quality metrics recorded in our “Step 2” quality lab (as well

as specification controls and round and strata fixed effects). The test that all the quality coefficients are jointly zero is
rejected at the 1.3 percent level. The regression is reported in Table E.8.


                                                             30
the detailed survey collection, and our quality lab allow us to make causal inferences about the
impact of exporting and to identify the mechanisms through which improvements occur.
   We find that profits for treatment firms increase 16-26 percent relative to control. This finding
stands in contrast to many RCTs designed to alleviate supply-side constraints that have shown
limited impacts on profits. Thus, our profit results suggest that demand-side constraints may be a
critical barrier to firm growth in developing countries and can be mitigated through market access
initiatives. The question of whether this market access program is cost effective and/or alleviates
market failures is an interesting one which we leave for future work.
   The rise in profits is driven by substantial quality upgrading accompanied by declines in out-
put per hour. However, this quality upgrading we observe may or may not come about through
learning-by-exporting—export induced improvements in technical efficiency.
   We provide five pieces of evidence that learning-by-exporting is occurring in our context. First,
conditional on product specifications, we observe large improvements in both quality and produc-
tivity. Second, when asked to produce an identical domestic rug, treatment firms produce higher
quality rugs and do not take longer to do so. Third, we observe learning curves among the firms
who took up the opportunity to export. Fourth, we document knowledge flowing between for-
eign buyers, the intermediary, and the producers, with quality increasing most along the specific
dimensions that the knowledge pertained to. Fifth, we find no evidence that firms make monetary
or time investments in upgrading, or pay, even implicitly, for the knowledge they receive.
   Taken together, the evidence indicates that learning-by-exporting is present in our data and
that the learning occurs, at least in part, through information flows. Given that this learning is
induced by demand for high-quality products from knowledgeable buyers in high-income coun-
tries, these changes would likely not have occurred as a result of increased market access to do-
mestic markets.
   As is the case in any analysis of a particular industry or location, we are cautious to generalize
our findings too broadly. However, we believe that two features of this study—random assign-
ment of export status and detailed surveys that allow us to unpack the changes occurring within
the firms—contribute to the literature that studies the impacts of trade on the developing world.




                                                31
References
A HN , J., A. K. K HANDELWAL , AND S.-J. W EI (2011): “The role of intermediaries in facilitating
  trade,” Journal of International Economics, 84, 73–85.

A LLEN , T. (2014): “Information Frictions in Trade,” Econometrica, 82, 2041–2083.

A LVAREZ , F. E., F. J. B UERA , AND J. R OBERT E. L UCAS (2013): “Idea Flows, Economic Growth,
  and Trade,” Working Paper 19667, National Bureau of Economic Research.

A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT, AND A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?” American Economic Review, 102, 94–130.

B ALTAGI , B. H. AND D. L I (2002): “Series Estimation of Partially Linear Panel Data Models with
  Fixed Effects,” Annals of Economics and Finance, 3, 103–116.

B ANERJEE , A. V. (2013): “Microcredit Under the Microscope: What Have We Learned in the Past
  Two Decades, and What Do We Need to Know?” Annual Review of Economics, 5, 487–519.

B ASTOS , P., J. S ILVA ,   AND   E. V ERHOOGEN (2014): “Export Destinations and Input Prices,”
  Unpub. paper.

B ERNARD , A. B. AND B. J ENSEN (1999): “Exceptional exporter performance: cause, effect, or
   both?” Journal of International Economics, 47, 1–25.

B ERNARD , A. B., S. J. R EDDING , AND P. K. S CHOTT (2011): “Multiproduct Firms and Trade
   Liberalization,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1271–1318.

B LOOM , N., B. E IFERT, A. M AHAJAN , D. M C K ENZIE , AND J. R OBERTS (2013): “Does Manage-
   ment Matter? Evidence from India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1–51.

B LOOM , N. AND J. VAN R EENEN (2007): “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
   Across Firms and Countries,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1351–1408.

——— (2010): “Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries?” Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 24, 203–24.

B RAMBILLA , I., D. L EDERMAN , AND G. P ORTO (2012): “Exports, Export Destinations, and Skills,”
   American Economic Review, 102, 3406–38.

C LERIDES , S. K., S. L ACH , AND J. R. T YBOUT (1998): “Is Learning By Exporting Important?
  Micro-Dynamic Evidence From Colombia, Mexico, And Morocco,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 113, 903–947.

C ROZET, M., K. H EAD , AND T. M AYER (2012): “Quality Sorting and Trade: Firm-level Evidence
  for French Wine,” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 609–644.

DE  L OECKER , J. (2007): “Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia,”
  Journal of International Economics, 73, 69–98.

——— (2013): “Detecting Learning by Exporting,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5,
 1–21.

DE L OECKER , J. AND P. G OLDBERG (2014): “Firm Performance in a Global Market,” The Annual
  Review of Economics.

                                                  32
DE L OECKER , J., P. G OLDBERG , A. K. K HANDELWAL ,    AND   N. PAVCNIK (2006): “Prices, Markups
  and Trade Reform,” Econometrica, 84, 445–510.

DE M EL , S., D. M C K ENZIE , AND C. W OODRUFF (2008): “Returns to Capital in Microenterprises:
  Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1329–1372.

——— (2009): “Measuring microenterprise profits: Must we ask how the sausage is made?”
 Journal of Development Economics, 88, 19–31.

——— (2010): “Wage Subsidies for Microenterprises,” American Economic Review, 100, 614–18.

——— (2014): “Business training and female enterprise start-up, growth, and dynamics:
 Experimental evidence from Sri Lanka,” Journal of Development Economics, 106, 199–210.

E ATON , J., M. E SLAVA , D. J INKINS , C. K RIZAN , AND J. T YBOUT (2013): “A Search and Learning
   Model of Export Dynamics,” Tech. rep., Penn State.

E DMOND , C., V. M IDRIGAN , AND D. Y. X U (2015): “Competition, Markups, and the Gains from
  International Trade,” American Economic Review, 105, 3183–3221.

FAJGELBAUM , P., G. M. G ROSSMAN , AND E. H ELPMAN (2011): “Income Distribution, Product
  Quality, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 721 – 765.

F EENSTRA , R. C. AND G. H. H ANSON (2004): “Intermediaries in Entrepot Trade: Hong Kong Re-
   Exports of Chinese Goods,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, Wiley Blackwell, 13, 3–35.

F EENSTRA , R. C. AND J. R OMALIS (2014): “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 477–527.

F OSTER , L., J. H ALTIWANGER , AND C. S YVERSON (2008): “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
   Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review, 98, 394–425.

H ALL , R. AND C. J ONES (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
  Worker Than Others?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83–116.

H ALLAK , J. (2006): “Product quality and the direction of trade,” Journal of International Economics,
  68, 238–265.

H ALLAK , J. AND P. K. S CHOTT (2011): “Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product
  Quality,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 417–474.

H ALLAK , J. AND J. S IVADASAN (2013): “Product and process productivity: Implications for
  quality choice and conditional exporter premia,” Journal of International Economics, 91, 53 – 67.

H ALLAK , J. C. (2010): “A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis,” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 92, 453–466.

H ARRISON , A. AND A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2010): Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy
  for Developing Countries, Elsevier, vol. 5 of Handbook of Development Economics, chap. 0, 4039–4214.

K ELLER , W. (2004): “International Technology Diffusion,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42,
  752–782.

K HANDELWAL , A. (2010): “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” The Review of Economic
  Studies, 77, 1450–1476.

                                                 33
K LING , J. R., J. B. L IEBMAN , AND L. F. K ATZ (2007): “Experimental analysis of neighborhood
  effects,” Econometrica, 75, 83–119.

K RUGMAN , P. R. (1979): “Increasing returns, monopolistic competition, and international trade,”
  Journal of International Economics, 9, 469–479.

K UGLER , M. AND E. V ERHOOGEN (2012): “Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 79, 307–339.

L EDERMAN , D., M. O LARREAGA , AND L. PAYTON (2010): “Export promotion agencies: Do they
   work?” Journal of Development Economics, 91, 257 – 265.

L EVITT, S. D., J. A. L IST, AND C. S YVERSON (2013): “Toward an Understanding of Learning by
   Doing: Evidence from an Automobile Assembly Plant,” Journal of Political Economy, 121, 643 –
   681.

M ANOVA , K. AND Z. Z HANG (2012): “Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 379–436.

M ARIN , A. G. AND N. V OIGTLANDER (2013): “Exporting and Plant-Level Efficiency Gains: It’s
 in the Measure,” NBER Working Paper 19033.

M C K ENZIE , D. (2012): “Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 99, 210–221.

M C K ENZIE , D. AND C. W OODRUFF (2013): “What Are We Learning from Business Training
 and Entrepreneurship Evaluations around the Developing World?” The World Bank Research
 Observer.

M ELITZ , M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
 Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695–1725.

PARK , A., D. YANG , X. S. S HI , AND Y. J IANG (2010): “Exporting and Firm Performance: Chinese
  Exporters and the Asian Financial Crisis,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92, 822–842.

R AUCH , J. E. (1999): “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
  Economics, 48, 7 – 35.

S CHOTT, P. K. (2004): “Across-Product Versus Within-Product Specialization in International
   Trade,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 647–678.

S YVERSON , C. (2011): “What Determines Productivity?” Journal of Economic Literature, 49, 326–65.

V ERHOOGEN , E. A. (2008): “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
  Manufacturing Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 489–530.

WAGNER , J. (2007): “Exports and Productivity: A Survey of the Evidence from Firm-level Data,”
 World Economy, 30, 60–82.




                                               34
Appendix A           Measuring Unadjusted and Specification-Adjusted TFP
    A key challenge in standard productivity analysis is the lack of firm-specific input and output
prices which biases productivity estimates (see de Loecker and Goldberg, 2014). We avoid these
measurement issues because we observe output quantities. Moreover, since all firms produce a
single product—handmade rugs—issues that arise with multi-product firms and the divisibility
of inputs are not relevant in this setting (de Loecker et al., 2016).
    The first production function estimation does not control for rug specifications and hence pro-
vides our unadjusted TFP estimates. We estimate the following Cobb-Douglas production function:
                                                                         unadjusted
                                ln xit = λ + αl ln lit + αk ln k it + ait             + eit                      (A.1)
where xit is the output (in m2 ) of firm i in period t, lit is total labor hours used, k it is the number
                           unadjusted
of active looms, and ait                is the firm’s unadjusted TFP. The error term captures unanticipated
shocks as well as an omitted variable, the specifications of the rugs produced.
    The second production function estimation controls for rug specifications and provides our
specification-adjusted TFP estimate. We estimate
                                                                     0        adjusted
                             ln xit = λ + γl ln lit + γk ln k it + Zit Γ + ait           + νit                   (A.2)
         adjusted
where ait           is the firm’s adjusted TFP and the vector Zit includes six rug specifications: rug dif-
ficulty, thread count, thread type, number of colors, market segment, and narrow product type.1
The error term now only captures unanticipated shocks (and, of course, measurement error).
    We do not include the costs incurred to find foreign buyers in the production function for phys-
ical output. Common to the learning-by-exporting literature, we view any productivity gains from
exporting as unanticipated by the firm. That is, firms make exporting decisions without anticipat-
ing that they would become more efficient producers. The evidence in Section 6 supports this
claim by showing that productivity improvements come, at least in part, from knowledge trans-
fers that the firms do not pay for. In this case, the costs incurred to find foreign buyers should not
be included in the production function for physical output under a reasonable definition of TFP.2
    Although data on quantities and specifications deal with measurement concerns, there is still
potential simultaneity bias since TFP is observed by the firm but not us. We follow the control
function approach (Olley and Pakes, 1996) and assume capital is subject to adjustment costs, labor
is a flexible input, and we use warp thread quantity as the proxy. We exploit the experimental
design by estimating the production function using only control firms, avoiding the need for as-
sumptions on how treatment changes the TFP process.3 We estimate the production functions
using the one-step approach proposed by Wooldridge (2009), with lit−1 as the instrument for lit ,
    1 In the Sample 1 baseline, we did not record the market segment or rug difficulty. We replace these missing values

with the corresponding values from the subsequent survey round.
    2 We also note that, unanticipated or not, to our knowledge resources associated with generating export orders

have never been explicitly included in any production function estimation. For example, de Loecker (2007, 2013)
includes an export dummy in the productivity law of motion, rather than as a separate factor of production.
    3 See de Loecker (2013) for an extensive discussion of this point. To check the stability of the production function

coefficients, we ran an OLS estimation of (A.2) on baseline and endline data, and allowed the αl and αk coefficients to
vary by round and treatment/control group; we find no statistical difference between the coefficients. This suggests
that while the level of TFP changed among treatment firms, their production function did not.


                                                          35
and cluster standard errors by firm. For production function (A.1), we obtain αl =0.74 (s.e. of
0.53) and αk =0.30 (s.e. of 0.20).4 For production function (A.2), we obtain αl =1.11 (s.e. of 0.30)
and αk =0.19 (s.e. of 0.11). We cannot reject the null of constant returns to scale in either case.
                                                                      unadjusted                        adjusted
     Having estimated the coefficients, we compute ait                = ln xit − α̂l lit − α̂k k it and ait =
                               0
ln xit − γ̂l lit − γ̂k k it − Zit Γ̂, where hats denote estimated parameters. Note that the methodology
assumes that the parameters of the production function are the same for treatment and control
firms. This is a reasonable assumption because all firms produce rugs using the same technol-
ogy in all periods. Since all firms produce a narrowly defined product, the assumption is weaker
than existing work that typically assumes identical parameters for all firms within a 2- or 4-digit
industry classification.
Appendix References
DE   L OECKER , J. (2013). “Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia”, Jour-
     nal of International Economics, 73, 69-98.
DE   L OECKER , J. (2013). “Detecting Learning by Exporting”, American Economic Journal: Microeco-
     nomics, 5(3), 1-21.
DE   L OECKER , J.       AND   P. G OLDBERG (2014). “Firm Performance in a Global Market”, The Annual
     Review of Economics, 6, 201-227.
DE   L OECKER , J., P. G OLDBERG , A. K. K HANDELWAL , N. PAVCNIK (2016). “Prices, Markups and
     Trade Reform”, Econometrica, 84(2), 445-510.
O LLEY, G. S.        AND    A. PAKES (1996), “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
     Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263–97.
W OOLRIDGE , J. M. (2009), “On Estimating Firm-level Production Functions Using Proxy Variables
     to Control for Unobservables,” Economics Letters, 104, 112–114.




     4 For   comparison, the OLS of (A.1) gives αl =0.82 (s.e. of 0.12) and αk = 0.33 (s.e. of 0.11).


                                                                36
                                                     Table 1: Sample and Takeup Statistics

                                                                                   Duble Orders                                                Kasaees Orders
                                                  Joint Sample                      Sample 1                                 Sample 2             Sample 1
                                                  Duble Firms        Goublan Firms Tups Firms            Duble Firms        Duble Firms         Kasaees Firms
Statistic                                              (1)                (2)          (3)                   (4)                (5)                  (6)
Firms                                                  219                 103               83               79                 140                  38
Treatment firms                                         74                 49                42               39                  35                  19
Takeup firms                                            46                  5                8                14                  32                   5
Initial packet size (m2)                               110                 110              110              110                 110                 250
Successful takeup firms                                 46                  4                6                14                  32                   5
Mean output conditional on takeup (m2)                 538                 586              589              778                 434                 303
S.D. of output conditional on takeup                   188                 174              208              132                 177                  76
Notes: Table reports statistics by firm type and sample. The 1st row displays the number of firms within each rug type and sample. The 2nd row displays the
number of firms in the treatment group. The 3rd row indicates the number of firms who accepted the treatment and agreed to make rugs for export. The 4th
row is the initial order size (in square meters) offered to each takeup firm. The 5th row shows the number of firms that completed the initial order successfully
and received subsequent orders from Hamis. The 6th row indicates average output conditional on takeup. The last row reports the standard deviation of
output in the first year, conditional on takeup.




                                                              Table 2: Survey Timeline

Survey Timeline                                                            Sample 1                                             Sample 2
Baseline Round 0                                                       *July-Aug 2011                                        *Feb-Mar 2013
Follow Up Round 1                                                      §Nov-Dec 2011                                         May-June 2013
Follow Up Round 2                                                      April-May 2012                                         Nov-Dec 2013
Follow Up Round 3                                                      Sept-Dec 2012                                         *May-June 2014
Follow Up Round 4                                                       Mar-Apr 2013
Follow Up Round 5                                                      *July-Oct 2013
Follow Up Round 6                                                       Jan-Mar 2014
Quality Lab                                                               June 2014                                             June 2014
Notes: Table reports the timeline for the data collection on duble firms by sample.
*Supplementary questions about household and firm outcomes are included in both samples Baseline Round 0 surveys and Follow Up Round 5 for
Sample 1 and Follow Up Round 3 for Sample 2.
§Data from Round 1 for Sample 1 was deemed unreliable and has been discarded for the analysis.




                                                                                37
                                                     Table 3: Baseline Balance


                                                                            Control Group               Difference in
                                                                                    Mean                  Treatment           N
Panel A: Household Characteristics
        Age                                                                            51.0                       0.9         218
                                                                                       (0.7)                     (1.6)
        Number of years in rug business                                                37.7                       0.2         213
                                                                                       (0.8)                     (1.7)
        Illiterate?                                                                     0.63                      0.10        214
                                                                                      (0.03)                    (0.07)
        Household size                                                                  4.2                       0.0         219
                                                                                       (0.1)                     (0.2)
        Household income                                                           1,090.0                        76.5        219
                                                                                      (91.2)                   (228.0)
        Digit Span Recall                                                               5.8                       0.2         204
                                                                                       (0.1)                     (0.2)
Panel B: Firm Characteristics
        Price per square meter                                                        30.2                        6.8         218
                                                                                       (3.3)                     (7.8)
        Direct monthly profits from rug business                                       646                         7.9        218
                                                                                      (41.8)                    (81.5)
        Reported monthly profits from rug business                                     806                       -10.4        217
                                                                                      (38.5)                    (84.4)
        Hours worked last month                                                        247                        -1.7        218
                                                                                       (5.6)                    (11.7)
        Number of employees                                                           1.09                        0.0         218
                                                                                       (0.0)                     (0.1)
        Total produced last month (m2)                                                 50.0                        3.3        218
                                                                                       (4.3)                    (10.0)
        Ever exported?                                                                  0.12                      0.02        219
                                                                                      (0.02)                    (0.05)
        Average Quality                                                                 2.63                     -0.13 ***    218
                                                                                      (0.03)                    (0.05)
Joint F-test                                                                                          1.23
Attrition in Follow Up Surveys                                                          0.11                      0.00        815
                                                                                      (0.01)                    (0.02)
Attrition in Quality Lab                                                                0.14                      0.02        219
                                                                                      (0.03)                    (0.05)
Notes: Table explores baseline balance. Each row is a regression of the named variable on a constant, treatment dummy and strata fixed
effects; the constant (control group mean) and treatment dummy are reported. The 3rd to last row reports the F-test for a regression of
the treatment dummy on all 14 baseline balance variables. Profits and prices are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile to trim outliers
(without winsorizing, the sample still remains statistically balanced between treatment and control groups). The final rows report average
attrition rates across all survey rounds and in the quality lab respectively. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.

                                                                   38
                                Table 4: Impact of Intervention on Firms Knowingly Exporting


                                                                                                          ITT                                    TOT
                                                                                                          (1)                                     (2)
Indicator for Ever Exported                                                                             0.55 ***                                 0.76 ***
                                                                                                      (0.06)                                   (0.07)
R-squared                                                                                                0.33                                    0.45
Control Mean                                                                                             0.20                                    0.20
Observations                                                                                             191                                     191
Notes: Table regresses an indicator for if a firm has ever knowingly produced rugs for export markets on indicators for treatment (column 1)
or takeup (column 2). The question was asked in Round 5 for Sample 1 and Round 3 for Sample 2. The TOT regression instruments takeup
with treatment. The regressions control for baseline values of the dependent variable, and include round and strata fixed effects. Significance
* .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                              Table 5: Impact of Exporting on Firm Profits

Panel A: Profits (in Month Prior to Survey)
                                                              Log (Reported Revenues - Log (Constructed Revenues -
                                   Log Direct Profits              Reported Costs)          Constructed Costs)                  Log Hypothetical Profits
                                    ITT           TOT              ITT            TOT              ITT            TOT              ITT            TOT
                                  (1A)            (1B)            (2A)            (2B)            (3A)            (3B)            (4A)            (4B)
Treatment                         0.26 ***        0.42 ***        0.21 ***        0.37 ***       0.19 ***        0.34 ***        0.37 ***        0.68 ***
                                  (.05)           (.08)           (.06)           (.10)          (.06)           (.10)           (.11)           (.19)
R-squared                         0.21            0.22            0.16            0.18            0.16            0.18           0.19            0.19
Control Mean (In Levels)          929             929             931             931             951             951            541             541
Observations                      573             573             644             644             685             685            687             687

Panel B: Profits per Owner Hour (in Month Prior to Survey)
                                                          Log (Reported Revenues - Log (Constructed Revenues -
                                 Log Direct Profits            Reported Costs)          Constructed Costs)                      Log Hypothetical Profits
                                  ITT          TOT             ITT         TOT           ITT          TOT                         ITT          TOT
                                (1A)           (1B)          (2A)          (2B)         (3A)          (3B)                       (4A)          (4B)
Treatment                         0.20 ***        0.32 ***        0.17 ***        0.29 ***       0.16 ***        0.28 ***        0.25 ***        0.46 ***
                                  (.05)           (.08)           (.05)           (.09)          (.05)           (.09)           (.07)           (.12)
R-squared                         0.14            0.14            0.12            0.13            0.13            0.13           0.19            0.18
Control Mean (In Levels)          3.53            3.53            3.54            3.54            3.55            3.55           5.56            5.56
Observations                      573             573             637             637             684             684            687             687
Notes: Table reports treatment effects on different measures of real profits in the month prior to the date of the survey, all measured in logs. See text for
descriptions of each measure. Dependent variable in Panel A is profits. Dependent variable in Panel B is profits per owner hour. Owner hours include the hours
of family member production when recorded. The regressions control for baseline values of the dependent variable, and include round and strata fixed effects.
Control group means are reported in levels in Egyptian pounds (LE) in Panel A and LE/hour in Panel B. The TOT regressions instrument takeup with treatment.
Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                             39
                                              Table 6: Sources of Changes to Firm Profits


Panel A: Components of Profits
                                    Log Output Price (LE/m2)            Log Output (m2)               Log Hours Worked
                                      ITT         TOT                 ITT        TOT                 ITT        TOT
                                     (1A)         (1B)               (2A)        (2B)               (3A)        (3B)
Treatment                            0.43 ***       0.78 ***        -0.26 ***     -0.47 ***         0.05 **       0.08 **
                                   (0.10)         (0.19)           (0.09)        (0.17)           (0.02)        (0.04)
R-squared                            0.16          0.15              0.24          0.22             0.12          0.13
Control Mean (In Levels)             28.2          28.2              64.1          64.1            269.0         269.0
Observations                         691           691               676           676               678           678

                                     Number of Employees             Log Number of Looms          Log Warp Thread Ball (kg)
                                       ITT       TOT                   ITT       TOT                  ITT       TOT
                                     (4A)        (4B)                (5A)       (5B)                (6A)        (6B)
Treatment                            0.01        0.01               -0.02      -0.04                0.15 ***    0.25 ***
                                   (0.01)      (0.01)              (0.04)     (0.06)              (0.05)      (0.08)
R-squared                            0.02        0.02                0.13       0.13                0.24        0.24
Control Mean (In Levels)               1.0        1.0                  1.1        1.1                 6.0        6.0
Observations                          695        695                  694        694                 600        600

Panel B: Inputs
                                        Log Weft Thread                Log Warp Thread                 Log Weft Thread               Log Warp Thread
                                          Price (LE/m2)                   Price (LE/m2)                  Quantity (g)                   Quantity (g)
                                      ITT           TOT               ITT          TOT               ITT         TOT                 ITT         TOT
                                     (1A)          (1B)              (2A)          (2B)             (3A)         (3B)               (4A)         (4B)
Treatment                            0.20 ***       0.33 ***        -0.04         -0.07            -0.19 **      -0.34 **           0.04          0.06
                                   (0.06)         (0.10)           (0.03)        (0.06)           (0.10)        (0.17)            (0.11)        (0.20)
R-squared                            0.22           0.24             0.27          0.27             0.23          0.22              0.10          0.11
Control Mean (In Levels)             12.8           12.8             18.1          18.1           110.0         110.0               17.8          17.8
Observations                         564            564              685           685              677           677               686           686
Notes: Panel A reports treatment effects on output prices and quantities, hours, number of employees (inclusive of owner), looms and the size of the warp
thread ball (which is a proxy for the length of the production run), all measured in logs except number of employees. Panel B analyzes input prices and
quantities, all measured in logs. The TOT regressions instrument takeup with treatment. Hours worked are calculated using average daily hours and number of
days worked last month. Control group means are reported in levels. The regressions control for baseline values of the dependent variable, and include round
and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                            40
                                                Table 7: Impact of Exporting on Quality Levels
Panel A: Quality Metrics
                                                                                                              Control                ITT                     TOT
                                                                                                               Mean                   (1)                      (2)
Corners                                                                                                        2.98                 1.11    ***              1.70    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.12)                   (0.11)
Waviness                                                                                                        2.99                1.10    ***              1.68    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.12)                   (0.10)
Weight                                                                                                          3.08                1.07    ***              1.63    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.11)                   (0.11)
Touch                                                                                                           3.12                0.40    ***              0.66    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.06)                   (0.07)
Packedness                                                                                                      3.11                0.89    ***              1.59    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.11)                   (0.12)
Warp Thread Tightness                                                                                           3.05                0.83    ***              1.49    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.10)                   (0.12)
Firmness                                                                                                        2.98                0.87    ***              1.60    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.11)                   (0.12)
Design Accuracy                                                                                                 3.17                0.79    ***              1.41    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.10)                   (0.12)
Warp Thread Packedness                                                                                          3.05                1.07    ***              1.65    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.11)                   (0.11)
Inputs                                                                                                          3.07                0.89    ***              1.62    ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.10)                   (0.12)
Loom                                                                                                            2.02                0.03                     0.05
                                                                                                                                  (0.02)                   (0.04)
R-squared                                                                                                                           0.44                     0.60
Observations                                                                                                                      6,885                    6,885
Panel B: Stacked Quality Metrics
                                                                                                              Control                ITT                     TOT
                                                                                                               Mean                   (1)                      (2)
Stacked Quality Metrics                                                                                        2.96                 0.79 ***                 1.35 ***
                                                                                                                                  (0.09)                   (0.08)
R-squared                                                                                                                           0.39                     0.54
Observations                                                                                                                      6,885                    6,885
Notes: Panel A stacks the quality metrics and interacts treatment (ITT) or takeup (TOT) with a quality-metric indicator variable. The coefficients on the
interactions provide the treatment effects seperately for each metric. The TOT instruments takeup interacted with quality metric with treatment interacted
with quality metric. Each regression includes baseline values of the quality metric, strata and round fixed effects, and each of these controls interacted with
quality-metric. Panel B constrains the treatment effects to be equal across quality metrics; these regressions include baseline values, strata and round fixed
effects. Control group means are reported in levels. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                       Table 8: Impact of Exporting on Unadjusted Productivity
                                                                                   Log Unadjusted Output Per Hour                       Log Unadjusted TFP
                                                                                         ITT               TOT                           ITT                    TOT
                                                                                         (1)                (2)                          (3)                     (4)
Treatment                                                                               -0.24 ***              -0.42 ***               -0.28 ***              -0.50 ***
                                                                                       (0.09)                 (0.16)                  (0.09)                 (0.16)
R-squared                                                                                0.18                   0.16                    0.26                   0.24
Control Mean (In Levels)                                                                 0.26                   0.26                    0.49                   0.49
Observations                                                                             687                    687                     674                    674
Notes: Table reports treatment effects for the two productivity measures: log unadjusted output per labor hour (in m2/hour) and log unadjusted TFP. See text and
Appendix A for the methodology used to obtain unadjusted TFP. The TOT specifications instrument takeup with treatment. Control group means are reported in
levels. Regressions control for baseline values of the variable, round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                                    41
                         Table 9: Quality and Productivity Conditional on Specifications (Step 1)


Panel A: Specification Controls
                                             Stacked Quality Metrics                   Log Output per Hour                             Log TFP
                                                ITT             TOT                     ITT             TOT                      ITT                TOT
                                                (1)               (2)                    (3)             (4)                     (5)                 (6)
Treatment                                      0.32 ***            0.78 ***            0.18 **              0.44 **             0.14 **             0.35 **
                                             (0.04)              (0.08)              (0.08)               (0.18)              (0.07)              (0.16)
(log) Thread quantity                          0.04                0.02               -0.12                -0.13               -0.07               -0.08
                                             (0.05)              (0.04)              (0.13)               (0.13)              (0.13)              (0.12)
Difficulty Control                             0.47 ***            0.34 ***           -0.14 ***            -0.21 ***           -0.16 ***           -0.22 ***
                                             (0.02)              (0.03)              (0.04)               (0.05)              (0.04)              (0.05)
(log) # colors                                 0.03 **             0.01               -0.05 *              -0.07 **            -0.06 **            -0.07 ***
                                             (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.03)               (0.03)              (0.03)              (0.02)
Low-market Segment                            -0.19 ***           -0.08 **             0.43 ***             0.49 ***            0.42 ***            0.47 ***
                                             (0.03)              (0.03)              (0.08)               (0.09)              (0.07)              (0.08)
Mid-Market Segment                            -0.19 ***           -0.05                0.29 ***             0.36 ***            0.26 ***            0.32 ***
                                             (0.04)              (0.04)              (0.08)               (0.09)              (0.07)              (0.08)
Rug Type FEs                                   yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
Input Thread Type FEs                          yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
R-squared                                     0.64                0.67                 0.57                0.58                0.62                 0.63
Observations                                 6,820               6,820                 673                 673                 660                  660
Panel B: Specification Fixed Effects
                                             Stacked Quality Metrics                   Log Output per Hour                             Log TFP
                                                (1)               (2)                    (3)             (4)                     (5)                  (6)
Treatment                                      0.13 **             0.53 ***            0.31 ***             1.26 ***            0.25 ***            0.94 ***
                                             (0.05)               0.17               (0.08)               (0.45)              (0.08)              (0.36)
Specification FEs                              yes                 yes                  yes                 yes                 yes                  yes
R-squared                                     0.71                0.72                 0.69                0.62                0.70                 0.68
Observations                                 6,820               6,820                 428                 428                 416                  416
Panel C: Specification-Adjusted Dependent Variables
                                       Stacked Quality Metrics                         Log Output per Hour                             Log TFP
                                          (1)               (2)                          (3)             (4)                     (5)                  (6)
Treatment                                      0.42 ***            0.72 ***            0.18 **              0.33 ***            0.20 ***            0.36 ***
                                             (0.05)              (0.04)              (0.07)               (0.13)              (0.07)              (0.12)
R-squared                                     0.18                0.27                 0.06                0.10                0.13                 0.18
Observations                                 6,860               6,860                 678                 678                 669                  669
Notes: Table reports treatment effects for the stacked quality measures and the two productivity measures after including various controls for the
specifications of the rug on the loom at the time of the survey. The TOT specifications instrument takeup with treatment. In Panel A, there are both rug and
input thread type fixed effects in addition to the specification controls included in the table. Panel B uses fixed effects for each of the 435 combinations of
the 6 specification controls. Both panels use unadjusted productivity measures. Panel C uses specification-adjusted meausre for quality and productivity;
see text and Appendix A for details. Regressions in all panels also control for baseline values of the dependent variable (and baselince values of the
specification controls in Panel A), as well as round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                              42
                Table 10: Quality and Productivity on Identical-Specification Domestic Rugs (Step 2)

Panel A: Quality Metrics
                                                                   Master Artisan                                                  Professor
                                                  Control             ITT                   TOT                Control              ITT                  TOT
                                                   Mean              (1A)                   (1B)                Mean               (2A)                  (2B)
Corners                                            3.23               0.72 ***              1.05 ***            3.31               0.29 **               0.43 **
                                                                    (0.14)                (0.17)                                 (0.13)                (0.18)
Waviness                                           3.17               0.55 ***              0.80 ***            3.31               0.25 **               0.36 **
                                                                    (0.14)                (0.18)                                 (0.12)                (0.16)
Weight                                             3.60               0.62 ***              0.91 ***            3.64               0.58 ***              0.86 ***
                                                                    (0.13)                (0.16)                                 (0.17)                (0.25)
Packedness                                         3.30               0.77 ***              1.14 ***            3.28               0.28 **               0.42 ***
                                                                    (0.13)                (0.15)                                 (0.11)                (0.15)
Touch                                              3.29               0.52 ***              0.76 ***            3.27               0.36 ***              0.52 ***
                                                                    (0.11)                (0.14)                                 (0.12)                (0.16)
Warp Thread Tightness                              3.00               0.51 ***              0.74 ***            3.30               0.25 **               0.36 **
                                                                    (0.09)                (0.11)                                 (0.12)                (0.16)
Firmness                                           3.21               0.71 ***              1.04 ***            3.23               0.29 **               0.43 ***
                                                                    (0.14)                (0.17)                                 (0.12)                (0.16)
Design Accuracy                                    3.65               0.53 ***              0.77 ***            3.45               0.27 **               0.40 ***
                                                                    (0.11)                (0.15)                                 (0.11)                (0.15)
Warp Thread Packedness                             3.05               0.87 ***              1.28 ***            3.20               0.39 ***              0.58 ***
                                                                    (0.14)                (0.17)                                 (0.12)                (0.16)
R-squared                                                             0.21                 0.34                                    0.11                 0.14
Observations                                                         1,680                1,680                                   1,667                1,667
Panel B: Stacked Quality Metrics
                                                                   Master Artisan                                                  Professor
                                                  Control             ITT                   TOT                Control              ITT                  TOT
                                                   Mean              (1A)                   (1B)                Mean               (2A)                  (2B)
Stacked Quality Metric                             3.28               0.64 ***              0.94 ***            3.33               0.33 ***              0.48   ***
                                                                    (0.10)                (0.12)                                 (0.10)                (0.13)
R-squared                                                             0.19                 0.32                                    0.09                 0.13
Observations                                                         1,680                1,680                                   1,667                1,667
Panel C: Objective Metrics
                                                  Control              ITT                  TOT
                                                   Mean               (1A)                  (1B)
Length Accuracy                                    -4.51              1.43 ***              2.09 ***
                                                                    (0.51)                (0.71)
Width Accuracy                                     -2.29              0.17                  0.25
                                                                    (0.29)                (0.41)
Weight Accuracy                                   -221.0              89.1 ***            131.0 ***
                                                                    (20.3)                (29.6)
Time (in minutes)                                  247.0             -5.67                  -8.3
                                                                      (6.6)                (9.5)
R-squared                                                             0.84                 0.84
Observations                                                          748                  748
Notes: Table reports ITT and TOT specifications using the 9 quality metrics from the quality lab. Panel A stacks the quality metrics and interacts treatment (ITT) or
takeup (TOT) with a quality-metric indicator variable. The coefficients on the interactions provide the treatment effects seperately for each metric. The TOT
instruments takeup (interacted with quality metric) with treatment (also interacted with quality metric). Panel B constrains the treatment effects to be equal
across quality metrics. Columns 1A and 1B report scores from the master artisan. Columns 2A and 2B report scores from the Professor of Handicraft Science at
Domietta University. Panel C reports objective accuracy measures which are calculated as the negative of the absolute error for that specification, so that a
higher value indicates that the manufactured rug was closer to intended length (140 cm), width (70 cm) and weight (1750 g). It also includes the time spent to
produce the rug in minutes. As in Panel A, these are run in a single regression by intereacting the objective measure with treatment or takeup. All regressions
include interactions of strata fixed effects with quality-metric indicators, and standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.
                                                                                 43
                                       Table 11: Information Flows and Quality Levels (Step 4)

Panel A: Baseline
                                                                                             Specification-                                     Specification-
                                                                 Stacked Quality          Adjusted Quality           Stacked Quality         Adjusted Quality
                                                                        Metrics                    Metrics                  Metrics                   Metrics
                                                                              (1)                        (2)                    (3)                        (4)
Takeupi x {Talked About Dimension}id                                        0.19 **                    0.16 **
                                                                          (0.08)                     (0.07)
Takeupi x {Information on Techniques for Dimension}id                                                                             0.32 ***                  0.33 ***
                                                                                                                                (0.09)                    (0.09)
Takeupi x {Pointed Out Mistakes in Dimension}id                                                                                   0.30 ***                  0.29 ***
                                                                                                                                (0.04)                    (0.04)
Quality Metric FEs                                                             yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Takeupi x Quality Metric FEs                                                    no                        no                        no                        no
Firm FEs                                                                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Specification-adjusted Quality Metrics                                          no                       yes                        no                       yes
R-squared                                                                     0.76                      0.43                      0.75                      0.42
Observations                                                                 1700                      1667                      1670                      1637

Panel B: With "Takeup x Quality" FEs
                                                                                        Specification-                                          Specification-
                                                                 Stacked Quality     Adjusted Quality                Stacked Quality         Adjusted Quality
                                                                        Metrics               Metrics                       Metrics                   Metrics
                                                                              (5)                   (6)                         (7)                        (8)
Takeupi x {Talked About Dimension}id                                        0.15 ***              0.13 **
                                                                          (0.05)                (0.05)
Takeupi x {Information on Techniques for Dimension}id                                                                             0.16 *                    0.16
                                                                                                                                (0.09)                    (0.10)
Takeupi x {Pointed Out Mistakes in Dimension}id                                                                                   0.17 **                   0.15 *
                                                                                                                                (0.08)                    (0.08)
Quality Metric FEs                                                             yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Takeupi x Quality Metric FEs                                                   yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Firm FEs                                                                       yes                       yes                       yes                       yes
Specification-adjusted Quality Metrics                                          no                       yes                        no                       yes
R-squared                                                                     0.81                      0.56                      0.81                      0.55
Observations                                                                 1700                      1667                      1670                      1637
Notes: Table regresses stacked quality metrics on takeup indicator and its interaction with a dummy that takes the value 1 if the intermediary talked to the firm
about that particular dimension of quality. Even-numbered columns use the specification-adjusted quality metrics described in the text. Columns 3 and 4
seperate whether the discussion along that dimension was about technique or just pointing out mistakes. Regressions are run on a cross-section of firms and
include baseline values, firm fixed effects, quality metric fixed effects, and quality metric fixed effects interacted with takeup. Panel B repeats the regressions in
Panel A but also includes takeup interacted with quality metric fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                                 44
       Figure 1: Example of Rug Specifications Provided by a Potential Foreign Client




                       Figure 2: Examples of Domestic Rugs and Export Rugs




Notes: Figure provides examples of a domestic rug (left) and export rugs ordered by foreign buyers (center, right). The
domestic rug is the duble rug that firms were asked to manufacture at the Quality Lab (See Section 6.3).


                                                          45
                                             Cumulative export orders (m2)




                       5,000




          0
                                    10,000
                                                   15,000
                                                                20,000
                                                                             25,000
                                                                                      30,000
                                                                                               35,000
     Dec-10



     Mar-11



     Jun-11
              Sample 1 - Baseline

     Sep-11



     Dec-11



     Mar-12
              Sample 1 - Round 2

     Jun-12




46
     Sep-12   Sample 1 - Round 3


     Dec-12


              Sample 2 - Baseline
     Mar-13   Sample 1 - Round 4
                                                                                                        Figure 3: Cumulative Export Orders




              Sample 2 - Round 1
     Jun-13
              Sample 1 - Round 5

     Sep-13


              Sample 2 - Round 2
     Dec-13
              Sample 1 - Round 6

     Mar-14
              Sample 2 - Round 3

     Jun-14
                                    Figure 4: Overlap in Rug Specifications between Domestic and Export Orders




                                                                                                                1




           .6
                                                            .8
                                                                                                                .8




                                                                .6




              .4
                                                                                                                  .6




                                                        .4
                                                                                                           Fraction
                                                                                                           .4




      Fraction
                                                       Fraction




           .2
                                                                                                                .2




                                                            .2
                                                                                                                0




           0
                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                e rteta
                                                                                                              Gou
                                                                                                                 blan TupsDubl−eDublaesaeesshmerBa
                   1   2        3         4   5                       Low          Mid       High                          1/2    K Ca
                           Rug Difficulty                                     Market Segment                                    Rug Type




           1
                                                            1
                                                                                                                .5




47
           .8
                                                            .8
                                                                                                                .4




             .6
                                                               .6
                                                                                                                   .3




      Fraction
      .4
                                                        Fraction
                                                                                                            Fraction




                                                       .4
                                                                                                           .2




           .2
                                                            .2
                                                                                                                .1




           0
                                                            0
                                                                                                                0




           ol   ol     n      r     le    r
         Wo L Wo Cotto olyesteChenil Othe
      EGP NZ         P                                               6.5       7      7.5      8     8.5                0   1     2     3       4         5
                   Weft Thread Type                                         Log Thread Quantity                             Log Number of Colors


                                                                     Takeup                        Non−Takeup

     Notes: Figure plots the density of the six rug specifications for takeup (shaded) and non−takeup (outline) firms.
                                                      Figure 5: Learning Curves for Takeup Firms (Step 3)


                                      No Specification Controls                                                   Specification-Adjusted




       -.1 -.05 0 .05
                                                                                  -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




     2
                                                                                 2




      M per hour (residual)
                                                                                 M per hour (residual)
                              0   200           400            600         800                           0   200           400            600    800
                                                                 2                                                                          2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                          Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                   Specification-Adjusted




                                                                                       0    .5     1




48
       TFP (residual)
                                                                                    TFP (residual)




      -.2 -.1 0 .1
                                                                                 -.5
                              0   200           400            600         800                           0   200           400            600    800
                                                                 2                                                                          2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                          Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                   Specification-Adjusted




       Quality (residual)
                                                                                  Quality (residual)




      -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6
                                                                                 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                              0   200           400            600         800                           0   200           400            600    800
                                                                 2                                                                          2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                          Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves obtained by regressing quality or productivity measures on firm and round fixed effects and then plotting a
     kernel-weighted local polynomial of the residuals against cumulative export production for takeup firms. Figure restricts attention to range of
     cumulative exports achieved by Sample 2 firms.
                          Exporting and Firm Performance:
                   Evidence from a Randomized Experiment
                        David Atkin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Adam Osman


                         Appendices for Online Publication
Online Appendix B              The Global and Egyptian Rug Industry
   The handmade craft industry and the carpet and rug industry are large and important sources
of employment in developing economies. Global handmade craft production was estimated at
$23.2 billion in 2005, while world production of carpets and rugs totaled $32 billion in 2008 (UNC-
TAD Creative Economy Report, 2010). Egypt is the 11th largest global producer of carpets and
rugs with a total production of $734 million in 2013 (36 percent of Egypt’s total textile sector and
1.3 percent of total manufacturing output).5 More than 17,000 people work in the carpet and rug
industry in Egypt, representing 7 percent of world employment in this industry and 1.7 percent
of total manufacturing employment in Egypt (UNIDO 2013). Egypt has a revealed comparative
advantage in this sector, and in 2013 Egypt’s exports in HS57 (“carpets and other textile floor cov-
erings”) constituted 1.4 percent of its total exports. The top 5 destinations for these exports are
the U.S., Germany, Italy, United Kingdom, and Canada, which together account for 59 percent of
total exports in the category. Indirect exporting is common in both the sector and among small
firms. As noted in the main text, 2006-2014 World Bank Enterprise Surveys reveal that 36 percent
of exporters across countries and sectors use an intermediary (and 62 percent for exporting firms
with 5 or fewer employees). Moreover, using Chinese customs data, we are able to obtain the
share of exports that go through intermediaries for the specific HS code that the rugs in our study
are classified under, HS 570231 (“Carpets and other textile floor coverings, wool”).6 Exporting via
intermediaries is particularly common in the rug industry with 52 percent of exports in HS Code
570231 going through intermediaries compared to 20 percent of overall exports.

Online Appendix C              The Rug Production and Marketing Process
   The firms in Fowa typically operate out of a rented space or sometimes the home of the owner.
The owner is almost always the primary weaver and most firms have no other full time employ-
ees, although family members often assist with restringing the loom and the finishing stage. Firms
self-identify as specialists in one of four flat-weave rug types: duble, tups, kasaees and goublan.
Duble and tups rugs are the most common types, with Tups rugs typically having more elaborate
patterns than Duble rugs; kasaees rugs are woven from rags and are the cheapest type; goublan
rugs are the most expensive type and are works of art used as wall hangings. See Figure C.1 for
pictures of each type.

   5 Statisticsfrom Euromonitor International Passport Database, Egypt national statistics, UN and OECD.
   6 See   Ahn et al. (2011) to see how exports through intermediaries are classified in this setting.


                                                         1
    The process of producing rugs is standardized across firms. The elements of the production
technology are marked in Figure C.2. The rugs are made on a large wooden foot-treadle loom.
The width of the loom determines the maximum width of a rug. Rugs can be made of any length.
The warp thread is the wool or cotton thread that spans the entire length of the rug and must be
attached to the loom before rugs can be weaved as part of the restringing process. These threads
cannot be seen on the final rug but are necessary to hold the rug together. The warp threads are
kept in place using a reed which resembles a very large comb. The weft thread (typically made
from wool) is the visible thread on the rug and is weaved between these warp threads using a
shuttle. A foot-operated heddle is used to raise every alternate warp thread allowing the weaver
to more quickly weave the weft threads between the warp threads. The weaver changes out the
weft thread as he weaves based on the needs of the design until the rug is complete. At that point
he cuts off the completed rug and continues to utilize the remaining warp thread until the pro-
duction run of that particular type of rug is finished. Hence, the length of the production run is
determined by the amount of warp thread in the warp thread ball attached to the loom.
    Duble rugs are the thickest of the rug types and typically made using a reed with 200 openings
per meter. In contrast, tups and goublan rugs are more intricate. Goublan rugs usually require a
reed with 400 openings per meter and because of the intricate design patterns, weavers use their
hands, instead of shuttles, for precision in weaving the weft thread. Tups rugs are also finely wo-
ven using a reed with 400 openings per meter but because they are used as floor rugs and have
simpler designs, weavers use shuttles to increase the speed of production. Finally, kasaees rugs
use reeds with 250 openings per meter but these rugs use left-over cloth (for example, torn up
t-shirts) in their weave instead of more expensive wool inputs.
    The vast majority of rug producers in Fowa use intermediaries to market their products. The
baseline survey revealed that 88 percent of firms sell products through one of the intermediaries
located in Fowa. We find no statistical difference in the proportion of firms using intermediaries
between treatment and control, nor is there a statistically significant difference in the use of in-
termediaries by firms who had exported at baseline and those who had not. Thus, the reliance
on intermediaries is not unique to exports. (And as noted earlier in Online Appendix B, the use
of intermediaries more generally is common, particularly for small firms). Finally, the baseline
data indicate that the (limited number of) firms who report having manufactured rugs for export
markets have lower unadjusted output per hour and higher quality metrics, just as we found for
firms induced to export by our intervention..7 This evidence suggests that, for the firms in Fowa
at least, the process of exporting through Hamis Carpets is similar to to the process of exporting
through other means.




    7A   regression of log unadjusted output per hour on having exported at baseline gives a coefficient of -0.224 (s.e.
0.139), while a regression of the mean of all quality metrics on having exported at baseline gives a coefficient of 0.143
(s.e. 0.083).


                                                           2
               Figure C.1: Examples of Duble, Tups, Kasaees, and Goublan Rugs

                      Duble Rug                                                                  Tups Rug




                    Kasaees Rug                                                                  Goublan Rug




Notes: Figure illustrates the four ﬂat-weave rug types produced by ﬁrms in Fowa, Egypt: duble, tups, kasaees, and goublan.




                                      Figure C.2: Production Technology




                                                                                    Heddle




                                                                                     Reed/Comb


                                                                                     WeftThread

                                                                                     WarpThread




                                                               3
Online Appendix D              Additional Details on Experiment Protocol
    In this appendix, we provide a detailed description of the experiment protocol. For complete-
ness, we repeat the details reported in the main text, as well as provide additional information.
Online Appendix D.1           Experiment Protocol
    Hamis Carpets (with ATA’s assistance) marketed rugs to overseas buyers. Once export orders
were secured, we divided the orders into smaller packets. The treatment firms were visited by
our survey team and a representative of Hamis carpets, and were offered the opportunity to pro-
duce one of these packets of export orders. More precisely, Hamis Carpets showed them the rug
design, explained that the carpet would be exported to a high-income country, and offered them
an order of 110m2 which translates to about 11 weeks of work. The 110m2 was chosen by trading
off the desire to have a reasonable sized initial order and the need to have enough orders to treat
all the treatment firms. Hamis was given discretion regarding what price to offer the treatment
firms, and chose prices based on the specifications of the particular rug orders. The initial protocol
intended for us to offer this 110m2 packet in one go, and for the rug orders to be of the type the
firm was specialized in producing. As we discuss in Online Appendix D.2, this was the protocol
followed for Sample 2. Given our initial difficulties in generating export orders, in Sample 1 we
could only offer Duble and Kassaes rugs orders, and only by sequentially offering smaller packet
sizes that summed to 110m2 .8
    If the firm accepted, Hamis delivered the input thread and the correctly sized reed and heddle
to ensure all rug orders were consistent across producers. At the same time, as is typical in many
buyer-producer relationships, Hamis would discuss the technical aspects of the specific rug order
and answer any questions the firm may have. Firms would deliver rugs to Hamis and receive
payment upon delivery.
    As further export orders were generated, Hamis continued to place them with the treatment
firms. Just as in any arms-length transaction, after the initial order amounts were offered, Hamis
was not bound to continue to make subsequent purchases from any particular treatment firm if
the quality was below par or the previous rugs were not delivered on time. (And firms were in-
formed of this arrangement.) The experiment protocol simply required Hamis to offer an initial
order to the treatment firm.9 Hamis was not allowed to allocate any orders to control firms and
we maintained a project coordinator and survey team in Fowa to ensure that the protocols were
followed.10 Thus, the intervention provided treatment firms with the opportunity to produce rugs
for the export market.


    8 As  Kassaes rugs are substantially quicker to produce we offered an initial packet size of 250m2 to Kassaes
producers.
    9 In cases in which the treatment firms were unable to produce the rugs at the quality level required by Hamis

Carpets, the research team would reimburse Hamis carpets the cost of the materials that were used in the first 110m2 .
This happened in only 3 cases, and in none of Duble producing-firms that comprise the Joint Sample we use in the
paper (see Table 1).
   10 As noted in the draft, one control firm was incorrectly treated due to an error by Hamis. In the empirical analysis

we make the most conservative assumption and keep this firm in the control group.


                                                           4
Online Appendix D.2      Sample, Randomization and Take up
   Since there is no official census of firms that manufacture rugs in Fowa, we hired a Fowa-based
NGO to go street by street looking for rug-making firms in homes and workshops that satisfied
the following characteristics: a) had fewer than 5 employees; b) worked on their own account
(meaning that they bought their own inputs when an order required); c) had never previously
worked with Hamis, and d) were willing to participate in a research experiment on exporting. We
stopped the recruitment drive when the NGO had identified 300 firms. As there are far more than
300 rug-making firms in Fowa, the first recruitment drive provided us with a sample of firms in
central areas of Fowa that were operating and observable at the time of recruitment. This exercise
produced a list of 303 firms, which we refer to as “Sample 1”.
   Firms specialize in one of four rug types. We stratified the sample on the type of rug produced
and the loom size. Within each stratum we randomized firms into treatment and control using a
random number generator and strata that contained an odd number of firms were assigned one
more firm to control than to treatment. The first two rows of columns 2, 3, 4 and 6 in Table 1 show
the total number of firms by rug type and treatment status for Sample 1. The third row of Table
1 shows the takeup status for these firms. As anticipated by our decision to stratify along this
dimension, takeup rates varied greatly depending on the firm’s primary rug type. For goublain
and tups producers, the two rug types for which we obtained no orders, takeup rates were 10 and
19 percent, respectively. We expected low take up in these strata since these firms do not typically
produce duble or kasaees rugs. Nevertheless, we attempted to treat these firms and found that
very few were willing to switch rug types. In follow-up round 2, we asked all treated firms who
did not take up why they did not take up. Table E.1 presents these results. The main reason for
refusals among goublain and tups firms was that the export rug order “was not the suitable rug
type”. While this could mean that either the rug category (i.e. duble, tups, kasaees, goublan)
was not suitable, or that the export rugs had sufficiently different specifications such that firms
perceived them to be a different rug type, we take this as confirmatory evidence.
   Table 1 shows that among kasaees and duble rug producers in Sample 1, take up was 26 and
38 percent, respectively. These takeup rates were still relatively low. As we detail in Section 2.2,
between December 2010 and May 2012 we were able to generate a small number of export orders
for kasaees and duble rugs (see Figure 3). However, given the small number of export orders, we
were unable to approach treatment firms in Sample 1 with the opportunity to produce the full
110m2 in one go. Instead, we had to sequentially offer smaller orders of 10-20m2 , or about two
weeks of work. Because these orders were small, many firms were unwilling to work with us:
Table E.1 shows that the most common reason why duble firms did not take up was an unwill-
ingness to jeopardize their existing relationships with other intermediaries for a small amount of
work, and that the export order was not the suitable rug type (presumably because of the very dif-
ferent export specifications). Many kasaees producers were unwilling to accept the export order
for the same reason (i.e. because there are several distinct types of kasaees and the particular rug
they were asked to produce was different from the kasaees rugs they usually make).


                                                 5
    From March 2013, Hamis’ major buyers offered assurances that they would continue to place
duble rug orders for the foreseeable future so it became feasible to offer the opportunity to pro-
duce 110m2 in one go. Since this was the intended treatment in our experimental protocol, we
conducted a second round of recruitment for firms that specialized in duble rugs. At this stage
of the project, we had an experienced Fowa-based team who were able to locate an additional
140 duble firms in Fowa that had been not been found during the initial recruitment drive in July
2011. To our knowledge, these were all the remaining duble rug producers in Fowa with the ex-
ception of ten firms who refused to participate. We refer to these additional firms as “Sample 2”
and again stratified these firms by loom size. We randomized 35 firms into the treatment group
using a random number generator. The choice of 35 treatment firms for Sample 2 was dictated
both by Hamis’ constraints on the number of firms it could work with, and our desire to ensure
that the full 110m2 could be offered to each treatment firm. Column 5 of Table 1 reports treatment
and takeup statistics for Sample 2. Consistent with the low take up in Sample 1 being due to the
inability to offer the full 110m2 packet in one go, 32 out of 35 treatment firms in Sample 2 took up
the opportunity to produce export orders.11
    We combine the duble strata from Sample 1 with the firms in Sample 2—who are exclusively
duble firms—to form the Joint Sample of 219 firms (74 in treatment, 47 of which took up). This is al-
most every duble producer in Fowa which mitigates concerns of internal validity that would arise
if we focused only on the second sample that was treated with the full 1102 initial order in one go.
    As noted above, the experiment protocol allowed Hamis Carpets to end their relationship with
firms that did not produce the 110m2 packet at the expected quality level and in a timely manner.
The 5th row of Table 1 reports the number of “successful” takeup firms, defined as those who
produced 110m2 and then received subsequent orders from Hamis. Only 3 treatment firms (all
non-duble firms in Sample 1) failed to secure additional orders from Hamis after the initial treat-
ment. Two of the firms were unable to manufacture the export orders successfully while the other
firm had a falling out with the owner of Hamis.
    Samples 1 and 2 do differ on some observables. On average, Sample 2 firms have higher prof-
its and consumption, although similar quality levels and output. These differences may be due to
the fact that recruitment was carried out sequentially, so that Sample 2 firms were more difficult
to find or less centrally located. However, there are no significant differences in observables be-
tween treatment and control groups within either sample as can be seen in Table F.1, or in the Joint
Sample of duble firms as can be seen in Table 3. We also find that the estimated treatment-on-the-
treated (TOT) effects do not differ across samples (we compare TOTs since ITTs will vary due to
differences in take up rates). Out of the 44 comparisons of TOTs between the two samples, only
three are statistically significant at the 10 percent level and one is statistically significant at the 5
percent level (in line with the number of type 1 errors we would expect).



  11 30of the 35 Sample 2 treatment firms took the offer up immediately in March 2013. The 2 remaining firms began
producing orders for Hamis in May 2014. This delay was due to capacity constraints on the side of Hamis.


                                                        6
Online Appendix D.3      Protocol for Quality Lab
   In June 2014, we rented a workshop with a loom and invited the primary weaver in all the
treatment and control firms in the Joint Sample to come to the workshop to produce an identical
rug. The rug specifications mimicked a popular rug design sold at mid-tier domestic retail outlets
in Egypt (a 140cm by 70cm rug with a desired weight of 1750g, and the master artisan assigned a
difficulty rating of 3—see Figure 2 for the actual design). Prior to the arrival of the firm’s weaver
(all of whom were the firm’s owners), our field team prepared the loom for weaving with the
help of the master artisan. We provided all the necessary thread, reed and heddle inputs. Thus,
each firm used an identical loom, an identical loom setup, and identical inputs to manufacture an
identical rug.
   This setup was not unusual. Some large intermediaries in Fowa have workshops where they
bring producers to and pay them to weave. Nonetheless, our Quality Lab differed in that we in-
vited firms to produce a single rug, instead of many meters of rugs as is the market norm. To
mitigate potential Hawthorne effects, where the firms act differently because they know they are
being analyzed, we excluded Hamis Carpets from being involved in administering the Quality
lab, from participating in contacting the firms, and from encouraging them to participate. Instead,
we hired a new staff member to administer the Quality Lab, and he was instructed to invite sam-
ple firms to produce a rug at the rented workshop for a LE70 payment, which is about three times
the average price for a rug of these specifications. The firms were told that the reason why this
lucrative opportunity existed was because there was a buyer in Cairo that was interested in mak-
ing a one-time purchase of one rug from each of the many producers in Fowa. This claim was
truthful, as one of the authors was in Cairo at the time, serving the role of that buyer. There was
no mention of Hamis Carpets and no discussion of whether performance in the lab would affect
future orders from Hamis.
   The firms were shown to the Quality Lab and provided the design and specifications of the
rug. The firms were not incentivized to produce quality in any way, nor were they encouraged to
produce quickly or slowly, or given a time limit. They also were not given any reason to believe
that their performance on this task would impact future opportunities to produce for this buyer,
or given any information about the desired quality of the rug. They were not even told they were
being evaluated in any way. Firms were simply informed that as long as they completed the rug
they would be given LE70 as promised. Our protocols directed the new staff member to interact
with the treatment and control group firms in an identical manner; from the way they were re-
cruited, to how they were told about the LE70 payment, and to the instructions they were given
about what type of rug to produce.
   The total time taken to weave the rug was recorded and after the rug was completed, the staff
member recorded the length, height and weight of the rug, and tagged each rug with a new set
of firm identification numbers. After all firms had manufactured the rugs, they were sent to the
master artisan to score the quality levels without revealing the master artisan the identity of the
firm that made them (only the anonymized identification number). In addition, the rugs were


                                                 7
sent to Professor Fayrouz Al-Gamal, a Professor of Handicraft Science from Domietta University,
to provide an independent set of quality scores. Professor Al-Gamal has been the chair of the
“Spinning, Weaving and Knitting Department” at the Domietta University since 2013 and is an
expert in jacquard knitting techniques. He has contributed technical chapters to eight published
books, and presented his work at a dozen academic conferences in the last five years.




                                                8
            Online Appendix E               Additional Tables and Figures



                                         Table E.1: Reasons for Refusing Treatment, Sample 1


                                                         Goublain Firms        Tups Firms        Kasaees Firms        Duble Firms           All Firms
Reasons for Refusal                                        N        %          N        %          N       %           N        %         N          %
(Agreed)                                                   3       6.1          6      14.3        5      26.3        15      38.5        28       18.8
Risk relationship with current intermediary                2       4.1          1      2.4         2      10.5         7      17.9        12        8.1
Price was too low                                          2       4.1          1      2.4         2      10.5         3       7.7         9        6.0
Left industry or passed away                               2       4.1          3      7.1         3      15.8         5      12.8        13        8.7
Export order not suitable rug type                        39      79.6         30      71.4        6      31.6         7      17.9        82       55.0
Refused contact with survey team                           1       2.0          1      2.4         1      5.3          2       5.1         5        3.4
Total                                                     49      100          42      100        19      100         39      100        149        100
Notes: Table reports the reasons for refusing treatment orders among Sample 1 firms as reported in the second survey round (April-May 2012). As of the
second survey round, 28 firms had agreed to take orders. Since that time, an additional duble firm, two additional goublain firms and two additional tups
firms have also taken orders resulting in a total of 33 Sample 1 firms takeing up.




                                                 Table E.2: Hamis Carpets’ Cost Structure


                                                                               Revenue and Expenses, Egyptian Pounds per m2
                                                                            Domestic Orders                      Export Orders
Material Expenses                                                                30                                    40
Payments to Producers                                                            25                                    40
Shipping Costs                                                                    0                                    40
Price Received                                                                   60                                   160
Markup                                                                           9%                                   33%
Notes: Table reports Hamis Carpets' cost structure on foreign and domstic rugs. Numbers reported in Egyptian Pounds per square meter. The final row
indicates self-reported markups on domestic and export orders.




                                                                           9
                                          Table E.3: Attrition by Survey Round and Sample


                                                                                              Control Group
                                                                                                      Mean              Treatment             Obs.
Attrition in All Follow Up Survey Rounds                                                                0.11                  0.00            815
                                                                                                      (0.01)                (0.02)
Attrition in Round 1, Sample 1 (Nov-Dec 2011)                                                              -                     -

Attrition in Round 2, Sample 1 (April-May 2012)                                                           0.15                -0.05              79
                                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.08)
Attrition in Round 3, Sample 1 (Sept-Dec 2012)                                                            0.10                 0.03              79
                                                                                                        (0.05)               (0.07)
Attrition in Round 4, Sample 1 (March-Apr 2013)                                                           0.18                 0.03              79
                                                                                                        (0.06)               (0.09)
Attrition in Round 1, Sample 2 (May-June 2013)                                                            0.05                -0.03            140
                                                                                                        (0.02)               (0.04)
Attrition in Round 5, Sample 1 (July-Oct 2013)                                                            0.20                 0.05              79
                                                                                                        (0.07)               (0.10)
Attrition in Round 2, Sample 2 (Nov-Dec 2013)                                                             0.02                 0.01            140
                                                                                                        (0.01)               (0.03)
Attrition in Round 6, Sample 1 (Jan-March 2014)                                                           0.28                 0.03              79
                                                                                                        (0.07)               (0.10)
Attrition in Round 3, Sample 2 (May-June 2014)                                                            0.07                -0.03            140
                                                                                                        (0.02)               (0.04)
Notes: Table reports attrition across all follow up survey rounds and then reports attrition seperately by round, in chronological order. Attrition is
defined as a firm not having answered the survey in a particular round. Statistics regarding Sample 1 only report attrition for the Sample 1 duble
firms that appear in the Joint Sample. As discussed elsewhere, we do not include Round 1 data for Sample 1 due to evidence of enumerator
misconduct. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                         10
                                             Table E.4: Geographic Spillovers to Control Firms


                                        Sum of Inverse Distance          Sum of Inverse Distance
                                            to Treatment Firms             Squared to Treatment                  Marginal Effect        R-Squared        Obs.
Ever Exported                                                 -0.2                         Firms
                                                                                            16.3                             6.8              0.12        128
                                                             (0.9)                           (40.2)                       (16.4)
Direct Log Monthly Profits                                    -0.9                              0.3                         -0.8              0.26        368
                                                             (1.3)                           (43.2)                       (17.2)
Direct Log Profits per Hour                                   -0.5                            -40.5                        -17.7              0.18        368
                                                             (1.4)                           (47.5)                       (19.0)
Log Output per Hour                                           -1.3                             37.3                         19.1              0.08        427
                                                             (1.0)                           (36.9)                       (16.4)
Stacked Quality                                                0.6                             -7.1                         -2.4              0.06      4,408
                                                             (0.4)                           (15.9)                        (6.4)
Log Unadjusted TFP                                            -1.5                           103.0 *                        42.0 *            0.22        418
                                                             (1.9)                           (59.3)                       (23.9)
Log Adjusted TFP                                              -1.7 *                           55.4                         21.9              0.10        421
                                                             (1.0)                           (42.5)                       (17.3)
Notes: Table reports results from regressing the outcome variable in each row on the sum of the inverse distance between control firms and all treatment
firms and the sum if the inverse distance squared to all treatment firms (with distance measured in meters). The third column shows the marginal effect of
distance on the outcome based on the results from the regression. Regressions include round and strata fixed effects and control for baseline values. The
stacked quality regression includes quality metric fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.

                            Table E.5: Key Results with Firm Fixed-Effects Instead of Baseline Controls

                                                                                                     ITT                 TOT          R-squared          Obs.
                                                                                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)          (4)
Ever Exported                                                                                      0.53    ***          0.74    ***        0.71          410
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.10)
Direct Log Monthly Profits                                                                         0.30    **           0.47    ***        0.57           874
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.16)
Direct Log Profits per Hour                                                                        0.28    **           0.44    ***        0.48           874
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.16)
Log Stacked Quality                                                                                1.04    ***          1.58    ***        0.61         8,931
                                                                                                   (.10)                (.09)
Log Output per Hour                                                                               -0.18                -0.31               0.04           901
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.20)
Log Unadjusted TFP                                                                                -0.26    **          -0.44    **         0.04           890
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.20)
Log Specification-Adjusted Stacked Quality                                                         0.71    ***          0.88    ***        0.30         8,389
                                                                                                   0.09                 0.08
Log Specification-Adjusted TFP                                                                     0.26    **           0.43    **         0.15           298
                                                                                                   (.12)                (.20)
Notes: Table reports treatment effects on eight main outcomes for the Joint Sample of duble firms using firm fixed effects instead of controlling for the
baseline value of the variable. All regressions include firm and round fixed effects, and cluster standard errors by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.



                                                                             11
                                                            Table E.6: Treatment Dynamics


                                                       Log Direct Profits     Log Output per                              Log Specification-   Log Specification-
                                Log Direct Profits         per Hour                Hour            Log Unadjusted TFP       Adjusted TFP       Adjusted Quality
                                            (1)                    (2)                  (3)                    (4)                     (5)                  (6)
Treatment                                   0.28 ***              0.23 ***             -0.26 **               -0.29 ***              0.19 *                0.44 ***
                                          (0.08)                (0.07)                (0.11)                 (0.10)                (0.10)                (0.06)
   x 2nd Survey Round                      -0.03                 -0.06                  0.16                   0.18                  0.13                  0.01
                                          (0.10)                (0.09)                (0.12)                 (0.12)                (0.11)                (0.06)
   x 3rd Survey Round                      -0.07                 -0.12                 -0.05                  -0.08                 -0.01                  0.01
                                          (0.10)                (0.09)                (0.13)                 (0.12)                (0.11)                (0.07)
   x 4th Survey Round                      -0.07                 -0.04                 -0.26                  -0.31                 -0.33 *               -0.10
                                          (0.16)                (0.15)                (0.24)                 (0.23)                (0.18)                (0.11)
   x 5th Survey Round                       0.27 *                0.27 *                0.17                   0.13                  0.07                 -0.21 *
                                          (0.16)                (0.15)                (0.24)                 (0.21)                (0.15)                (0.11)
R-squared                                   0.22                  0.15                  0.18                  0.27                   0.13                  0.18
Observations                                573                   573                   687                   674                    669                  6,860
Notes: Table reports treatment effects interacted with dummies for each round of data collection. The regressions control for baseline values of the dependent
variable, and include round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.

                               Table E.7: Summary Statistics for Intermediary-Firm Information Flows


                                                                                                                            (1)
Number of Visits                                                                                                           11.0
                                                                                                                          (2.57)
Length of Visit (in minutes)                                                                                               27.6
                                                                                                                          (4.88)
Discussed technique (as opposed to pointing out flaws)                                                                    90.3%
Observations                                                                                                                44

                                                                                                  Discussed Metric                  Discusssed Technique
                                                                                                        (1A)                                 (2A)
Corners                                                                                                31.8%                               100.0%
Waviness                                                                                               20.5%                               100.0%
Weight                                                                                                 54.5%                                92.9%
Touch                                                                                                  11.4%                               100.0%
Packedness                                                                                             20.5%                                93.8%
Warp Thread Tightness                                                                                  47.7%                                78.9%
Firmness                                                                                               31.8%                               100.0%
Design Accuracy                                                                                        50.0%                                96.2%
Warp Thread Packedness                                                                                 22.7%                                75.0%
Observations                                                                                                                44
Notes: Table summarizes the data collected about knowledge flows between the intermediary and the firms. All firms were visited at least 7 times, and
the top panel reports the average length of each visit in minutes (with standard deviations in parantheses), and the proportion of interactions that
discuss technique, rather than simply pointing out flaws. The bottom panel reports the proportion of firms that report discussing the quality metric with
the intermediary and, conditional on discussing that metric, the proportion of firms that report that the intermediary discussed techniques to improve
along that dimensions rather than simply pointing out flaws. Note that these data were collected before two take-up firms in Sample 2 began producing
for export.




                                                                                12
                                               Table E.8: Quality Hedonic Regression


                                                                                                                    Log Profits Per Hour
                                                                                                                                     (1)
Corners                                                                                                                             0.08
                                                                                                                                  (0.06)
Waviness                                                                                                                         -0.044
                                                                                                                                  (0.06)
Weight                                                                                                                           -0.027
                                                                                                                                  (0.05)
Touch                                                                                                                             0.189 **
                                                                                                                                  (0.07)
Packedness                                                                                                                       -0.150 **
                                                                                                                                  (0.07)
Warp Thread Tightness                                                                                                             0.173 **
                                                                                                                                  (0.08)
Firmness                                                                                                                         -0.103
                                                                                                                                  (0.08)
Design Accuracy                                                                                                                   0.106 *
                                                                                                                                  (0.05)
Warp Thread Packedness                                                                                                            0.032
                                                                                                                                  (0.06)
P-Value of Joint F-Test                                                                                                           0.013
R-squared                                                                                                                         0.587
Observations                                                                                                                        563
Notes: Table reports the regression of log profits per hour on the nine quality metrics that are recorded in Step 2. The regression is run on
all firms producing for the domestic market (the non-takeup firms). Regressions also include strata and round fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                     13
                                                Figure E.1: Semi-Parametric Learning Curves for Takeup Firms


                                      No Specification Controls                                                  Specification-Adjusted




                                                                                 0    .5    1 1.5




     2
                                                                               2




       -.2-.15-.1-.05 0 .05
      M per hour (residual)
                                                                                M per hour (residual)
                              0   200           400            600       800                            0   200           400            600       800
                                                                 2                                                                         2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                         Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                  Specification-Adjusted




                                                                                      .5     1




14
         TFP (residual)
                                                                                TFP (residual)
                                                                                0




      -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1
                              0   200           400            600       800                            0   200           400            600       800
                                                                 2                                                                         2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                         Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                  Specification-Adjusted
                                                                                                .6




                 1 1.5
                                                                                           .4




          .5
                                                                                    .2




      Quality (residual)
                                                                                Quality (residual)




      0
                                                                                0




                              0   200           400            600       800                            0   200           400            600       800
                                                                 2                                                                         2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                         Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves for quality and productivity measures removing firm and round fixed effects using the partially linear panel
     data estimator proposed by Baltagi and Li (2002). We present non-parametric plots of the residuals against cumulative export production for
     takeup firms. Figure restricts attention to range of cumulative exports achieved by Sample 2 firms.
                                           Figure E.2: Learning Curves using High-Frequency Order-Book Data for Takeup Firms




                               .1
                                                                                                       .1     .2




                       0
                                                                                                0




              -.1
                                                                                        -.1




         Packedness (residual)
                                                                                     Size accuracy (residual)




      -.2
                                                                                                     -.2
                                    0     200         400          600         800                                    0     200         400          600      800
                                                                       2                                                                                 2
                                        Cumulative export production (m )                                                 Cumulative export production (m )




                                                                                                                .01




15
                      .1       .2
                                                                                               0      .005




               0
       Design accuracy (residual)
                                                                                       Weight accuracy (residual)




      -.1
                                                                                     -.005




                                    0     200         400          600         800                                    0     200         400          600      800
                                                                       2                                                                                 2
                                        Cumulative export production (m )                                                 Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves obtained by regressing high-frequency quality measures on firm fixed effects and then plotting a kernel-
     weighted local polynomial of the residuals against cumulative export production for takeup firms. Quality measures are recorded by the
     intermediary firm Hamis Carpets for each batch of rugs delivered by each firm (often at a weekly frequency). Weight accuracy is defined
     as the negative of the absolute value of the difference between the actual weight and the weight specified by the buyer. Figure restricts
     attention to range of cumulative exports achieved by Sample 2 firms.
                                            Figure E.3: Semi-Parametric Learning Curves using High-Frequency Order-Book Data for Takeup Firms




                               .2
                                                                                                                 .4    .6




                         .1
                                                                                                           .2




                  0
                                                                                                      0




            -.1
                                                                                                -.2




         Packedness (residual)
                                                                                              Size accuracy (residual)




      -.2
                                                                                                              -.4
                                        0         200         400          600          800                                    0     200         400          600      800
                                                                               2                                                                                  2
                                                Cumulative export production (m )                                                  Cumulative export production (m )




                                   .2




16
             -.1    0       .1
                                                                                                  Weight accuracy (residual)




         Design accuracy (residual)
      -.2
                                                                                              -.015 -.01 -.005 0 .005 .01




                                        0         200         400          600          800                                    0     200         400          600      800
                                                                               2                                                                                  2
                                                Cumulative export production (m )                                                  Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves for high-frequency quality measures removing firm fixed effects using the partially linear panel data
     estimator proposed by Baltagi and Li (2002). We present non-parametric plots of the residuals against cumulative export production for takeup
     firms. Quality measures are recorded by the intermediary firm Hamis Carpets for each batch of rugs delivered by each firm (often at a weekly
     frequency). Weight accuracy is defined as the negative of the absolute value of the difference between the actual weight and the weight specified
     by the buyer. Figure restricts attention to range of cumulative exports achieved by Sample 2 firms.
                         Figure E.4: Total Export Production CDFs
         1
         .8
Cumulative density
   .4    .2
         0  .6




                     0          500                     1000            1500
                                                          2
                                Total Export Production (m )

                                   Sample 1                  Sample 2




                                           17
                              800       Figure E.5: Cumulative Exports and Days Since First Order
Days since first export order
 200      400    0  600




                                    0   200       400    600       800      1000      1200          1400   1600
                                                                                    2
                                                     Cumulative export production (m )

                                                     Sample 1
                                                     Sample 2
                                                     Locally-weighted polynomial (both samples)




                                         Figure E.6: Quality Problems Noted by Overseas Buyer




                                                                   18
Online Appendix F           Results for Sample 1 duble firms, Sample 2 firms, and Sample 1
                            non-duble firms
    Tables F.1-F.10 and Figures F.1-F.2 in this appendix repeat the key tables and figures from the
main text but now splitting the Joint Sample into Sample 1 duble firms and Sample 2 firms (recall
all Sample 2 firms are duble firms). Table F.11 reports the treatment effects for the non-duble firms
in Sample 1 who we were not able to provide with sufficient orders in their specialist rug type.12




  12 Due to funding constraints, we stopped regular data collection on non-duble producers after round 3. We did,
however, collect data in round 5 (effectively the endline round) for the tups and kasaees strata but for budgetary
reasons we did not include the goublan strata as they had the lowest takeup of all strata.


                                                       19
                                 Table F.1: Baseline Balance for Samples 1 and 2 (Appendix to Table 3)


                                                                                       Sample 1                                           Sample 2
                                                                          Control                                         Control
                                                                      Group Mean       Treatment        Obs.          Group Mean          Treatment      Obs.
Panel A: Household Characteristics
     Age                                                                       51.4            -1.5     79                     50.7             2.8      139
                                                                               (1.1)          (2.2)                            (1.0)           (2.2)
     Number of years in rug business                                           39.3            -2.0     77                     36.8             1.9      136
                                                                               (1.1)          (2.3)                            (1.1)           (2.5)
     Illiterate?                                                                0.70           0.14     79                      0.59            0.07     135
                                                                              (0.05)         (0.10)                           (0.04)          (0.10)
     Household size                                                             4.5            -0.1     79                      4.1             0.1      140
                                                                               (0.2)          (0.3)                            (0.1)           (0.3)
     Household income                                                      1,100.0          -121.0      79                 1,090.0            226.0      140
                                                                            (137.0)        (278.0)                          (120.0)          (340.0)
     Digit Span Recall                                                          5.0            -0.1     72                      6.3             0.5      132
                                                                               (0.1)          (0.2)                            (0.1)           (0.3)
Panel B: Firm Characteristics
     Price per square meter                                                   38.7             13.0     79                     25.4             2.1      139
                                                                               (8.6)         (17.5)                             (1.8)          (3.9)
     Direct monthly profits from rug business                                  266            40.2      79                     862             -16.6     139
                                                                              (75.3)       (153.0)                            (39.5)          (86.0)
     Reported monthly profits from rug business                                714            -8.8      78                     858             -11.5     139
                                                                              (79.4)       (162.0)                            (39.9)          (86.2)
     Hours worked last month                                                   208             -5.7     79                     269               1.3     139
                                                                              (11.5)         (23.3)                            (5.1)          (10.8)
     Number of employees                                                        1.25           0.00     79                     1.00                      139
                                                                              (0.08)         (0.17)                                   -              -
     Total produced last month (m2)                                             61.3          7.11      79                     43.6             0.3      139
                                                                              (10.9)       (22.15)                             (2.4)           (5.8)
     Ever exported?                                                             0.03           0.00     79                      0.17            0.03     140
                                                                              (0.02)         (0.04)                           (0.03)          (0.08)
     Average Quality                                                            0.22          -0.18 ** 78                       0.19           -0.09     140
                                                                              (0.05)         (0.08)                           (0.03)          (0.06)
     Constructed monthly profits from rug business                                                                             865             -35.6     139
                                                                                                                              (42.6)          (87.4)
     Hypothetical monthly profits from rug business                                                                            365              -3.6     139
                                                                                                                              (26.5)          (57.7)
Joint F-test                                                                             1.01                                               1.37
Notes: Table presents baseline balance for Sample 1 duble-firms (left panel) and the Sample 2 (right panel). Each row is a regression of the variable on a constant,
treatment dummy and strata fixed effects; the constant (control group mean) and treatment dummy are reported. The last row reports the F-test for a regression
of the treatment dummy on all 14 baseline balance variables. Profits and price are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile to trim outliers (without winsorizing,
the sample still remains statistically balanced between treatment and control groups). The standard error and treatment dummy for "number of employees" in
Sample 2 are missing because every firm had one employee, inclusive of the owner. Constructed profits and hypothetical profits were not collected at baseline for
sample 1. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.
            Table F.2: Impact of Intervention on Firms Knowingly Exporting: Sample 1 and Sample 2
            (Appendix to Table 4)


                                                                          Sample 1                                      Sample 2                   P-Value of
                                                                    ITT                 TOT                       ITT                 TOT             TOT
                                                                    (1)                  (2)                      (3)                  (4)        Comparison
Indicator for Ever Exported                                        0.31 **              0.79 ***                 0.68 ***             0.75 ***        0.90
                                                                 (0.12)               (0.25)                   (0.07)               (0.07)
R-squared                                                          0.12                 0.34                     0.45                 0.49
Control Mean                                                       0.19                 0.19                     0.20                 0.20
Observations                                                         59                   59                     132                  132
Notes: Table regresses an indicator for if a firm has ever knowingly produced rugs for export markets on indicators for treatment (columns 1 and 3) or takeup
(columns 2 and 4). The question was asked in Round 5 for Sample 1 and Round 3 for Sample 2. The TOT regressions instrument takeup with treatment. The last
column reports the p-value from the statistical test of equivalence of the TOT coefficients between the two samples. The regressions control for baseline values
of the dependent variable, and include round and strata fixed effects. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                              21
                Table F.3: Impact of Exporting on Firm Profits: Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 5)

Panel A: Profits (in Month Prior to Survey)
                                                                        Sample 1                                           Sample 2

                                                                               Control                                            Control            P-Value of TOT
                                                         ITT         TOT       Mean             Obs.        ITT         TOT       Mean           Obs. Comparison
Outcome Variable:                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)
Log Direct Profits                                     0.27 **      0.83 **         890        198         0.25 *** 0.30 ***           951       375         0.11
                                                       (.11)        (.33)                                  (.06)    (.07)
Log (Reported Revenues - Reported Costs)               0.22 **      0.71 **         892        269         0.23 *** 0.28 ***           955       375         0.21
                                                       (.11)        (.33)                                  (.05)    (.06)
Log (Constructed Revenues - Constructed Costs)         0.14         0.48            940        310         0.24 *** 0.29 ***           957       375         0.59
                                                       (.10)        (.34)                                  (.05)    (.07)
Log Hypothetical Profits                               0.39 **      1.29 **         465        314         0.36 *** 0.44 ***           586       373         0.19
                                                       (.18)        (.64)                                  (.10)    (.12)
Panel B: Profits per Owner Hour (in Month Prior to Survey)
                                                                        Sample 1                                           Sample 2

                                                                               Control                                            Control            P-Value of TOT
                                                         ITT        TOT        Mean             Obs.        ITT         TOT       Mean           Obs. Comparison
Outcome Variable:                                       (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)       (9)
Log Direct Profits                                     0.24 **      0.74 **         3.48       198         0.17 *** 0.21 ***           3.56      375         0.09
                                                       (.10)        (.30)                                  (.05)    (.06)
Log (Reported Revenues - Reported Costs)               0.21 **      0.66 **         3.49       262         0.15 *** 0.19 ***           3.58      375         0.12
                                                       (.10)        (.30)                                  (.05)    (.06)
Log (Constructed Revenues - Constructed Costs)         0.15 *       0.52 *          3.50       309         0.16 *** 0.19 ***           3.58      375         0.28
                                                       (.09)        (.30)                                  (.05)    (.06)
Log Hypothetical Profits                               0.29 **      0.98 **         4.80       314         0.21 *** 0.26 ***           6.01      373         0.07
                                                       (.11)        (.38)                                  (.07)    (.08)
Notes: Table reports treatment effects on different measures of real profits in the month prior to the date of the survey, all measured in logs, seperately for Sample 1
duble-firms and Sample 2. See text for descriptions of each measure. Dependent variable in Panel A is profits. Dependent variable in Panel B is profits per owner hour.
Owner hours include the hours of family member production when recorded. The regressions control for baseline values of the dependent variable, and include round
and strata fixed effects. Control group means are reported in levels in Egyptian pounds (LE) in Panel A and LE/hour in Panel B. The TOT regressions instrument takeup
with treatment. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                                  22
                  Table F.4: Sources of Changes to Firm Profits: Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 6)

Panel A: Components of Profits
                                                                 Sample 1                                              Sample 2


                                                                            Control                                               Control             P-Value of TOT
                                                   ITT           TOT        Mean        Obs.             ITT           TOT        Mean       Obs.      Comparison
Outcome Variable:                                   (1)            (2)         (3)       (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)       (8)           (9)
Log Output Prices (LE/m2)                         0.40 **        1.36 **      26.4      315             0.46 ***       0.56 ***     29.3      376          0.23
                                                (0.18)         (0.65)                                 (0.10)         (0.12)
Log Output (m2)                                  -0.30 *        -1.01 *       74.7      301            -0.22 **       -0.27 ***     57.9      375          0.21
                                                (0.16)         (0.59)                                 (0.09)         (0.10)
Log Monthly Hours Worked                          0.01           0.03        265.0      303             0.08 ***       0.10 *** 272.0         375          0.57
                                                (0.03)         (0.10)                                 (0.02)         (0.03)
Number of Employees                               0.01           0.01          1.0      319             0.00           0.00         1.0       376            .
                                                (0.01)         (0.01)                                      .              .
Log Number of Looms                               0.01           0.04          1.2      318            -0.06 ***      -0.07 ***     1.1       376          0.62
                                                (0.07)         (0.22)                                 (0.01)         (0.02)
Log Warp Thread Ball (kg)                        -0.01          -0.03          5.2      311             0.13 **        0.15 **      6.3       377          0.13
                                                (0.20)         (0.68)                                 (0.05)         (0.06)
Panel B: Inputs
                                                                 Sample 1                                              Sample 2

                                                                            Control                                               Control             P-Value of TOT
                                                   ITT           TOT        Mean        Obs.             ITT           TOT        Mean       Obs.      Comparison
Outcome Variable:                                   (1)            (2)         (3)       (4)             (5)            (6)         (7)       (8)           (9)
Log Weft Thread Price (LE/m2)                     0.16           0.62         12.3      188             0.23 ***       0.29 ***     13.1      376          0.54
                                                (0.15)         (0.53)                                 (0.04)         (0.05)
Log Warp Thread Price (LE/m2)                    -0.03          -0.10         19.8      309            -0.03          -0.04         17.0      376          0.74
                                                (0.05)         (0.17)                                 (0.03)         (0.04)
Log Weft Thread Quantity                         -0.25          -0.85        130.0      302            -0.13          -0.16         97.8      375          0.26
                                                (0.17)         (0.60)                                 (0.09)         (0.10)
Log Warp Thread Quantity                         -0.01          -0.03         17.7      311             0.08           0.10         17.8      375          0.85
                                                (0.20)         (0.68)                                 (0.09)         (0.11)
Notes: Table reports results seperately for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2. Panel A reports treatment effects on output prices and quantities, hours, number of
employees (inclusive of owner), looms and the size of the warp thread ball (which is a proxy for the length of the production run), all measured in logs except number
of employees. Panel B analyzes input prices and quantities, all measured in logs. The TOT regressions instrument takeup with treatment. Hours worked are calculated
using average daily hours and number of days worked last month. Control group means are reported in levels. The regressions control for baseline values of the
dependent variable, and include round and strata fixed effects. P-values from testing equivalence of the TOTs from each sample are reported in the last column. We
cannot estimate the ITTs or TOTs for "number of employees" as there is no variation in sample 2. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; ***
.01.




                                                                                 23
              Table F.5: Impact of Exporting on Quality Levels: Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 7)


Panel A: Quality Metrics
                                                                        Sample 1                                                    Sample 2

                                                    Control              ITT                  TOT               Control              ITT                  TOT
                                                     Mean                 (1)                  (2)               Mean                 (3)                  (4)
Corners                                              2.89               0.66 ***              1.73 ***           3.00               1.38 ***              1.69 ***
                                                                      (0.21)                (0.41)                                (0.13)                (0.08)
Waviness                                             2.89               0.67 ***              1.76 ***           3.02               1.36 ***              1.66 ***
                                                                      (0.20)                (0.36)                                (0.13)                (0.08)
Weight                                               2.90               0.67 ***              1.75 ***           3.14               1.32 ***              1.60 ***
                                                                      (0.20)                (0.38)                                (0.12)                (0.09)
Touch                                                3.14               0.24 ***              0.67 ***           3.11               0.54 ***              0.65 ***
                                                                      (0.08)                (0.18)                                (0.08)                (0.06)
Packedness                                           3.17               0.39 **               1.32 ***           3.08               1.38 ***              1.68 ***
                                                                      (0.15)                (0.36)                                (0.12)                (0.08)
Warp Thread Tightness                                3.04               0.43 ***              1.38 ***           3.05               1.24 ***              1.51 ***
                                                                      (0.15)                (0.35)                                (0.12)                (0.09)
Firmness                                             2.99               0.34 **               1.19 ***           2.97               1.43 ***              1.75 ***
                                                                      (0.14)                (0.35)                                (0.13)                (0.08)
Design Accuracy                                      3.28               0.36 **               1.21 ***           3.12               1.22 ***              1.48 ***
                                                                      (0.15)                (0.35)                                (0.12)                (0.10)
Warp Thread Packedness                               2.90               0.66 ***              1.71 ***           3.10               1.33 ***              1.64 ***
                                                                      (0.20)                (0.40)                                (0.13)                (0.09)
Inputs                                               3.09               0.44 ***              1.51 ***           3.06               1.37 ***              1.66 ***
                                                                      (0.15)                (0.38)                                (0.11)                (0.09)
Loom                                                 2.03               0.02                  0.06               2.02               0.04                  0.05
                                                                      (0.02)                (0.06)                                (0.04)                (0.04)
R-squared                                                              0.32                  0.50                                  0.57                  0.66
Observations                                                          2,765                 2,765                                 4,120                 4,120
Panel B: Stacked Quality Metrics
                                                                        Sample 1                                                    Sample 2

                                                    Control              ITT                  TOT               Control              ITT                  TOT
                                                     Mean                (1)                   (2)               Mean                (3)                   (4)
Stacked Quality Metrics                              2.94               0.41 ***              1.26 ***           2.97               1.14 ***              1.39 ***
                                                                      (0.13)                (0.27)                                (0.10)                (0.06)
P-Value of TOT Comparison                                                                                                                                0.63
R-squared                                                              0.29                  0.44                                  0.52                  0.60
Observations                                                          2,765                 2,765                                 4,120                 4,120
Notes: The table reports the estimated impacts seperately for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2. Panel A stacks the quality metrics and interacts treatment (ITT)
or takeup (TOT) with a quality-metric indicator variable. The coefficients on the interactions provide the treatment effects seperately for each metric. The TOT
instruments takeup (interacted with quality metric) with treatment (also interacted with quality metric). Each regression includes baseline values of the quality
metric, strata and round fixed effects, and each of these controls is interacted with a quality-metric indicator variable. Panel B constrains the treatment effects to
be equal across quality metrics; these regressions include baseline values, strata and round fixed effects. Control group means are reported in levels. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.
               Table F.6: Impact of Exporting on Productivity: Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 8)


                                                       Sample 1                                                 Sample 2
                                                                    Control                                                  Control             P-Value of TOT
                                          ITT            TOT         Mean      Obs.               ITT            TOT          Mean      Obs.      Comparison
                                          (1)             (2)         (3)       (4)               (5)             (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)
Log Output Per Hour                     -0.24           -0.79         0.30      311             -0.24 ***       -0.29 ***      0.24      376           0.47
                                       (0.15)          (0.53)                                  (0.09)          (0.10)
Log Unadjusted TFP                      -0.30 *         -1.00 *       0.58      299             -0.26 ***       -0.32 ***      0.43      375           0.32
                                       (0.15)          (0.55)                                  (0.09)          (0.10)
Notes: TFP Table reports treatment effects for the two productivity measures: log unadjusted output per labor hour (in m2/hour) and log unadjusted TFP, seperately
for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2. See text and Appendix A for the methodology used to obtain unadjusted TFP. The TOT specifications instrument takeup with
treatment. Control group means are reported in levels. Regressions control for baseline values of the variable, round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                               25
                                                             Table F.7: Quality and Productivity, Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 9)

                                             Stacked Quality Metrics                                                         Log Output per Hour                                                                   Log TFP
                               ITT            TOT            ITT             TOT                                ITT          TOT          ITT             TOT                               ITT          TOT                 ITT              TOT
Panel A: Specification Controls                                                           P-Value of                                                                   P-Value of                                                                      P-Value of
                                     Sample 1                        Sample 2                TOT                      Sample 1                     Sample 2               TOT                   Sample 1                           Sample 2               TOT
                                 (1)         (2)               (3)              (4)      Comparison             (5)              (6)         (7)              (8)     Comparison            (9)        (10)              (11)                 (12)    Comparison
Treatment                      0.17 ***       0.72 ***       0.52 ***        0.82 ***        0.56              0.11          0.44          0.29 ***        0.45 ***        0.98            0.04          0.19            0.27 ***          0.42 ***       0.58
                             (0.04)         (0.15)         (0.09)          (0.09)                            (0.11)        (0.43)        (0.10)          (0.16)                          (0.11)        (0.40)          (0.10)            (0.15)
(log) Thread quantity          0.00          -0.03           0.02            0.04                             -0.01         -0.03         -0.42 **        -0.40 **                         0.08          0.06           -0.38 **          -0.36 **
                             (0.06)         (0.05)         (0.10)          (0.07)                            (0.16)        (0.15)        (0.19)          (0.18)                          (0.15)        (0.15)          (0.18)            (0.17)
Difficulty Control             0.47 ***       0.33 ***       0.42 ***        0.33 ***                         -0.17 **      -0.24 **      -0.11 **        -0.16 ***                       -0.22 ***     -0.25 ***       -0.12 **          -0.17 ***
                             (0.03)         (0.05)         (0.04)          (0.04)                            (0.07)        (0.10)        (0.05)          (0.06)                          (0.07)        (0.09)          (0.05)            (0.05)
(log) # colors                 0.03 *         0.02           0.02            0.00                             -0.07         -0.07 **      -0.07           -0.08 *                         -0.08 **      -0.09 ***       -0.06             -0.07 *
                             (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.02)                            (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.04)                          (0.03)        (0.03)          (0.04)            (0.04)
Low-market Segment            -0.24 ***      -0.07          -0.16 ***       -0.10 **                           0.28 **       0.38 **       0.55 ***        0.59 ***                        0.26 **       0.30 **         0.55 ***          0.58 ***
                             (0.05)         (0.06)         (0.04)          (0.04)                            (0.12)        (0.17)        (0.10)          (0.10)                          (0.11)        (0.15)          (0.09)            (0.10)
Mid-Market Segment            -0.26 ***      -0.09          -0.11 **        -0.04                              0.28 **       0.38 **       0.30 ***        0.34 ***                        0.21 *        0.25 *          0.33 ***          0.36 ***
                             (0.06)         (0.07)         (0.05)          (0.05)                            (0.12)        (0.15)        (0.10)          (0.10)                          (0.11)        (0.13)          (0.09)            (0.10)
Rug Type FEs                   yes            yes             yes            yes                                yes          yes            yes            yes                              yes           yes             yes              yes
Input Thread Type FEs          yes            yes             yes            yes                                yes          yes            yes            yes                              yes           yes             yes              yes
R-squared                     0.63           0.65            0.67           0.69                               0.62         0.63           0.55           0.54                             0.69          0.70            0.55             0.55
Observations                 2,744          2,744           4,076          4,076                               302          302            371            371                              290           290             370              370
Panel B: Specification Fixed Effects                                                      P-Value of                                                                   P-Value of                                                                      P-Value of
                                     Sample 1                        Sample 2                TOT                      Sample 1                     Sample 2               TOT                   Sample 1                           Sample 2               TOT
                                 (1)         (2)               (3)              (4)      Comparison             (5)              (6)         (7)              (8)     Comparison            (9)        (10)              (11)                 (12)    Comparison
Treatment                      0.06           0.51           0.37 ***        0.71 ***        0.65              0.22 **       1.53          0.42 ***        0.81 **         0.47            0.24 **       1.48 **         0.38 ***          0.73 **        0.32
                             (0.05)         (0.39)         (0.12)          (0.19)                            (0.11)        (0.96)        (0.14)          (0.39)                          (0.11)        (0.73)          (0.12)            (0.32)
Specification FEs              yes            yes             yes            yes                                yes          yes            yes            yes                              yes           yes             yes              yes
R-squared                     0.71           0.71            0.73           0.74                               0.77         0.70           0.64           0.61                             0.78          0.77            0.65             0.64
Observations                 2,744          2,744           4,076          4,076                               153          153            223            223                              143           143             223              223
Panel C: Specification-Adjusted Dependent Variables                                       P-Value of                                                                   P-Value of                                                                      P-Value of
                                   Sample 1                          Sample 2                TOT                      Sample 1                     Sample 2               TOT                   Sample 1                           Sample 2               TOT
                               (1)         (2)                 (3)              (4)      Comparison             (5)              (6)         (7)              (8)     Comparison            (9)        (10)              (11)                 (12)    Comparison
Treatment                      0.21 ***       0.65 ***       0.60 ***        0.74 ***        0.47              0.04          0.14          0.34 ***        0.41 ***        0.50            0.03          0.09            0.38 ***          0.46 ***       0.33
                             (0.06)         (0.11)         (0.06)          (0.04)                            (0.12)        (0.39)        (0.07)          (0.09)                          (0.11)        (0.36)          (0.07)            (0.09)
R-squared                     0.12           0.21            0.26           0.32                               0.01         0.03           0.16           0.16                             0.13          0.15            0.16             0.17
Observations                 2,784          2,784           4,076          4,076                               307          307            371            371                              298           298             371              371
Notes: Table reports treatment effects seperately for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2 for the stacked quality measures and the two productivity measures after including various controls for the specifications of the rug on the loom at the time of the survey.
The TOT specifications instrument takeup with treatment. In Panel A, there are both rug and input thread type fixed effects in addition to the specification controls included in the table. Panel B uses fixed effects for each of the 435 combinations of the 6
specification controls. Both panels use unadjusted productivity measures. Panel C uses specification-adjusted meausre for quality and productivity; see text and Appendix A for details. Regressions in all panels also control for baseline values of the dependent
variable (and baselince values of the specification controls in Panel A), as well as round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.
              Table F.8: Quality and Productivity on Identical-Specification Domestic Rugs, Sample 1 and
              Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 10)

Panel A: Quality Metrics
                                                      Sample 1                                                                       Sample 2
                                       Master Artisan                               Professor                         Master Artisan                              Professor
                           Control      ITT       TOT     Control                 ITT        TOT           Control    ITT        TOT     Control                ITT        TOT
                             Mean     (1A)        (1B)      Mean                (2A)         (2B)           Mean     (3A)        (3B)      Mean                (4A)        (4B)
Corners                       3.27    0.47 *      1.33 **     3.41              0.14         0.39            3.22    0.89 ***   0.98 ***     3.27              0.40 **     0.44   **
                                    (0.25)      (0.56)                        (0.20)       (0.52)                  (0.16)     (0.15)                         (0.17)      (0.18)
Waviness                      3.24    0.30        0.84        3.27              0.19         0.55            3.14    0.72 ***   0.79 ***     3.33              0.29 *      0.32   **
                                    (0.25)      (0.56)                        (0.19)       (0.45)                  (0.17)     (0.17)                         (0.15)      (0.16)
Weight                        3.62    0.27        0.78        3.89              0.53 **      1.50   **       3.59    0.85 ***   0.94 ***     3.53              0.62 **     0.69   ***
                                    (0.20)      (0.49)                        (0.22)       (0.73)                  (0.16)     (0.16)                         (0.24)      (0.26)
Packedness                    3.32    0.31        0.88 *      3.31              0.07         0.21            3.28    1.09 ***   1.20 ***     3.26              0.43 ***    0.47   ***
                                    (0.22)      (0.49)                        (0.19)       (0.48)                  (0.15)     (0.15)                         (0.14)      (0.15)
Touch                         3.41    0.22        0.62        3.27              0.25         0.70            3.24    0.73 ***   0.80 ***     3.27              0.43 ***    0.47   ***
                                    (0.20)      (0.45)                        (0.20)       (0.46)                  (0.13)     (0.13)                         (0.15)      (0.16)
Warp Thread Tightness         3.03    0.29 *      0.81 **     3.36             -0.02        -0.06            2.99    0.66 ***   0.73 ***     3.28              0.43 ***    0.48   ***
                                    (0.16)      (0.35)                        (0.19)       (0.52)                  (0.10)     (0.10)                         (0.15)      (0.16)
Firmness                      3.32    0.22        0.62        3.24            0.074          0.21            3.16    1.04 ***   1.15 ***     3.22              0.44 ***    0.48   ***
                                    (0.26)      (0.64)                        (0.19)       (0.48)                  (0.14)     (0.14)                         (0.15)      (0.17)
Design Accuracy               3.75    0.30        0.85 *      3.55             -0.01        -0.02            3.61    0.68 ***   0.75 ***     3.41              0.45 ***    0.50   ***
                                    (0.18)      (0.46)                        (0.21)       (0.60)                  (0.14)     (0.14)                         (0.12)      (0.13)
Warp Thread Packedness        3.16    0.51 **     1.45 **     3.28              0.14         0.39            3.00    1.12 ***   1.23 ***     3.17              0.57 ***    0.62   ***
                                    (0.25)      (0.57)                        (0.19)       (0.50)                  (0.16)     (0.16)                         (0.15)      (0.16)
R-squared                             0.11        0.31                          0.16         0.18                    0.31       0.36                           0.10        0.10
Observations                           593        593                            589         589                   1,087       1,087                         1,078       1,078
Panel B: Stacked Quality Metrics
                                                      Sample 1                                                                       Sample 2
                                       Master Artisan                              Professor                          Master Artisan                   Professor
                           Control      ITT       TOT     Control                ITT        TOT            Control    ITT        TOT     Control     ITT        TOT
                             Mean     (1A)        (1B)      Mean                (2A)        (2B)            Mean     (3A)        (3B)      Mean     (4A)        (4B)
Stacked Quality Metric        3.35    0.32 *      0.91 **     3.40              0.15        0.43             3.25    0.87 ***   0.95 ***     3.30   0.45 ***    0.50              ***
                                    (0.18)      (0.40)                        (0.16)      (0.40)                   (0.12)     (0.11)              (0.12)      (0.13)
P-Value of TOT Comparison                                                                                                       0.92                            0.88
R-squared                             0.09        0.30                         0.14          0.22                    0.29       0.34                0.09        0.09
Observations                           593        593                          589           589                   1,087       1,087              1,078       1,078
Panel C: Objective Metrics
                                     Sample 1                                                                          Sample 2
                           Control ITT          TOT                                                        Control     ITT          TOT            P-Value
                            Mean    (1A)        (1B)                                                        Mean      (3A)          (3B)           of TOT
Length Accuracy              -4.41    0.70        1.98                                                       -4.56      1.93 ***      2.12   ***     0.95
                                    (0.85)      (2.17)                                                                (0.63)        (0.70)
Width Accuracy               -2.22 -0.21         -0.60                                                        -2.32     0.43          0.48          0.48
                                    (0.52)      (1.50)                                                                (0.34)        (0.36)
Weight Accuracy             -197.0    83.0 *** 236.0 **                                                     -231.0      93.3 ***    103.0    ***    0.18
                                    (26.8)      (93.4)                                                                (29.1)        (30.6)
Time (in minutes)            255.0 -22.10 *    -62.70 *                                                      243.0      5.52           6.1          0.05
                                    (12.1)      (34.2)                                                                  (7.4)        (8.0)
R-squared                             0.87        0.81                                                                  0.83          0.83
Observations                           264        264                                                                    484          484
Notes: Table reports ITT and TOT specifications using the 9 quality metrics from the quality lab, seperately for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2. Panel A stacks the quality
metrics and interacts treatment (ITT) or takeup (TOT) with a quality-metric indicator variable. The coefficients on the interactions provide the treatment effects seperately for
each metric. The TOT instruments takeup (interacted with quality metric) with treatment (also interacted with quality metric). Panel B constrains the treatment effects to be
equal across quality metrics. Columns 1A and 1B report scores from the master artisan. Columns 2A and 2B report scores from the Professor of Handicraft Science at Domietta
University. Panel C reports objective accuracy measures which are calculated as the negative of the absolute error for that specification, so that a higher value indicates that the
manufactured rug was closer to intended length (140 cm), width (70 cm) and weight (1750 g). It also includes the time spent to produce the rug in minutes. As in Panel A, these
are run in a single regression by intereacting the objective measure with treatment or takeup. All regressions include interactions of strata fixed effects with quality-metric
indicators, and standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.


                                                                                        27
                                          Table F.9: Treatment Dynamics, Sample 1 and Sample 2


                                                      Log Direct Profits               Log Direct Profits per Hour                 Log Output per Hour
                                                 Sample 1         Sample 2              Sample 1           Sample 2             Sample 1        Sample 2
                                                    (1A)                (1B)                 (2A)               (2B)                (3A)            (3B)
Treatment                                              0.36                0.24 ***           0.31                0.20 ***          -0.24               -0.28 **
                                                     (0.21)              (0.08)             (0.19)              (0.07)             (0.22)              (0.12)
   x 2nd Round Since Treatment                        -0.23                0.05              -0.17               -0.01               0.23                0.11
                                                     (0.28)              (0.08)             (0.25)              (0.08)             (0.21)              (0.14)
   x 3rd Round Since Treatment                        -0.17               -0.03              -0.21               -0.09              -0.14                0.01
                                                     (0.24)              (0.09)             (0.23)              (0.09)             (0.27)              (0.13)
   x 4th Round Since Treatment                        -0.16                                  -0.12                                  -0.28
                                                     (0.25)                                 (0.23)                                 (0.26)
   x 5th Round Since Treatment                         0.16                                   0.16                                   0.14
                                                     (0.23)                                 (0.21)                                 (0.29)
R-squared                                              0.15                0.29               0.15                0.18               0.18                0.19
Observations                                           198                 375                198                 375                311                 376


                                                    Log Unadjusted TFP                  Log Specification-Adjusted TFP       Log Specification-Adjusted Quality
                                                 Sample 1       Sample 2                 Sample 1          Sample 2            Sample 1           Sample 2
                                                    (1A)             (1B)                    (2A)               (2B)                (3A)              (3B)
Treatment                                             -0.31               -0.28 **            0.19 *              0.37 ***          -0.03                0.63 ***
                                                     (0.20)              (0.11)             (0.10)              (0.09)             (0.05)              (0.08)
   x 2nd Round Since Treatment                         0.33                0.08               0.13               -0.02               0.16               -0.03
                                                     (0.24)              (0.13)             (0.11)              (0.11)             (0.10)              (0.08)
   x 3rd Round Since Treatment                        -0.17               -0.02              -0.01                0.03               0.34 ***           -0.06
                                                     (0.24)              (0.12)             (0.11)              (0.12)             (0.11)              (0.08)
   x 4th Round Since Treatment                        -0.29                                  -0.33 *                                 0.38 ***
                                                     (0.25)                                 (0.18)                                 (0.10)
   x 5th Round Since Treatment                         0.15                                   0.07                                   0.27 ***
                                                     (0.24)                                 (0.15)                                 (0.09)
R-squared                                              0.31                0.18               0.13                0.16               0.13                0.26
Observations                                           299                 375                669                 371               2,784               4,076
Notes: Table reports treatment effects interacted with dummies for each round of data collection, separately for Sample 1 duble-firms and Sample 2. The
regressions control for baseline values of the dependent variable, and include round and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Standard
errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                                  28
                                           Table F.10: Information Flows and Quality Levels: Sample 1 and Sample 2 (Appendix to Table 11)

Panel A: Without "Takeup x Quality" FEs                                                         Sample 1                                                                                       Sample 2
                                                          Stacked             Specification-               Stacked          Specification-                Stacked            Specification-               Stacked          Specification-
                                                           Quality         Adjusted Stacked                 Quality      Adjusted Stacked                  Quality        Adjusted Stacked                 Quality      Adjusted Stacked
                                                          Metrics           Quality Metrics                Metrics        Quality Metrics                 Metrics          Quality Metrics                Metrics        Quality Metrics
                                                                (1)                       (2)                   (3)                    (4)                      (5)                      (6)                   (7)                    (8)
Takeupi x {Talked About Dimension}id                          0.21 *                    0.16                                                                  0.20 **                  0.16 *
                                                            (0.11)                    (0.13)                                                                (0.10)                   (0.09)
Takeupi x {Talked About Technique of Dimension}id                                                             0.31                    0.30                                                                   0.35 ***                0.35 ***
                                                                                                            (0.21)                  (0.20)                                                                 (0.08)                  (0.09)
Takeupi x {Talked About Mistake of Dimension}id                                                               0.47 ***                0.34 ***                                                               0.26 ***                0.27 ***
                                                                                                            (0.09)                  (0.07)                                                                 (0.05)                  (0.05)
Quality Metric FEs                                             yes                       yes                   yes                     yes                     yes                       yes                  yes                     yes
Takeupi x Quality Metric FEs                                    no                        no                    no                      no                      no                        no                   no                      no
Firm-fixed Effects                                             yes                       yes                   yes                     yes                     yes                       yes                  yes                     yes
Specification-adjusted Quality Metrics                          no                       yes                    no                     yes                      no                       yes                   no                     yes
P-Value for TOT Comparison                                                                                                                                    0.94                      1.00                 0.82                    0.83
R-squared                                                     0.75                      0.39                  0.75                   0.38                     0.76                      0.45                 0.76                    0.45
Observations                                                  602                       599                   582                    579                     1098                      1068                 1088                    1058

Panel B: With "Takeup x Quality" FEs                                                          Sample 1                                                                                          Sample 2
                                                          Stacked             Specification-           Stacked              Specification-                Stacked               Specification-           Stacked            Specification-
                                                           Quality         Adjusted Stacked             Quality          Adjusted Stacked                  Quality          Adjusted Stacked              Quality       Adjusted Stacked
                                                          Metrics           Quality Metrics            Metrics            Quality Metrics                 Metrics             Quality Metrics            Metrics          Quality Metrics
                                                                (1)                       (2)                (3)                       (4)                      (5)                         (6)                (7)                      (8)
Takeupi x {Talked About Dimension}id                          0.29 ***                  0.23 ***                                                              0.13 *                      0.10 *
                                                            (0.07)                    (0.08)                                                                (0.07)                      (0.05)
Takeupi x {Talked About Technique of Dimension}id                                                          0.24                        0.21                                                                  0.19 **                  0.16 *
                                                                                                         (0.19)                      (0.15)                                                                (0.09)                   (0.09)
Takeupi x {Talked About Mistake of Dimension}id                                                            0.49 ***                    0.22                                                                  0.10                     0.13
                                                                                                         (0.18)                      (0.15)                                                                (0.09)                   (0.10)
Quality Metric FEs                                             yes                       yes                yes                          yes                   yes                         yes                yes                      yes
Takeupi x Quality Metric FEs                                   yes                       yes                yes                          yes                   yes                         yes                yes                      yes
Firm-fixed Effects                                             yes                       yes                yes                          yes                   yes                         yes                yes                      yes
Specification-adjusted Quality Metrics                          no                       yes                 no                          yes                    no                         yes                 no                      yes
P-Value for TOT Comparison                                                                                                                                    0.08                        0.17               0.80                     0.75
R-squared                                                     0.79                      0.50                0.79                       0.48                   0.82                        0.59               0.81                     0.58
Observations                                                   602                       599                 582                        579                  1098                        1068               1088                     1058
Notes: Table regresses stacked quality metrics on takeup indicator and its interaction with a dummy that takes the value 1 if the intermediary talked to the firm about that particular dimension of quality, seperately for Sample 1
duble-firms and Sample 2. Even-numbered columns use the specification-adjusted quality metrics described in the text. Columns 3 and 4 seperate whether the discussion along that dimension was about technique or just pointing
out mistakes. Regressions are run on a cross-section of firms and include baseline values, firm fixed effects, quality metric fixed effects, and quality metric fixed effects interacted with takeup. Panel B repeats the regressions in Panel
A but also includes takeup interacted with quality metric fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.
                                                   Table F.11: Results for Non-Duble Strata

                                                                                                                        TOT for Joint           P-Value for TOT
                                                         ITT               TOT         R-squared           Obs.              Sample                Comparison
                                                         (1)                (2)               (3)           (4)                   (5)                        (6)
Ever Exported                                          0.03               0.22              0.28            90                  0.76    ***               0.40
                                                       (.09)              (.63)                                                 (.07)
Direct Log Monthly Profits                            -0.01              -0.07               0.05           324                 0.42    ***                 0.52
                                                       (.08)              (.76)                                                 (.08)
Direct Log Profits per Hour                            0.00              -0.02               0.04           323                 0.32    ***                 0.64
                                                       (.07)              (.72)                                                 (.08)
Log Stacked Quality                                    0.03               0.30               0.58          2830                 1.35    ***                 0.02
                                                       0.04               (.45)                                                 (.08)
Log Output per Hour                                    0.05               0.65               0.69           373                -0.42    ***                 0.49
                                                       (.10)            (1.30)                                                  (.16)
Log Unadjusted TFP                                     0.03               0.38               0.65           351                -0.50    ***                 0.62
                                                       (.13)            (1.76)                                                  (.16)
Log Specification-Adjusted Stacked                     0.03               0.36               0.23          2800                 0.72    ***                 0.35
Quality                                                0.04               (.37)                                                 (.04)
                                                      -0.04              -0.59               0.31           345                 0.36    ***                 0.77
Log Specification-Adjusted TFP
                                                       (.09)            (1.27)                                                  (.12)
Notes: Table reports treatment effects on eight main outcomes for the firms in Sample 1 who were not in the duble strata. The sample sizes vary across outcomes
and in general are lower than for duble strata because after round 3, we stopped regular data collection on these strata because we did not secure sufficient
overseas orders for these rugs and had budgetary constraints. in round 5 (essentially the endline), we collected data for the kasaees and tups strata, but did not
collect data for the goublain strata which had the lowest takeup of all strata. Regressions include baseline values of the dependent variable and round and strata
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm. Significance * .10; ** .05; *** .01.




                                                                                  30
                                         Figure F.1: Learning Curves, Sample 1 Takeup Firms (Appendix to Figure 5)


                                      No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




                       .1
     2
                                                                               2




       -.2 -.1 0
                                                                               -1.5 -1 -.5 0 .5 1




      M per hour (residual)
                                                                               M per hour (residual)
                              0      500                 1000           1500                           0      500                 1000           1500
                                                                 2                                                                        2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




31
                                                                                -1 0 1 2




        TFP (residual)
                                                                               TFP (residual)




      -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2
                                                                                          -2
                              0      500                 1000           1500                           0      500                 1000           1500
                                                                 2                                                                        2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

                                      No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




                        1
                                                                                          .2 .4




            0     .5
                                                                               -.2 0




       Quality (residual)
                                                                               Quality (residual)




      -.5
                              0      500                 1000           1500                           0      500                 1000           1500
                                                                 2                                                                        2
                                  Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves obtained by regressing quality or productivity measures on firm and round fixed effects and then plotting a
     kernel-weighted local polynomial of the residuals against cumulative export production for takeup firms in Sample 1.
                                          Figure F.2: Learning Curves, Sample 2 Takeup Firms (Appendix to Figure 5)


                                       No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




                                                                                      0     .5    1




     2
                                                                                2
                                                                                -.5




      -.06-.04-.02 0 .02 .04
      M per hour (residual)
                                                                                M per hour (residual)
                               0   200           400            600       800                           0   200           400            600     800
                                                                  2                                                                        2
                                   Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

                                       No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




32
                                                                                   TFP (residual)




         TFP (residual)
      -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1
                                                                                -.2 0 .2 .4 .6
                               0   200           400            600       800                           0   200           400            600     800
                                                                  2                                                                        2
                                   Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

                                       No Specification Controls                                                 Specification-Adjusted




      Quality (residual)
                                                                                  Quality (residual)




      -.2 0 .2 .4 .6
                                                                                -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3




                               0   200           400            600       800                           0   200           400            600     800
                                                                  2                                                                        2
                                   Cumulative export production (m )                                        Cumulative export production (m )

     Notes: Figure plots learning curves obtained by regressing quality or productivity measures on firm and round fixed effects and then plotting a
     kernel-weighted local polynomial of the residuals against cumulative export production for takeup firms in Sample 2.
