NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMOTIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF DONATION OPPORTUNITIES
Lara B. Aknin
Guy Mayraz
John F. Helliwell
Working Paper 20696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20696

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

The authors are grateful for the support of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, through
its program on Social Interactions, Identity and Well-being, with which all of us are affiliated. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lara B. Aknin, Guy Mayraz, and John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Emotional Consequences of Donation Opportunities
Lara B. Aknin, Guy Mayraz, and John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 20696
November 2014
JEL No. C91,D60,D64,H3
ABSTRACT
Charities often circulate widespread donation appeals to garner support for campaigns, but what impact
do these campaigns have on the well-being of individuals who choose to donate, those who choose
not to donate, and the entire group exposed to the campaign? Here we investigate these questions by
exploring the changes in affect reported by individuals who donate in response to a charitable request
and those who do not. We also look at the change in affect reported by the entire sample to measure
the net impact of the donation request. Results reveal that large donors experience hedonic boosts
from their charitable actions, and the substantial fraction of large donors translates to a net positive
influence on the well-being of the entire sample. Thus, under certain conditions, donation opportunities
can enable people to help others while also increasing the overall well-being of the population of potential
donors.

Lara B. Aknin
Department of Psychology
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, British Columbia, V5A 1S6
CANADA
laknin@sfu.ca
Guy Mayraz
Department of Economics
Level 4, FBE Building
111 Barry Street
The University of Melbourne
Victoria 3010
Australia
guy.mayraz@unimelb.edu.au

John F. Helliwell
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

Societies often value generous action among citizens and support various forms of
prosocial behavior, such as unpaid volunteer work and monetary donations. However, because
charities frequently rely on contributions motivated by donor interest, people are commonly
bombarded with charitable requests as many organizations hope that their initiative will generate
support. But what are the emotional consequences, for both donors and non-donors receiving an
invitation to contribute? Here we explore how the presentation of a donation request influences
the well-being of both donors and non-donors.
A large literature has explored what factors lead people to give (e.g., Batson, Duncan,
Ackerman, Buckley & Birtch, 1981; Benabou & Tirole, 2006; Cialdini, Brown, Lewis, Luce &
Neuberg, 1997; Clary & Snyder, 1991; Hamilton, 1963; Nowak & Sigmund, 1998; Piff, Krause,
Cote, Cheng & Keltner, 2010; Trivers, 1971), but only recently have researchers started to
examine the emotional impact of giving. Indeed, this growing body of research has demonstrated
that people are not only willing to offer aid to others, a tendency that begins early in life
(Eisenberg & Mussen, 1989; Warneken & Tomasello, 2006), but that giving to others is
emotionally rewarding. Correlational research suggests that people who engage in generous
behavior – by way of giving either their time or money to others – are happier and healthier (e.g.,
Borgonovi, 2008; Brown et al., 2003; Helliwell & Wang, 2013; Konrath, Fuhrel,-Forbis, Lou &
Brown, 2012; Thoits & Hewitt, 2001). For instance, individuals around the world who report
donating money to charity in the last month also report higher levels of life satisfaction than
those who report not donating at all (Aknin et al., 2013). Moreover, the link between giving and
well-being is causal; several experiments demonstrate that giving to others leads to larger
emotional rewards than giving to oneself (Aknin et al., 2013; Aknin, Hamlin & Dunn, 2012;

1

Dunn, Aknin & Norton, 2008, 2014; Gray, 2010; Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). Thus, giving to
others yields emotional rewards for the giver.
Donation opportunities may therefore be beneficial for donors who reap the benefits of
generosity outlined above, but what is the overall emotional impact of a donation opportunity on
the whole range of subjects, including people who decide not to give (non-donors) or those who
choose to give very little (low-donors)? Past research suggests that non-donors and low-donors
fare worse than donors. Indeed, just as people engaging in prosocial behavior typically
experience positive outcomes, people engaging in little or no prosocial action tend to experience
relatively fewer benefits. For instance, examining mortality rates in large sample of older adults,
Konrath and colleagues (2012) found that individuals who reported engaging in no volunteer
work or low levels of volunteer work in the past decade had a higher level of mortality risk than
highly active volunteers. Focusing specifically on the emotional consequences of donations,
Dunn and colleagues (2010) detected a positive relationship between the amount of money
students donated to a classmate and the donor’s well-being; students offering less money
reported lower levels of positive affect and higher levels of negative affect. Finally, some
research has examined how non-helpers – defined in past research as individuals who were not
asked to provide assistance to someone in need – compare to helpers on various well-being
measures. Weinstein and Ryan (2010) found that participants not given the opportunity to help
another participant reported lower levels of well-being than participants allowed to help, but only
when assistance was initiated by the helper. Similarly, Williamson and Clark (1989) reported
that participants not allowed to help a confederate experienced lower levels of well-being than
participants asked and allowed to help. Thus, individuals for whom the opportunity to help is
withheld tend to report lower well-being than individuals for whom help is requested and

2

permitted. Interestingly, however, past research has not measured whether non-donors and lowdonors are worse off (i.e. experience lower well-being) as a result of declining a donation
opportunity. As such, it remains unknown whether individuals who choose to forgo an
opportunity to act generously experience negative emotional consequences, thereby offsetting, at
least in part, the overall positive emotional consequences of donation requests.
Given that widespread charitable appeals often request involvement from many members
of a population, how do the differential outcomes for high, low, and non-donors influence wellbeing of the full sample? To the best of our knowledge, this question has not yet been examined.
Here, we provide a first look among a sample of undergraduate students provided with the
opportunity to donate as much or as little of their study earnings to charity as they like. Because
all participants were presented with the same donation request and reported their well-being
before and after the donation, we are able to investigate how high, low, and non-donors respond
emotionally –individually and as a larger collective – to being offered a chance to donate. Our
four key hypotheses were as follows:
Hypothesis 1: Consistent with past research demonstrating that human prosocial
tendencies emerge early in life and are visible across a wide variety of contexts, we predicted
that the majority of participants would give a large portion (defined here as more than 50% of
their earnings) when presented with the opportunity to donate to charity.
Hypothesis 2: Consistent with past research demonstrating that larger donations predict
greater emotional rewards than smaller donations (e.g., Dunn et al., 2010), we predicted that
high donors (people offering more than 50% of their earnings to charity) would experience
larger emotional benefits as a result of their donation than low or non-donors (people offering
less than 50% of their earnings to charity).

3

Hypothesis 3: We predicted that people offered the opportunity to give but who choose
not to do so (non-donors) or only offer a little (low-donors) may experience a reduction in
well-being, including a decrease in positive affect and increase in negative affect. To the best
of our knowledge, this hypothesis has not been tested in previous research.
Hypothesis 4: Since there is no previous research assessing the aggregate net emotional
consequences for donors and non-donors, it was not clear what to expect. However, because
aggregate cross-national evidence demonstrates that life evaluations are higher in countries
where generosity is more prevalent (Aknin et al 2013; Helliwell & Wang 2013), and these
samples include both donors and non-donors, we hypothesized that among our sample with a
high prevalence of donations (H1) that presenting participants with an opportunity to donate
would have a positive net impact on the well-being of the entire sample, despite the
emotional costs potentially incurred by non-donors and low donors (H3).
If the presentation of a charitable appeal does not lead to negative consequences for nondonors and low-donors as predicted by Hypothesis 3, but there are gains for large donors, then
offering people the opportunity to give may provide an unalloyed good. However, if non-donors
and low-donors do experience negative well-being consequences when forgoing the opportunity
to donate, as Hypothesis 3 suggests, then the overall emotional consequences of the donation
opportunity will require finding an appropriate way of measuring and comparing the gains of the
donors against the emotional losses of the low-donors and non-donors.
Methods
Participants
Two hundred and eighty-seven students (Mage = 19.75, SD = 2.90, 64% female) at Simon
Fraser University participated in this study in exchange for course credit. Five additional

4

participants completed the experiment but withdrew their consent upon completion; their data are
not reported.
Procedure
Initial questionnaire. Participants registered for the study independently but were tested
in pairs. When entering the lab, participants were asked to independently complete an initial
questionnaire assessing their baseline emotion on the Positive and Negative Affect Scale
(PANAS; Watson, Clark & Tellegen, 1989); this measure requires respondents to rate the extent
to which they feel 10 positive and 10 negative affect emotions at the moment using a 5 point
likert scale (1-very little or not at all, 5- extremely). In line with previous research (Aknin, Dunn,
Whillans, Grant & Norton, 2012), the word “happy” was added to the PANAS because this
emotion was of particular interest.
First die roll and second questionnaire. After participants completed the initial
questionnaire, the research assistant told participants that they would have the chance to roll a
six-sided die for a monetary payoff. Pairs of participants were randomly assigned to either a team
or self condition. Participants in the self condition were told that each player would have the
chance to roll the die. If the participant rolled a value of 1-3 they would earn $3 cash and if the
participant rolled a value of 4-6 they would earn $6. Meanwhile, participants in the team
condition were told that each player would have a chance to roll the die and if they, together as a
team, rolled values that summed between 2-6, the team would earn $6 cash to split equally. If the
numbers summed to a value between 8-12, the team would earn $12 to split equally. And if the
team rolled values that summed to 7, both participants would roll again. If only one of the two
research participants came to the assigned time slot, the sole participant was given the chance to
roll the die with the “self” payoff scheme. The research assistant showed participants cash in a

5

money box to indicate that the earnings were real. Participants rolled the die and were paid
accordingly. Afterward, participants were asked to independently complete a second emotion
questionnaire assessing their current positive and negative affect on the same PANAS scale
(Watson et al., 1989).
Second die roll and third questionnaire. Participants were then informed that they had the
option of rolling the die again for a monetary gain or loss. Specifically, participants in the self
condition were told that each player could decide to roll the die again and if they rolled a value
of 1-3 they would lose $2 cash. However, if the participant rolled a value of 4-6 they would earn
$3. Meanwhile, participants in the team condition were told that if they, together as a team,
decided to roll again and rolled values that summed between 2-6, the team would lose $4 cash.
However, if participants rolled numbers that summed to a value between 8-12, the team would
earn $6 to split equally. And if the team rolled values that summed to 7, both participants would
roll again. Participants made their decision, rolled the die, and earnings were adjusted
accordingly. To assess the impact of gains and losses on well-being, participants were asked to
complete a third emotion questionnaire assessing their current positive and negative affect on the
same PANAS scale (Watson et al., 1989). In addition, participants were asked to provide their
demographic information (e.g., age, gender, GPA, income).
Donation opportunity and final questionnaire. The research assistant indicated that the
study was nearly complete and told participants that the lab was collecting money for Spread the
Net, a charity affiliated with the United Nations International Emergency Fund (UNICEF) that
purchases bed nets to stop the spread of malaria through Africa. The research assistant explained
that every ten dollars donated buys a bed net that could save a child. Therefore, if participants
wanted to support the charity, they could put a donation in a small envelope and put the envelope

6

in a box labeled “Spread the Net”. The research assistant then left the room to prepare the final
questionnaire; this ensured that participants could make their donation decision without pressure
from the researcher. Envelopes provided for donations were surreptitiously marked with each
participant’s unique identifier so that we could determine how much money, if any, each
participant donated to charity. When the research assistant returned, participants were asked to
complete a final emotion questionnaire, which allowed us to assess the impact of donation on
well-being.
Results
Hypothesis 1: Earning and donation rates
Participants earned an average of $4.25 (SD = 2.72) and donated an average of $2.80 (SD
= 2.43) to charity. A large proportion of participants (90.6%) gave some money to charity. We
calculated a “donation ratio” – dividing donation amount by earnings – and found that nearly
two-thirds (60.62%) of participants gave more than half of their money to charity, while a subset
of 11.1% of the full sample donated all or more of their earnings.
Hypotheses 2 &3: Change in affect for individual donors
Given that slightly over half of our sample offered more than half of their earnings to
charity, we focused our analyses on the emotional consequences of donating large (>50%) and
small (<50%) earnings ratios to charity. Note that this means we have combined non-donors and
low-donors to increase our statistical power; this strategy is supported by the finding that nondonors and low-donors provided similar emotional ratings on all well-being measures pre- and
post-donation (see Supplementary Materials).
We focused on two particular positive emotions of specific interest (happiness and pride) as
well as overall positive and negative affect.

7

Happiness. To examine the impact of large and small donation ratios on happiness we
first looked at change in self-reported levels of happiness from pre- to post- donation
questionnaires using paired samples t-tests. Analyses revealed that participants offering a small
proportion of their earnings (<50%) reported a non-statistically significant drop in happiness
(from M = 3.54, SD = 1.10 to M = 3.47, SD = .87), t(111) = .85, p = .40, while participants
offering a larger proportion of their earnings (>50%) reported a statistically significant increase
in happiness (from M = 3.37, SD = .99 to M = 3.74, SD = 1.00), t(170) = 5.81, p < .001 (see
Figure 1). Thus, although there were no happiness differences between high and low donation
groups before the donation opportunity, t(281) = 1.29, p = .200, participants who donated a
larger proportion of their earnings to charity were happier post-donation than were participants
who donated a smaller proportion of their earnings, t(285) = 2.33, p < .03.
Pride. Similarly, to examine the impact of large and small donation ratios on pride we
looked at change in self-reported levels of pride from pre- to post- donation questionnaires using
paired samples t-tests. Analyses revealed that participants offering a small proportion of their
earnings (<50%) reported a non-statistically significant drop in pride (from M = 2.37, SD = 1.20
to M = 2.32, SD = 1.10), t(112) = .51, p = .61, while participants offering a larger proportion of
their earnings (>50%) reported a statistically significant increase in pride (from M = 2.52, SD =
1.13 to M = 3.08, SD = 1.28), t(171) = 6.94, p < .001 (see Figure 1). Thus, once again, although
there were no differences in pride between high and low donation groups before the donation
opportunity, t(283) = 1.04, p = .299, participants who donated a larger proportion of their
earnings to charity reported experiencing higher levels of pride post-donation than participants
who donated a smaller proportion of their earnings, t(285) = 5.19, p < .001

8

Positive Affect. A paired samples t-test revealed that participants offering a small
proportion of their earnings (<50%) reported a statistically significant drop in positive affect
(from M = 2.71, SD = 1.02 to M = 2.42, SD = .81), t(108) = -5.22, p < .001, while participants
offering a larger proportion of their earnings (>50%) reported a statistically significant increase
in positive affect (from M = 2.74, SD = .79 to M = 2.83, SD = .84), t(168) = 2.46, p < .02 (see
Figure 1). High and low donation groups reported similar levels of positive affect before the
donation opportunity, t(279) = 2.99, p = .765, but participants who donated a larger proportion of
their earnings to charity reported higher levels of positive affect post-donation than participants
who donated a smaller proportion of their earnings, t(282) = 4.07, p < .001.
Negative Affect. A paired samples t-test revealed that participants offering a small
proportion of their earnings (<50%) reported a non-statistically significant drop in negative affect
(from M = 1.25, SD = .34 to M = 1.21, SD = .33), t(110) = 1.53, p = .13, while participants
offering a larger proportion of their earnings (>50%) reported a statistically significant decrease
in negative affect (from M = 1.27, SD = .39 to M = 1.16, SD = .27), t(160) = 5.11, p < .001 (see
Figure 1). High and low donation groups reported similar levels of negative affect before the
donation opportunity, t(281) = .47, p = .637. Because both groups reported a decrease in negative
affect, participants donating a larger proportion of their earnings to charity did not report
statistically significant lower levels of negative affect post-donation than participants who
donated a smaller proportion of their earnings, t(273) = 1.30, p = .20.
Hypothesis 4: Change in affect across the full sample
How did these emotional consequences influence the entire sample? To find out, we
examined the change in happiness, pride, positive affect, and negative affect from pre- to postdonation across all participants. Analyses revealed a statistically significant increase in happiness

9

(from M = 3.44, SD = 1.03 to M = 3.63, SD = 0.96, t(282) = 3.79, p < .001), a statistically
significant increase in pride (from M = 2.46, SD = 1.16 to M = 2.78, SD = 1.27, t(284) = 4.74, p
< .001), a statistically significant drop in positive affect (from M = 2.73, SD = 0.89 to M = 2.67,
SD = 0.85, t(277) = 1.97, p < .05), and a statistically significant drop in negative affect (from M
= 1.27, SD = 0.37 to M = 1.18, SD = 0.30, t(271) = 4.89, p < .001; see Figure 1). These changes
in emotion reflect the generally positive consequences of offering the donation opportunity, with
large and strongly statistically significant increases in happiness and pride, and a corresponding
decrease in negative affect. However, it is worth investigating further why there is a small but
significant drop in full-sample positive affect despite the significant full-sample increases in
happiness and pride (and also “inspired”). This appears to happen because four of the PANAS
positive affect markers that reflect increasing fatigue as the experiment progresses – alertness,
attentiveness, excitement and determination – fall significantly over the second half of the
experiment. If these affect declines that take place between the third and fourth evaluations
(before and after the donation opportunity) are factored out of our calculations, then the
remaining sum of positive affect changes becomes significantly above zero for the sample as a
whole. We conclude that the donation opportunity resulted in an unambiguous improvement in
the average level of subjective well-being.
General Discussion
The findings reported here suggest that a single donation request can have net positive
influence on the well-being of an entire sample. While those who donate little or no money at all
in response to a charitable request experience some hedonic costs, such as a drop in positive
affect, those who chose to donate a substantial portion of their earnings to charity experience
large hedonic gains, seen here as an increase in happiness, pride, positive affect, and drop in

10

negative affect. Given that the majority of our sample donated a large proportion of their
earnings to charity and experienced emotional rewards, the overall impact of presenting a
donation request to the sample was positive.
To what extent is the net positive impact of the donation opportunity dependent upon
having a majority of large donors? To answer this question, we used the changes in happiness
and pride reported in the results section to compute the smallest percentage of high donors that
would result in subjective well-being improvement for the full sample.1 Analyses reveal that a
the net change in happiness is estimated to be positive if 16% or more of the subjects donate
more than half of their earnings. The corresponding figure for the net change in pride is 9%.
Thus, while nearly two-thirds of the present sample donated over half of their earnings in
response to a donation request, fewer than one-sixth of the donors must do the same for the net
subjective well-being change to be positive if the magnitude of change matches that in our
experiments.
These findings dovetail with a growing body of research documenting the emotional
rewards of generous actions. Indeed, while numerous studies have demonstrated that people
enacting kind deeds – using either their time or money in service of others – experience a boost
in well-being from doing so, the findings reported here indicate that the well-being benefits of
generosity are detectable across an entire sample including non-donors and low-donors as well.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first examination of a large-scale, net result of a
donation request. As such, these findings may provide helpful guidance when considering the
emotional consequences of wide-spread donation requests and opportunities.
Our results may offer helpful insight for policy directed at increasing prosocial behavior
and citizen well-being. Specifically, our results suggest that presenting opportunities for

11

prosocial action are beneficial in that they offer citizens the opportunity to contribute to their
community or causes of interest and reap emotional rewards of doing so. While we focused on
monetary requests, it is possible that similar outcomes may occur in response to other charitable
campaigns, such as requests to assist with community clean-up initiatives or to volunteer at a
local homeless shelter. Thus, policy supporting prosocial campaigns might not only make
prosocial behavior more prevalent, but also foster greater well-being for citizens.
While these initial results offer exciting possibilities for increasing prosocial and wellbeing outcomes, caution should be exercised when extrapolating from this single, small-scale
investigation to the real world because this study has limitations. First, our sample consisted of
undergraduate students, a population that does not represent the large range of adults targeted by
donation requests. Although students may not reflect the demographics of the population, past
research has shown that students respond to donation requests in similar ways to nationally
representative adult samples (e.g., Aknin et al., 2013; Dunn et al., 2008), suggesting that our
convenience sample does not raise obvious concerns for generalizability. Second, participants
were asked to donate a small amount of money that they had just earned participating in the
study, not their hard earned cash. This may seem problematic to the extent that the emotional
consequences of donating may differ when people contribute their hard earned resources instead
of “house money”. While this presents an intriguing possibility, previous work has shown that
people take ownership of newly acquired resources quickly and value them accordingly. For
instance, classic research on the Endowment Effect indicates that moments after being given a
mug, new owners require double the original value to sell their item (Kahneman, Knetsch &
Thaler, 1990). Moreover, the emotional benefits of giving tend to be greater when giving
requires sacrificing one’s own personally costly resources than when giving an identical, non-

12

personally costly item; 22-month old toddlers in a giving experiment smiled significantly more
when sharing their own treats with a recipient than when giving an identical treat that did not
belong to them (Aknin et al., 2012). Thus, these findings suggest that the emotional rewards of
giving detected here may have underestimated the true effect. Finally, it is worth noting that
participants were asked to donate to charity with a clear positive impact on recipients. Given that
the emotional rewards of giving are greatest when donors are aware of how their donation
positively influences others (Aknin, Dunn, Whillans, Grant & Norton, 2013), the donation target
– and especially the transparency of the aid – may be of critical importance. Thus, future
research may wish to examine whether the observed findings replicate with various donation
targets.
Moving to the bigger picture, any conclusion that expanding the opportunities for
generosity improves well-being needs to be able to make the connection between the short-term
emotional consequences we have found and some broader and more long-lasting measures of
well-being. We do not expect that short-term, small-scale experiments – like the one used here –
would increase life evaluations; indeed it is better for the plausibility of both measures that they
do not. Thus we find, as expected, that there is a small and non-significant increase in life
satisfaction among the high donors. What we need is some plausible link between this smallscale experimentation and what might be happening in societies with very different patterns of
generosity. In earlier work, we combined lab experiments on the emotional benefits of giving
with large scale survey evidence showing a significant partial linkage between the national
prevalence of donations and average life evaluations (Aknin et al, 2013). This suggests that
sustained patterns of giving are associated with life evaluations that are on average higher, with
donors and non-donors both included in the sample. Further research is needed to clarify the

13

channels through which the positive emotions from sustained giving translate into higher life
evaluations, perhaps through the health and social connections channels proposed by Kok and
colleagues (2013).
More broadly, large-scale implementations of donation opportunities require careful
consideration of unintended outcomes. For instance, past research on donor fatigue and moral
licensing (Monin & Miller, 2001) suggest that individuals respond generously to an initial
donation request but may abstain from subsequent opportunities to engage in prosocial behavior.
To the extent that multiple donation requests turn high-donors into low-donors or non-donors,
the emotional costs of each donation request increase, decreasing the net positive impact
experienced by the population. Of course, it is also possible that positive emotions could
promote subsequent prosocial action (Aknin, Norton & Dunn, 2010; Isen & Levin, 1972),
making repeat donations more likely. Thus future work should examine the long-term impact of
multiple donation requests. In addition, we did not have the statistical power to explore which
participants were the most likely to forgo the opportunity to donate to charity. Seeing as
individuals choosing not to donate bear the emotional costs of donation requests, it is worth
investigating whether these individuals represent a vulnerable population (e.g., low income
individuals) requiring further consideration of whether emotional costs should be preferentially
weighed.
These considerations notwithstanding, this research presents a first look at how a single
donation request can influence the well-being of potential donors, both as individuals and as a
larger collective. Our findings suggest that a donation request can have net positive influence on
the well-being of the group targeted by a donation request. Although low-donors and non-donors
may experience hedonic costs, high donors experience larger hedonic gains. Given that the

14

majority of people are large donors, the emotional benefits outweigh the emotional costs,
suggesting that donation requests provide an opportunity for people to help others and
experience a boost in well-being from doing so.

15

References
Aknin, L. B., Barrington-Leigh, C. P., Dunn, E. W., Helliwell, J. F., Burns, J., Biswas-Diener,
R., Kemeza, I., Nyende, P., Ashton-James, C. E., & Norton, M. I. (2013). Prosocial
spending and well-being: Cross-cultural evidence for a psychological universal. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 635-652.
Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., Whillans, A., Grant, A. M., & Norton, M. I. (2013). Feeling like you
made a difference: On the importance of perceived prosocial impact when giving to
others. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 88, 90-95.
Aknin, L. B., Dunn, E. W., & Norton, M. I. (2011). Happiness runs in a circular motion:
Evidence for a positive feedback loop between prosocial spending and happiness. Journal
of Happiness Studies, 13(2), 347-355. DOI: 10.1007/s10902-011-9267-5
Aknin, L. B., Hamlin, J.K. & Dunn, E. W. (2012). Giving leads to happiness in young children.
PLoS ONE, 7(6), e39211.
Batson, C. D., Duncan, B. D., Ackerman, P., Buckley, T., & Birch, K. (1981). Is empathic
emotion a source of altruistic motivation?. Journal of personality and Social
Psychology, 40(2), 290.
Bénabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2006). Incentives and prosocial behavior. American Economic
Review 96(5), 1652-1678.
Borgonovi, F. (2008). Doing well by doing good. The relationship between formal volunteering
and self-reported health and happiness. Social Sciences & Medicine, 66, 2321-2334.
Brown, S.L., Nesse, R.M., Vinokur, A.D.& Smith, D.M. (2003). Providing social support may be
more beneficial than receiving it: Results from a prospective study of mortality.
Psychological Science, 14,320-327.

16

Cialdini, R. B., Brown, S. L., Lewis, B. P., Luce, C., & Neuberg, S. L. (1997). Reinterpreting the
empathy–altruism relationship: When one into one equals oneness. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 73(3), 481.
Clary, E. G., Snyder, M., Ridge, R. D., Copeland, J., Stukas, A. A., Haugen, J., & Miene, P.
(1998). Understanding and assessing the motivations of volunteers: a functional
approach. Journal of personality and social psychology, 74(6), 1516.
Dunn, E. W., Ashton-James, C., Hanson, M. D., & Aknin, L. B. (2010). On the costs of selfinterested economic behavior: How does stinginess get under the skin? Journal of Health
Psychology, 15, 627-633.
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others promotes
happiness. Science, 319, 1687-1688.
Eisenberg, N., & Mussen, P. H. (Eds.). (1989). The roots of prosocial behavior in children.
Cambridge University Press. Hamilton, Hamilton, W. D. (1963). The evolution of
altruistic behavior. American naturalist, 354-356.
Gray, K. (2010). Moral transformation good and evil turn the weak into the mighty. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 1(3), 253-258.
Helliwell, J.F. & Wang, S. (2013). World happiness: Trends, explanations and distribution.
Chapter 2 of Helliwell, J. F., Layard, R., & Sachs, J. (Eds.). World Happiness Report. UN
Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 8-37.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., & Thaler, R. H. (1990). Experimental tests of the endowment
effect and the Coase theorem. Journal of political Economy, 1325-1348.
Kok, E., Coffey, K., Cohn, M., Catalino, L., Vacharkulksemsuk, T., Algoe, S., Brantley, M. &
Fredrickson, B. (2013) How positive emotions build physical health: Perceived positive

17

social connections account for the upward spiral between positive emotions and vagal
tone Psychological Science 24, 7, 1123-1132.
Konrath, S., Fuhrel-Forbis, A., Lou, A., & Brown, S. (2012). Motives for volunteering are
associated with mortality risk in older adults. Health Psychology, 31(1), 87.
Thoits, P. A., & Hewitt, L. N. (2001). Volunteer work and well-being. Journal of Health and
Social Behavior, 42, 115–131.
Monin, B., & Miller, D. T. (2001). Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 81(1), 33.
Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (1998). Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image
scoring. Nature, 393(6685), 573-577.
Piff, P. K., Kraus, M. W., Côté, S., Cheng, B. H., & Keltner, D. (2010). Having less, giving
more: the influence of social class on prosocial behavior. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 99(5), 771.
Trivers, R.L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 46,
35-37.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Altruistic helping in human infants and young
chimpanzees. Science, 311(5765), 1301-1303.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures
of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.
Weinstein, N., Ryan, R. M. (2010). When Helping Helps: Autonomous Motivation for Prosocial
Behavior and Its Influence on Well-Being for the Helper and Recipient. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 222-244.

18

Williamson, G. M., & Clark, M. S. (1989). Providing help and desired relationship type as
determinants of changes in moods and self-evaluations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 56(5), 722-734.

19

Footnote
1

Let a denote the increase in subjective well-being that high donors experience as a result of the

donation opportunity, and let b denote the decrease in the subjective well-being of high-donors.
If p denotes the proportion of high donors, then the average change is pa-(1-p)b. Hence, the
overall change is positive as long as p is larger than b/(a+b).

20

Figure 1. Change in happiness, pride, positive affect, and negative affect for low givers (< 50%),
high givers (> 50%), and the full sample.

21

