                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE COLLATERAL TRAP

                                        Frédéric Boissay
                                         Russell Cooper

                                      Working Paper 20703
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20703


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2014




We thank seminar participants at CREI, Sciences-Po Paris, Pennsylvania State University, BIS,
CSEF (Capri), and Zurich University for their comments. A special thanks to Elena Carletti, Ed
Green, and Antoine Martin for comments and suggestions. A previous version of this paper
circulated under the title "Inside and Outside Collateral: Implications for Financial Market
Instability".The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the ECB or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Frédéric Boissay and Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Collateral Trap
Frédéric Boissay and Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 20703
November 2014, Revised March 2016
JEL No. E44,E51,G21,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

Active wholesale financial markets help reallocate deposits across heterogeneous banks. Because
of incentive problems these flows are constrained and collateral is needed. The composition of
collateral matters. The use of inside assets (loans) creates a “collateral pyramid” in that cash
flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through collateral pyramids the financial
sector creates safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the economy to systemic panics. Outside
collateral (treasuries) serves as foundation of, and stabilises, the pyramid. There is a threshold for
the volume of treasuries, below which investors panic and the pyramid collapses.


Frédéric Boissay
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29, 60311 Frankfurt am main
Germany
frederic.boissay@ecb.europa.eu

Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University
611 Kern
State College, PA 16802
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
                                         The Collateral Trap

                                 Frédéric Boissay∗ and Russell Cooper†         ‡



                                        This Version: March 1, 2016
                                     First Version: November 17, 2014



                                                    Abstract

              Active wholesale financial markets help reallocate deposits across heterogeneous banks.
           Because of incentive problems these flows are constrained and collateral is needed. The
           composition of collateral matters. The use of inside assets (loans) creates a “collateral
           pyramid” in that cash flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through
           collateral pyramids the financial sector creates safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the
           economy to systemic panics. Outside collateral (treasuries) serves as foundation of, and
           stabilises, the pyramid. There is a threshold for the volume of treasuries, below which
           investors panic and the pyramid collapses.

 1        Introduction

This paper studies the fragility of wholesale financial markets. These markets facilitate the
reallocation of funds within the banking sector: banks with relatively profitable opportunities
borrow from other banks. These exchanges may include various market–financed transfers
of assets between banks and take a variety of forms, including overnight funding markets,
collateralised loan markets, etc. For short, we refer to those markets as “interbank loan”
markets.

         Markets secured by inside collateral are less stable. Our analysis highlights the sig-
nificance of collateral for the functioning of the interbank markets. Both the volume, the value,
and the composition of collateral matter. We make a distinction between “outside collateral”,
such as the pledging of treasuries in a repo arrangement, and “inside collateral”, such as the
     ∗
         Bank for International Settlements, frederic.boissay@bis.org
     †
         Department of Economics, The Pennsylvania State University; Research Associate, NBER, russell-
coop@gmail.com
   ‡
     We thank seminar participants at CREI, Sciences-Po Paris, Pennsylvania State University, BIS, CSEF
(Capri), and Zurich University for their comments. A special thanks to Elena Carletti, Ed Green, and An-
toine Martin for comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect those of the BIS.




                                                        1
pledging of cash flows in the asset backed commercial paper market.1 We argue that markets
are, all else equal, less stable when they are secured by inside collateral than when they are
secured by outside collateral. The use of inside assets creates a type of “collateral pyramid” in
that cash flows from one loan can be pledged to secure another. Through collateral pyramids,
the financial sector is able to create safe assets, but at the cost of exposing the economy to
systemic panics. Indeed, the process of creation of safe assets by banks, which is endogenous,
is subject to strategic complementarities.
       Strategic complementarities. Reflecting incentive problems in the interbank market,
a bank’s collateral determines its ability to borrow and thus the extent of the reallocation of
savings from low to high quality banks. In equilibrium, the pledgeability of borrowers’ cash
flows itself depends, through adverse selection, on borrowers’ quality. If lenders believe that
borrowers are high quality, then borrowing constraints are lax, the demand for funding and
the equilibrium interbank rate are high. Only high quality banks, those whose projects have a
positive net present value (NPV), borrow funds. So, borrowers are indeed high quality. Those
complementarities are magnified when transactions are collateralised. Indeed, high quality
loans have high collateral value, which further relaxes borrowing constraints, raises demand,
the equilibrium rate, and borrower quality.
       Yet, for the same parameter values there may exist a “collateral trap” in which lenders
are pessimistic about the quality of borrowers. In this equilibrium, borrowing constraints are
tight, borrowers demand little funding, and the equilibrium rate is low. As a consequence, most
projects have positive NPV, even low quality banks borrow, and the sorting of borrowers is less
efficient. The lack of information about borrowers’ cash flows undermines their pledgeability. In
a collateral trap, pledgeability is low and the volume of safe assets that borrowers can engineer
out of their cash flows, i.e. inside collateral, is scaled down, which contributes to tightening the
borrowing constraint.
       The resulting complementarity may generate multiple equilibria including a collateral trap,
characterized by (i) a reduction in the creation of inside collateral by banks, (ii) reduced inter-
bank activity, (iii) resource mis–allocation, (iv) a recession.
       Treasuries as foundation of the collateral pyramid. We provide a crisp characteriza-
tion of the conditions on the economy’s fundamentals for this type of multiplicity. We emphasize
the specific role of outside collateral, like treasuries, in avoiding the collateral trap. Treasuries
serve as the foundation of the collateral pyramid. A larger foundation contributes to making
the pyramid immune to beliefs, more stable. There is a threshold for the volume of treasuries
   1
    While the terminology is reminiscent of the distinction between private and public liquidity in Holmstrom
and Tirole (1998), our focus is on different forms of collateral as pledgeable assets rather than liquidity per se.
In our model, as in theirs, a complementarity emerges between inside and outside collateral. Note also that
treasuries may not necessarily be the only type of outside collateral or even may not always be considered as
outside collateral, as would for example be the case when a sovereign issues debt in order to bail out its domestic
banking sector.


                                                        2
held by the banking sector, below which investors may panic and the pyramid collapse.

      Link to the literature. Models of fragility provide a framework for understanding the
power of expectations in driving outcomes in financial markets. Our model of strategic uncer-
tainty in financial markets focuses on loans between financial entities, and on the characteristics
of the assets used to secure those loans. It purposefully downplays the role of financial instabil-
ity stemming from bank runs along the lines of Diamond and Dybvig (1983).2 Indeed, capital
flow reversals and “sudden stops” are not key elements in our analysis.3 As in Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997) and the literature that follows, collateral is central to our analysis as a means of
coping with incentive problems. This literature focuses on the effects of endogenous variations
in collateral value. In contrast, we emphasize how endogenous variations in the composition of
collateral, i.e. the relative magnitudes of inside and outside collateral, determine the ability of
banks to borrow against their assets. This is reflected, in part, by the height of the equilib-
rium determined collateral pyramid. The complementarity between the two types of collateral
in our model stands in contrast with Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015). In their
model, banks provide safe assets to households and the rise in the supply of treasuries crowds
out banks deposits via effects on the equilibrium price of treasuries. In contrast, we focus on
the holdings of treasuries by collateral constrained banks and on the role of such securities in
securing banks’ wholesale funding. As Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015), we too
predict that following an increase in treasury supply the yield spread between risky loans and
safe assets should go down (see also Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)). But in our
case the reduced spread reflects the lower shadow collateral value of safe assets for banks, not
a deterioration of the non–pecuniary services of safe assets for households.

      In Benmelech and Bergman (2012) a higher value of collateral leads to more lending. Further,
they assume that the value of collateral depends positively on the liquidity constraints of firms
who would be the natural purchasers of the collateral in the event of default. This generates a
complementarity between collateral values and lending. Benmelech and Bergman (2012) discuss
the types of equilibria that can arise, including one they term a “credit trap” in which collateral
values and lending are low and injections of liquidity do not increase lending. In the collateral
trap banks too are led to invest deposits in a relatively low return activity because the return on
the interbank market is driven to a low value through adverse selection. In this sense, liquidity
is hoarded rather than lent to more productive activities, as in a credit trap. A distinguishing
  2
     See, for example, Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014), Gorton and Metrick (2012), Covitz, Liang, and
Suarez (2009), Copeland, Martin, and Walker (2011), Acharya and Schnabl (2010), and Fleming, Hrung, and
Keane (2010) for arguments supporting this emphasis. Moreover, the runs observed on asset–backed commercial
paper (ABCP) markets in 2007-8 were different from the traditional deposit–based bank runs, which Gorton
(1988) showed to be mainly related to economic fundamentals. In particular, Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009)
find that investors in ACBP markets ran from all types of programs, even from those with apparently solid
fundamentals.
   3
     As emphasized by Caballero (2009), the financial crisis in the US was not marked by a sudden withdrawal
of external funds.


                                                     3
feature of our model is the collapse of interbank market transactions, particularly those backed
by inside collateral. Indeed, consistent with evidence we present, our analysis highlights that
the interbank loans backed by inside assets are much less resilient than those backed by outside
assets. The collateral trap is also distinct from the traditional Keynesian liquidity trap and from
Caballero and Fahri (2015)’s “safety trap”. In those traps, the excess demand for liquidity or
safe assets leads to a recession when the nominal interest rate hits the zero lower bound. Also,
like Benmelech and Bergman (2012), the focus is on the anemic effects of monetary policy post
crisis. In our model, in contrast, a recession results from the collapse of the interbank market
and is associated with an inefficient allocation of resources. Moreover, the economy falls into
the collateral trap when interest rates are low, not necessarily when they are at the zero lower
bound.

   Link to facts and policy implications. Switches from optimism to pessimism resemble
the observed collapse in wholesale funding markets during the Great Recession. The predictions
of our model relate to both financial flows and real activity and are consistent with several
observations during the recent financial crisis. For example, our model predicts the excess
volatility of the Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) relative to repo markets. Our model
creates comparable variations in the use of inside and outside collateral. The implications of
the model for output and capital reallocation also relate to the evidence presented in Foster,
Grim, and Haltiwanger (2013) on factor reallocation. They argue that, in contrast to previous
periods of low economic activity, the Great Recession did not correspond to a period of increased
reallocation of factors of production.
   Though the paper is not intended as a basis for assessing the full costs and benefits of policy
analysis, it is possible to consider some crude forms of interventions within our framework,
for example restrictions on bank portfolios, the setup of a central bank deposit facility, bank
subsidies, or collateral swaps. A key finding is that asset portfolio restrictions are costly insofar
as they limit reallocation through the interbank market. This restriction may eliminate the
fragility of these markets but they do so by supporting a unique equilibrium with low interbank
flows. We also find that bank subsidies, the setup of a central bank deposit facility, and collateral
swaps, contribute to the stability of the financial sector. The paper proceeds as follows. Section
2 documents the evolution of secured funding markets in the US around the recent financial
crisis. Section 3 describes our theoretical framework and Section 4 describes the conditions
under which financial markets may collapse. The implications of those events are analysed
in Section 5. Section 6 explores to the link between our model and the facts, and Section 7
discusses the potential policy interventions that influence both the multiplicity of equilibria as
well as the efficiency of the interbank markets. The last section concludes.




                                                 4
 2    Facts

This section presents some pertinent facts related to the flows of funds and rates in interbank
markets in the US before and during the 2007-8 financial crisis. These observations are used
initially as motivation. Later, we comment those facts again, through the lenses of our model.

Fact # 1: The 2007–8 crisis occurred after a historical increase in bank deposits and a historical
fall in US treasuries holdings by the US financial sector.

     Figure 1 shows the long term evolution of the volume of treasuries held by the US financial
sector and the rest of the world, against the evolution of US household deposits. Treasuries and
deposits both increased from 1970 until 1995. After 1995, the growth of deposits and of the
demand for treasuries by the rest of the world accelerated, while US banks reduced their holding
of treasuries; until the start of the crisis. At that time, banks deposits were at a historical high,
and treasuries held by the financial sector were at a historical low, reflecting a “crowding out
effect” and the shortage of safe assets in the US financial sector (Caballero (2009)). In 2007q2,
notably, only 2.5% of the funds deposited in US banks were invested into treasuries. This
suggests that, at that time, the rate of transformation of risky assets into safe deposits by US
banks was unusually high.

            Figure 1: US treasuries held by the financial sector and household deposits

                                                             10000                                                                2000
                                                                          Household deposits
                                                                          Treasuries held by the RoW
                                                                          Treasuries held by US financial sector (RHS)
                                                              8000
                          Household Deposits, in billion $




                                                                                                                                  1500
                                                                                                                                         Treasuries, in billion $




                                                              6000

                                                                                                                                  1000

                                                              4000


                                                                                                                                  500
                                                              2000



                                                                 0                                                                0
                                                                 1970q1   1980q1          1990q1           2000q1        2010q1
                                                                                              date
Note: Total outstanding amount of US treasuries securities held by the US financial sector: Source: US Flows of Funds
Accounts (Table L.209, series FL763061100.Q + FL753061103.Q + FL743061103.Q + FL633061105.Q + FL653061105.Q
+ FL663061105.Q). Household Deposits: total currency and deposits (including money market fund shares) by households
and nonprofit organizations; Source: US Flows of Funds (Table L.100, series FL154000025.Q). Treasuries held by the Rest
of the World: Source: US Flows of Funds Accounts (Table L.209, series FL263061105.Q). Vertical lines: Great Recession’s
troughs and peaks (NBER dates).



Fact # 2: During the 2007-8 crisis, Asset Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) markets collapsed
as a substantial number of Special Purpose Vehicles experienced a run. In contrast, the markets
secured by treasuries or government guaranteed assets remained stable.

     Fact #2 has been documented in a number of papers. For example, Copeland, Martin,
and Walker (2011) show that the segments of the US repo market, such as tri-party repos
and the bilateral repos, which represent more than two thirds of the US repo market, remained

                                                                                                5
               Figure 2: Volume of Secured Loans, as a ratio to Households’ Deposits

                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                 Repo
                                                                                                                 ABCP
                                                                                                                 ABS (incl. CDO)




                          normalised to one in 2007q2
                                                                                                                 CDO (incl. CDO squared)

                                                         1                                                            Lehman Brothers Bankruptcy




                                                         .5




                                                         0
                                                              q1


                                                                      q1


                                                                              q1


                                                                                      q1


                                                                                              q1


                                                                                                         q1


                                                                                                                 q1


                                                                                                                           q1


                                                                                                                                    q1


                                                                                                                                              q1
                                                          03


                                                                     04


                                                                             05


                                                                                     06


                                                                                             07


                                                                                                        08


                                                                                                                09


                                                                                                                         10


                                                                                                                                  11


                                                                                                                                            12
                                                        20


                                                                   20


                                                                           20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                           20


                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                          20
Note: Volumes of repos, ABCP, and ABS, divided by households deposits; the ratio is normalised to 1 in 2007q2. Repo
and Fed Funds volumes: outstanding amounts borrowed by the financial sector (excluding foreign banks offices); Source:
US Flows of Funds (Table L.207, series FL892150005.Q). ABCP: outstanding amounts; Source: Federal Reserve Bank
of St Louis (FRED) database (series DTBSPCKAM). ABS and CDO: quarterly issuances; Source: Asset Backed Alert
and Dealogic. Household Deposits: total currency and deposits (including money market fund shares) by households and
nonprofit organizations; Source: US Flows of Funds (Table L.100, series FL154000025.Q). Vertical lines: Great Recession’s
troughs and peaks (NBER dates).



strikingly stable during the crisis. Overall, the reduction in repo transactions was rather limited
and dwarfed by the reduction in ABCP transactions. In practice, ABCP transactions are
operated through so–called Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), which are essentially subsidiaries
bankruptcy–remote from their parent banks that issue commercial paper and use the proceeds
to invest in assets like mortgages or corporate loans (see, e.g., Gorton and Souleles (2005)).4
By mid–2007, this type of funding was prominent in the US, as SPVs totalled assets over $1.3
trillion, compared to broker–dealer repos of $2.5 trillion, and financial commercial paper of $0.8
trillion. But it also turned out to be most unstable. Covitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) document
a significant fall in the number of SPVs at the onset of the crisis, with about 40% of those SPVs
facing in a run. In Figure 2 we compare the evolution of wholesale funding markets secured
by outside collateral (repos) or inside collateral (ABCP, and Asset Backed Securities —ABS)
during the recent financial crisis.5 The upshot is that the markets secured by inside collateral
were less stable than those secured by outside collateral. In the run–up to the crisis, the three
markets essentially evolved together, and their size increased. When in Summer 2007 the crisis
hit, the volume of transactions fell by 60% in the ABS market and by 40% in the ABCP market,
while it fell by less than 10% in the repo market, which confirms the resilience of the latter
documented in earlier work.
    4
      Bankruptcy–remoteness is a central element to the use and creation of collateral and, accordingly, will also
be an important aspect of our analysis.
    5
      ABSs are securities whose income payments is derived from and “backed” by a specified pool of assets, like
mortgages, credit card loans etc, which cannot be sold individually. Collateralized Debt Obligations (CDO) are
structured financial products that pools together cash flow–generating assets and repackage those assets into
discrete tranches that can be sold to investors. The maturity ABSs and CDOs is usually longer (above eighteen
months) than that of repos and ABCPs, which does not exceed a quarter (overnight for the repos and less than
six weeks for ABCPs). To compare the evolution of those markets, we report the quarterly issuances of ABS and
CDOs together with the outstanding volumes (end–of–quarter) of repos and ABCPs.



                                                                                                  6
Fact # 3: During the crisis the Fed fund rate and the yields on repos and three–month treasuries
fell sharply but the spreads between those yields remained close to zero. In contrast, the spread
between corporate loan rates rose abruptly.

         Figure 3 shows that the repo rate has been essentially the same as the risk–free Federal Fund
and three month treasury rates. Those rates increased together in the run–up to the crisis, and
then plummeted from 5.25% in 2007q2 to about 0.25% in 2009q1. The figure also shows that the
spread between the average corporate loan rate (dashed black line) and the Federal Fund rate
(plain black line) increased significantly during the crisis. This spread will play an important role
in our analysis; we will argue that its increase during the crisis is indicative of the impairment
of the financial intermediation process.

                                    Figure 3: Nominal Interest Rates by Asset Classes

                                        10                                                            Treasury repo
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                      Treasury rate




                                                                                                                                         Fed Fund rate / Corporate loan rate
                                                                                                      Fed Fund rate
                                         8                                                            Corporate loan rate
                                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                                                      Fed Fund / Corp. rate (RHS)
                          Rates, in %




                                         6                                                                                          .6



                                         4                                                                                          .4



                                         2                                                                                          .2



                                         0                                                                                          0
                                             q1


                                                     q1


                                                             q1


                                                                     q1


                                                                             q1


                                                                                       q1


                                                                                               q1


                                                                                                       q1


                                                                                                                  q1


                                                                                                                               q1
                                          03


                                                    04


                                                            05


                                                                    06


                                                                            07


                                                                                    08


                                                                                              09


                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                              12
                                        20


                                                  20


                                                          20


                                                                  20


                                                                          20


                                                                                  20


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                            20




Note: Quarterly averages. Repo rates are the DTCC GCF Repo Index of the interest rates paid for the most-traded
GCF Repo contracts on US treasury securities, federal agency securities, and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) issued by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac; Source: DTCC. The treasury rate is the interest rate on the 3–month treasury securities
(constant maturity); Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis FRED database. The corporate loan rate is the average of
commercial and industrial loan rates ; Source: Federal Reserve Board Survey of Terms of Business Lending. Vertical lines:
Great Recession’s troughs and peaks (NBER dates).



 3        Environment

We consider an economy populated by a government, a representative household, and banks.
All agents live one period.6 We present their choice problems and constraints in turn.

 3.1        Government

The government finances expenditures b by borrowing from banks at rate rb , and repays debt
by raising taxes of brb on households at the end of the period. This budget constraint is built
into the consumption of the representative household in (1). Though public expenditures have
no direct benefit, the debt will have indirect social value through its use as collateral by banks.
     6
    The model is static as the interactions take place just once. Note though that there are two stages to these
interactions.




                                                                                   7
 3.2     Household

The representative household saves s units of the single good through deposits into banks at
the beginning of the period. At the end of the period the household consumes the return on
deposits, srd , minus the taxes brb .7 For simplicity, assume linear utility over consumption, c:


                                           u(c) = c = srd − brb .                                          (1)


 3.3     Banks

There is a continuum of mass one of banks collecting deposits s from the household. Each bank
has access to a continuum of fixed size projects as well as to a storage technology. There are two
stages of bank investments. In the first stage, banks are identical and use deposits to purchase
government bonds, b, setting the remainder, s − b, aside for second stage investments. In the
second stage, banks learn their productivity, ε, and become heterogenous. They can then invest
into their projects, or lend to more productive banks on an interbank market. The interbank
market arises endogenously to allow banks to reallocate their funds once they have learned their
productivity. In the second stage, banks may also store goods. We focus on a situation where
banks operate new projects through subsidiaries created specifically for this purpose. Those
subsidiaries have limited liability, in the sense that their parent banks can collect their profits
but have no legal ownership. In essence, they resemble the bankruptcy–remote SPVs, which
banks set up in practice to raise funds on collateralized debt markets (Acharya, Schnabl, and
Suarez (2013)). Through this structure, banks are able to use cash flows from one subsidiarily as
collateral for a loan to another subsidiary when protecting assets in a bankruptcy proceeding.
We first study the choices of the bank in the second stage. Using these, we formulate the
optimization problem of the bank in the first stage.

 3.3.1    Stage 2 Choices: Interbank Market Participation

In the second stage banks, after making a portfolio choice in the first stage, learn their produc-
tivity ε. The size of each project is normalised to one. The projects of bank with productivity
ε (for short, bank ε) yields gross unit return εa. The εs are distributed over [0, 1] with a contin-
uously differentiable cumulative distribution function G(ε), ∀ε ∈ [0, 1]. Once the ε’s are drawn,
banks allocate their available funds, s − b, into interbank loans or their own projects in order to
maximize profit. Let r be the interbank loan rate. Then, there is a critical productivity level,
denoted ε̄, with


                                                  ε̄ = r/a,                                                (2)
   7
     In the model, there will be no friction between banks and households. Therefore, there will be no material
distinction between bank deposits and bank equity, and rd may be equally interpreted as the return on deposits
plus dividends.


                                                      8
such that a bank with ε = ε̄ is indifferent between undertaking projects and lending on the
interbank market. Banks with ε < ε̄ lend on the interbank market; those with ε ≥ ε̄ borrow,
as for them the net marginal return on investment is positive. To fix ideas, we will refer to
those banks as “lenders” and “borrowers”, respectively. As noted, our banks operate through
subsidiaries, and the creditors of a given subsidiary have no claim on the cash flows generated by
other subsidiaries within the parent bank. This is formalized by Assumption 1 on bankruptcy
remoteness. Importantly, this assumption does not preclude the pledging of cash flow as collat-
eral; on the contrary, as made clear below, this structure creates a role for collateralized lending
and the engineering of safe assets by banks. BCBS (2009) lists a series of reasons why banks
operate through bankruptcy–remote SPVs. Those include, inter alia, regulatory arbitrage, ac-
counting (as the bank may move assets off its balance sheet), the revenues from the commission
fees associated with the creation of SPVs. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2013) argue that
regulatory arbitrage is the main motive. For the purpose of our paper, we abstract from those
reasons and take banks’ modus operandi as given.8 To fix ideas, we will refer to the subsidiaries
of bank ε as subsidiaries ε.

Assumption 1. (Bankruptcy Remoteness) Banks invest into projects through bankruptcy–
remote subsidiaries.

       Apart from their projects, banks can also store goods, which generates a return γa, with
γ < 1. In the discussion that follows, we proceed under the assumption that the storage
technology is (weakly) inefficient, i.e. banks (weakly) prefer to either initiate projects or lend
to other banks rather than undertake storage (see Assumption 5). The potential to store goods
will nonetheless matter for the equilibrium outcome through its effects on borrowers’ incentives.
As it allows funds to be channelled to the most productive projects, the interbank market
improves the efficiency of the financial sector. The higher ε̄, the more productive are the banks
operating projects, and thus the more efficient is the banking sector. Accordingly, we will
interpret ε̄ as a measure of financial efficiency. Clearly, in a frictionless world, only the most
productive bank would operate its project: ε̄ would be equal to one. However, there is a limit,
determined in equilibrium, on how much productive banks (those with ε ≥ ε̄) can borrow on
the interbank market. This limit takes into account the presence of two frictions: asymmetric
information and moral hazard.

Assumption 2. (Asymmetric Information) Its realized value of ε is known only to the
bank.

       Asymmetric information arises from the assumption that ε is known to bank ε only, and is
not verifiable ex post. Thus, in equilibrium lenders will be able to compute the expected value
   8
    In Appendix 9.4 we show that, without Assumption 1, the default and the subsequent bankruptcy of a
subsidiary would endanger a bank’s entire portfolio of assets, and might discipline the subsidiaries of the bank.


                                                       9
of ε for borrowers but contracts cannot be conditioned on bank specific variables.

Assumption 3. (Moral Hazard) The cash flows generated from storage are not seizable.
Once it obtains a loan, a bank subsidiary can unilaterally decide to invest in storage.

       Once a subsidiary obtains a loan, it has a choice to invest the funds in a project, or to
invest them in storage. Under Assumption 3, the returns from storage cannot be seized by
the lenders, which gives the subsidiary the option to abscond and default on the loan. Since
the parent bank is not liable for the subsidiary’s loan (Assumption 1), the subsidiary cannot
commit itself to invest in the project and repay the loan. This creates a moral hazard problem,
which will be important for determining an equilibrium restriction on the amount borrowed.
To deal with the subsidiary’s incentive issues, lenders can restrict borrowing and require the
subsidiary to pledge assets as collateral. As it meets potential lenders, the subsidiary does not
hold any assets. But it may pledge some of the assets of the bank it belongs to: indeed, the
parent bank may have two different types of assets on its balance sheet. First, there are the
government bonds purchased in stage 1, b (determined later in Section 3.3.2). Those bonds
are publicly traded, easy to resell or liquidate, and therefore can be seized at no cost by the
lenders. Hence, lenders would accept them as collateral, with no haircut. Second, there may
be projects, which the bank funded in the past through other subsidiaries. Unlike government
bonds, lenders cannot seize the entire cash flows of those projects, though. We assume that
they can seize only a fraction θ of them, and that the remainder, the fraction 1 − θ, can be
retained by the parent bank. As in Tirole (2006), one could interpret those retained cash flows
as reflecting the private benefits that the bank is able to extract from the projects. They could
also reflect lenders’ lack of information, knowledge, and expertise about those projects, which
prevents lenders from seizing all the proceeds. Admittedly, in practice, lenders collect a lot of
information on the projects they finance and the borrower should not be able to hide anything.
But the assumption here is that they cannot seize all the cash flows generated by the other
subsidiaries within their borrower’s parent banking group. Else, lenders do have free and full
access to the cash flows generated by the projects they finance. Finally, we assume that, to
claim the collateral, lenders must beforehand pay a fixed cost, f . This fixed cost captures all
the transaction costs that are related to the transfer of ownership of the projects but unrelated
to the size of the default. For example, it may reflect court costs, the cost of a collective action
against the parent bank, or the cost related to the lenders having to administer the projects
themselves. To fix ideas, we interpret f as the cost of setting up a “bad bank” that takes over
the projects on behalf of the lenders. This fixed cost is shared among all the lenders defaulted
upon.9
   9
    As there are potentially many lenders, we assume that they cooperatively share the costs and gains of post
default actions.



                                                     10
       To recap: banks borrow through subsidiaries. Subsidiaries can secure the loans with two
types of assets: government bonds and the cash flows of existing projects. Upon default, lenders
can keep the full amount of the government bonds pledged; but they can only seize up to a
fraction θ of the cash flows of the projects upon the payment of f . Throughout, government
bonds are considered outside collateral while cash flows are termed inside collateral.
       Interbank Trades. Under Assumption 3, a bank subsidiary can obtain a loan, invest the
funds in storage, run away, and default. Its incentive to do this decreases with the value of its
collateral but increases with the size of the loan. As a consequence, to prevent default, lenders
take care never to allow the size of the loan to exceed a certain threshold that increases with
the collateral value. As we explain below, a bank with ε ≥ ε̄ raises interbank funds in multiple
stages, though multiple subsidiaries.
       Initially, based upon its ex ante portfolio decision (i.e. the choice of b), the bank only holds
government bonds. So, its subsidiaries can only secure loans with those bonds. Let φb s be the
amount of those loans. Then, the incentive constraint that prevents the subsidiary of bank ε
from borrowing funds and absconding is:

                                                               
                           γa s − b + φb s ≤ brb + εa s − b + φb s − φb sr.                                   (3)


The left side is the payoff from absconding. If the subsidiary invests in storage and runs away,
its parent bank gets γa(s − b + φb s). But the returns on the pledged government bonds, brb ,
are lost, as the lender has direct control over the government bonds pledged. By contrast, if
the subsidiary does not run away, then its bank earns the return on government bonds plus
the return on the project, εa s − b + φb s , net of the interbank loan repayment, φb sr. This is
                                          

indicated by the three terms on the right side of (3).10
       This incentive constraint must hold for all banks who borrow, i.e. for all ε ≥ ε̄. Hence, it
must hold for the marginal bank’s subsidiaries ε̄. For subsidiaries ε̄ the net return from not
running away is independent of φb , whereas the net return of running away increases with φb .
As a result, in equilibrium, (3) binds at ε = ε̄, which yields (using (2)):

                                                     
                                φb = b(rb − r)/s + ε̄a / (γa) − 1 + b/s.                                      (4)


Building on these first projects, bank ε can raise additional funds in order to finance more
projects. It can setup new subsidiaries that issue new loans backed by the cash flows of the initial
  10
    In this analysis, the subsidiary does not incorporate any effects its action might have on the operation of
the parent bank. That is, the subsidiary maximizes its own profit. Alternatively, the subsidiary might take into
account that by running away it deprives its parent bank of projects whose seizable cash flows could potentially
be used at a later stage to raise additional funds, say ∆, and generate more returns. For bank ε, every additional
funding ∆ yields ∆(εa − r) as net return. This extra opportunity cost of investing into storage could be reflected
in an additional term on the right side of (3). However, for the marginal bank, ε̄, this opportunity cost is, by
definition, zero. Hence this internalization does not alter incentives.



                                                       11
projects. Importantly, those cash flows are all that the subsidiaries can pledge as collateral, as
the government bonds have already been pledged to the first stage lenders. So, no asset is being
pledged multiple times. Moreover, whether or not the first stage subsidiaries invested into their
projects need not be observable to lenders for the latter to accept cash flows as collateral, since
(3) ensures that no wealth is stored. (In this respect, it is sufficient that lenders observe that a
loan φb s was made.) Let φc(1) s be the new funding that new subsidiaries ε raise against the cash
flow coming from the first stage project. The incentive constraint that prevents the subsidiaries
from investing those funds in storage and absconding is:

                                                                     
                              γaφc(1) s + brb + (1 − θ)εa s − b + φb s − φb sr
                                                      
                              ≤ brb + εa s − b + φb s − φb sr + φc(1) s(εa − r)                                  (5)


The left side is the total profit of the parent bank if its new subsidiaries store φc(1) s and
default. The bank gets the return from storage, γaφc(1) s, but must forgo the fraction θ of
the cash flows from the initial projects, which the defaulting subsidiaries pledged as collateral,
θεa s − b + φb s . The default does not affect the rest of the bank beyond that (Assumption
                

1). So, the bank also gets the returns on government bonds, brb , and the unpledged cash
flows from the first stage subsidiaries, (1 − θ)εa s − b + φb s , net of the payment of those
                                                               

subsidiaries’ interbank loans, φb sr.11 Hence the expression on the left hand side. If, in contrast,
the subsidiaries invest φc(1) s into new projects, then the bank earns the returns on government
bonds and on the projects, net of the interests on interbank loans. This is indicated by the four
terms on the right hand side. The incentive compatibility condition (5) simplifies to:

                                                          
                                 γaφc(1) − θεa 1 − b/s + φb ≤ φc (εa − r).                                       (6)

Again, this condition holds with equality for the marginal bank’s subsidiaries. Using (2), (6)
becomes
                                                                  
                                       φc(1) = (θε̄/γ) 1 − b/s + φb .                                            (7)

The term θε̄/γ is the fraction of the project that can be pledged as collateral in subsequent
wholesale funding transactions. Under Assumption 4 (see below), it is smaller than one.

          There is no reason for the process to stop. Indeed, once they obtain φc(1) s, the subsidiaries
invest into new projects, which new subsidiaries of the parent bank can use to secure new loans,
φc(2) , and finance new projects. In this way, the use of cash flows as collateral gives rise to
     11
     One can show easily that, under    Assumption 4, in equilibrium (i.e. using (2), (4), and (12)), one has
φ sr < brb +(1−θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s , which means that the first stage subsidiaries of the marginal bank ε̄ always pay
 b
                                 

their interbank loans. One can also show that, if b/s is large enough, then one has φb sr > (1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s ,
                                                                                                                   

which means that the first stage subsidiaries rely on the cash flows from their government bonds to pay back
φb sr.



                                                         12
a sequence of new collateralised loans and collateral creation inside the banking sector. This
is why we refer to cash flows as “inside” collateral. Specifically, let φc(n) s be the funds that
subsidiaries ε can raise against the cash flows of the projects financed at the (n − 1)th round.
Then, the corresponding nth incentive constraint is (for n ≥ 2)


                                    γaφc(n) − θεaφc(n−1) ≤ φc (εa − r),                                        (8)


and must again hold for all ε ≥ ε̄.12 In equilibrium, using the fact that (8) binds at ε = ε̄, one
gets (for all n ≥ 2)
                                            φc(n) = (θε̄/γ)φc(n−1) .                                           (9)

It is useful to return to the role of Assumption 1. Cash flow can be pledged across subsidiaries
in the same way that government bonds can be posted as collateral. In the event of default,
the assets are retrieved by the lenders and the defaulting borrower is unable to protect these
pledged assets. But, under Assumption 1, the other assets of the bank are protected during
bankruptcy. Thus there is a clear distinction between the use of assets as collateral and their
vulnerability under bankruptcy.

    This process of loan creation is limited by the fixed cost f , motivated earlier as a cost of a
court proceeding due to default. Lenders jointly pay this cost whenever their loans (here the
nth loans) are defaulted upon. The lenders’ threat to take over those assets, which is crucial
in preventing the borrower from absconding, is credible only if the cash flows recovered by the
lenders cover the fixed cost, though. It follows that a subsidiary can issue the nth interbank
loan only if:
                                               θε̄aφc(n−1) s ≥ f.                                             (10)

The left side of (10) is the cash flows of the marginal borrowers (with ε̄), which the new creditors
can seize if those borrowers default on their loans. The constraint thus means that lenders must
be in the position to claim the cash flows of the defaulting subsidiaries, e.g. be able to set
up a bad bank, even for the least productive projects, ε̄. The constraint (10) determines the
maximum number of lending rounds, N .
    Collateral Pyramid. The multiple rounds of lending described above form a “collateral
pyramid”; see Figure 4. Those rounds arise endogenously, as the banks accumulate pledgeable
assets through their subsidiaries. The foundation of the collateral pyramid (in gray in the figure)
is made of assets created outside the financial sector, i.e. government bonds. The rest of the
pyramid is made of collateral created inside the financial sector along the various lending rounds.
   12
      Because they depend on ε, borrowers’ cash flows, εaφc(n−1) s, are information sensitive, subject to the asym-
metric information problem, and cannot be pledged as collateral (see Gorton and Ordonez (2014)). Only a
fraction of it, θε̄aφc(n−1) s can be repackaged into information insensitive assets. This information insensitive
fraction of the cash flows can be seen as the “senior” tranche of the subsidiaries’s cash flows.



                                                        13
The size of the pyramid corresponds to the total volume of safe assets that can be pledged as
collateral in interbank transactions. It is limited by three main factors. First, it depends on the
volume of government bonds held by banks relative to their deposits, b/s: all things equal, the
larger this collateral base, the bigger the pyramid. Thus, inside collateral builds upon outside
collateral. Second, it also depends on the size of the fixed cost relative to the size of the banking
sector, f /s: all things being equal, the smaller the fixed cost, the “taller” the pyramid, and the
more inside collateral. Third, the volume of safe assets in the economy depends on the degree
of pledgeability of the banks’ cash flows, θε̄/γ.
   The degree of pledgeability (and notably paramater θ) plays a critical role in our analysis.
It determines how much inside collateral can be generated out of cash flows (i.e. a “collateral
multiplier”). It is also endogenous and varies with ε̄; as we shall see later, this is the reason
why the volume of inside collateral is much more unstable than that of outside collateral, and
collapses during crises. To understand the importance of θ, assume that θ = 1. This means
that banks can pledge the integrality of their cash flows as collateral. In this case, the collateral
multiplier is above one (indeed, under Assumption 5, in equilibrium ε̄ > γ), banks create
more inside collateral out of every new unit of funding. Ultimately, the moral hazard problem
vanishes, and the economy reaches its first best allocation. We will assume that θ is low enough
so as a moral hazard problem can arise (Assumption 4).
   The parameter f is not as critical as θ, but nonetheless important. By inducing economies
of scale, it allows us (i) to endogenize the number of subsidiaries, and therefore to relate the
model to Fact #2; and (ii) to relate —in a non–trivial way— the size of the banking sector,
s, with the size of the collateral pyramid. As Figure 4 suggests, when f = 0, an increase in
savings always constricts the collateral pyramid, which is detrimental to financial efficiency.
When f > 0, in contrast, economies of scale kick in and a trade–off appears, as in this case an
increase in savings also stimulates the creation of inside collateral. Economies of scale in the
banking sector thus help relate the increase in savings (Figure 1) with that of secured lending
(Figure 2), as observed in the run–up to the 2007–8 crisis.
   The dependence of inside collateral on outside collateral stands in stark contrast with Kr-
ishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015), who view the two types of safe assets as substitutes.
They too make a distinction between outside safe assets (treasuries) and inside safe assets (in
their case, bank deposits). In their model, however, both types of safe assets are demanded by
households for the non-pecuniary services those assets provide. When the supply and the yield
of treasuries go down, households increase their demand for bank deposits. In contrast, in our
case safe assets are engineered and supplied by banks as a way to alleviate financing constraints
on the interbank market. When the supply of treasuries goes down, banks have less outside
collateral to secure wholesale funding, and counter–party fears on the interbank market rise,
which reduces the pledgeability of cash flows and the creation of inside collateral. In our case,


                                                 14
                                                        Figure 4: Collateral Pyramid




                                                                     f /s

                                                                                   A


                             Inside Collateral
                                                                    n=N



                                                                      ..
                                                                       .


                                                                                   C
                                                                    n=2



                                                 θ ε̄
                                                 γ
                                                                    n=1                θ

                                                              Outside Collateral



                                                                     b/s



the two types of assets are therefore complements. Our model of the interbank market, which
emphasizes the stages of the lending process, can be seen as a stylized representation of how the
US shadow banking industry manufactured new financial products in the run–up to the 2008
financial crisis (see Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009); Pozard, Adrian, Ashcraft, and Boesky
(2012)). To recap, the first step is to form a diversified pool of loans. The next step is to slice
the pool and to issue a safe security backed by the information insensitive slice of the pool. This
funding then gives rise to new projects and cash flows, which will be later used as collateral
to raise new funding, and so on. In equilibrium lenders are indifferent as to which subsidiaries
they lend to, and when.13 So, in effect, the various rounds of lending are fully integrated, trans-
actions take place simultaneously, and the interbank market clears instantaneously. Moreover,
while our model is about single banks, banks can yet grow larger and more “complex” as new
subsidiaries are created. In the discussion that follows we will think of N not merely as being
the number of rounds, but also as reflecting the number of subsidiaries per bank, a measure of
complexity of the banking sector.

 3.3.2    Stage 1 Choices: Portfolio Choice

Ex ante banks maximize the expected gross return on assets, denoted π b , with respect to b:
                                                                                       Z   1
                         b                              b                   b      c
                  max π ≡ rs + b(r − r) + (s − b + (φ + φ )s)                                  (εa − r)dG(ε)   (11)
                    b                                                                  ε
  13
   Implicitly, a lender goes to the interbank market only once. Given that the return on interbank loans is the
same throughout the rounds, lenders are indeed indifferent.


                                                                     15
where φb is given by (4) and φc denotes the total amount of interbank loans secured by cash
flows (i.e. φc ≡ n=N     c(n) . The return on assets is the sum of the returns on government
                 P
                   n=1 φ
bonds, interbank loans, and projects, weighted by the share of those assets in banks’ assets.
The second and third terms reflect the excess return on governments bonds and projects over
interbank loans. This optimization problem already takes into account that, ex post, banks with
ε < ε̄ will be net lenders in the interbank market and banks with ε ≥ ε̄ will be net borrowers
on the interbank market and invest into projects. Only the latter banks enjoy excess returns.
From relations (4), (7), and (9) it is easy to see that the first order condition yields the arbitrage
condition (12) in Lemma 1 below.

 3.3.3     Recap

Putting together the stage 2 borrowing constraints and the stage 1 portfolio choice of the
banks leads to a set of conditions that must hold in any interbank market equilibrium. These
conditions are stated in Lemma 1 given r. The next section characterizes the determination of
r.

Lemma 1. Given the interbank market rate r,

     1. The bank with productivity ε̄ is indifferent between borrowing and lending, with ε̄ = r/a;

     2. An interior solution to bank optimization implies


                                                    rb = r;                                      (12)


     3. The volume of loans backed by outside collateral is:


                                             φb = ε̄/γ − 1 + b/s;                                (13)


     4. The volume of loans backed by inside collateral, φc , is:


                                    φc = (θε̄/γ) · (ε̄ − f /(as))/(γ − ε̄θ);                     (14)


     5. The total outstanding amount of interbank loans, φ, is:


                         φ ≡ φb + φc = (ε̄/γ) · (γ − θf /(as))/(γ − θε̄) − 1 + b/s;              (15)


     6. The number of subsidiaries per bank, N , is given by:


                                N = (ln(ε̄) − ln(f /(as)))/(ln(γ) − ln(θε̄)).                    (16)



                                                   16
Proof. See Appendix 9.1.

 4      Equilibrium Conditions

This section describes the set of equilibria. A sunspot variable is included in the construction
of an equilibrium as there may be multiple equilibria in the interbank market. The sunspot
only serves as an indicator of expectations; no significant economic decisions are taken prior to
its realization.14 Throughout the analysis we impose the following condition in order for inside
collateral to be created and yet maintain a moral hazard problem:

Assumption 4. (Liquidation Cost, Seizable Cash Flow) (i) γ > θ and (ii) γa > f /s.

       The first part of Assumption 4 means that what borrowers get when they run away, γ, more
than compensates their loss of the pledged assets, θ, so that banks may gain from abscond-
ing. The second part of the assumption means that the fixed liquidation cost is not too large
compared with the size of the economy, so that a inside collateral can emerge (i.e. N > 0).

 4.1      Timing

The timing of the interactions between households, banks, and the government is as follows:
(1) the household deposits s; (2) the sunspot is revealed; (3) banks allocate deposits across
government bonds (b) and future investment (s − b); (4) banks learn about the profitability
of their projects, ε; and (5) banks decide to make either interbank loans, to invest into their
project, or store goods.

 4.2      Market Clearing Conditions

There are three markets: government bonds, interbank loans, and bank deposits. We solve for
the equilibria, given savings s and a stock of bonds b. The interbank market equilibrium will
determine ε̄. Once this is known, the other components of the equilibria can be determined.
The key to financial fragility comes from the multiple values of ε̄ solving the interbank market
clearing condition.
       Government Bond Market. Since the government issues b bonds per bank, and each
bank demands b, the market clears when:


                                                  b = b.                                               (17)


Here b reflects the holding of government bonds by the banks. By our timing, this decision is
made after the realization of the sunspot and hence given the rate of return on interbank loans
and government debt.
  14
   One extension of the model would allow the strategic uncertainty to influence households’ demand for bank
deposits.




                                                    17
   Bank Deposit Market. Banks are identical ex ante, compete for depositors, and break
even ex post. In equilibrium, the return on bank deposits is given by (using (11), (12) and (15)):

                                            θ    f Z 1
                                                                    !
                             π b       1 −    ·
                                           γa s
                        rd ≡     =r 1+                 (ε − ε̄)dG(ε) .                       (18)
                             s           γ − θε̄    ε

   Under Assumption 4, the deposit rate is larger than the interbank loan rate and the return
on government bonds. The spread reflects the shadow value of government bonds as collateral.
Despite the low return on government bonds, banks are willing to hold such assets ex ante
because they may pledge them as collateral later —once they learn their productivity ε— to
relax their financing constraints.
   Interbank Market. Banks with ε ≥ ε̄ demand funds φs; so demand is (1 − G(ε̄))φs.
Banks with ε < ε̄ supply s − b, provided that ε̄ > γ; in this case, those banks strictly prefer to
lend than to store goods, and supply is G(ε̄)(s − b). In the special case when ε̄ = γ, banks are
indifferent between those two options, and so supply up to G(ε̄)(s − b) on the interbank loan
market. It follows that the market clearing condition is:
                                 
                                  = G(ε̄)(1 − b/s) if ε̄ > γ             (a)
                    (1 − G(ε̄))φ                                                             (19)
                                  ∈ [0, G (ε̄) (1 − b/s)] if ε̄ = γ      (b).

   In (19a), banks with ε < ε̄ lend their entire wealth, s − b, in the interbank market; they
do not store goods. It is possible that the interbank market also clears with some of the low
productivity banks using the storage technology. By arbitrage, this arises only when ε̄ = γ, as
(19b) suggests. Banks with ε ≥ ε̄ finance their projects with own funds s − b and by interbank
loans, φs. Using (15) and (17), relation (19) can be re–written as:

                                             θ(1− bs)
                                         
                                          =     θ f if ε̄ > γ            (a)
                           (1 − G(ε̄))ε̄    1− γa  ·s
                   H(ε̄) ≡    γ
                                             
                                                    1− b
                                                                                            (20)
                                − ε̄      ∈ 0,  θ (    s )
                              θ
                                         
                                                       θ f    if ε̄ = γ    (b).
                                                    1− γa · s

   Relation (20) is a convenient representation of the market clearing condition, as only its
left side depends on ε̄. As we will see later, the richness of the model will come from the
non–monotonicity — i.e. the hump–shape— of H(ε̄). As ε̄ increases, the fraction of banks who
borrow falls, and their average quality goes up. Since higher quality banks have less incentives
to abscond, the amount they can borrow increases. That is, from (15), φ is increasing in ε̄. The
multiplicity will come from the interaction of these extensive and intensive margins. The term
on the right side of (20a) decreases with aggregate productivity (a), or as the fixed cost (f )
goes down. One can also show that, under Assumption 4, H(ε̄) goes up faster with the fraction
of seizable cash flows (θ) than the term on the right hand side does, which means that the net
demand of interbank loans increases with seizable cash flows. The return on storage, γ, has an


                                                  18
opposite effect on net demand.

 4.3       Equilibria

We discuss the types of equilibria that might arise and then give conditions for their co–existence.
We will show that there are potentially multiple equilibria due to the asymmetric information
and moral hazard of banks. For this discussion, we consider restrictions on G(·) and γ so that
those two frictions are meaningful:

Assumption 5. (Initial Resource Mis–allocation) (i) G00 (ε̄)≥ 0 ∀ε̄ ∈ [0, 1], and (ii) γ <
ε̄max ≡ arg maxε̄∈[0,1] H(ε̄).

       Point (i) means that there is a sufficient mass of high ε–banks in the economy. Point (ii)
means that the storage technology is (weakly) inefficient. Altogether, Assumption 5 means
that deposits are initially mis–allocated across banks, and that there is scope for re–allocation
through an interbank market. Under this assumption, H(ε) is hump–shaped and reaches an
interior maximum at ε̄ = ε̄max ∈ (γ, 1).15 The hump shape of H(ε) reflects the ambiguous effect
of ε on loan demand, which decreases with ε̄ on the extensive margin but increases with ε̄ on the
intensive margin. This latter unusual effect is due to the fact that borrowers’ average quality
goes up with ε̄, as this works to relax banks’ borrowing constraint. The negative intensive
margin effect dominates when 1 − G(ε) is large enough, that is when ε̄ is low; in this case, the
loan demand curve bends backward.

Definition 1. An equilibrium is a vector of returns (r, rd , rb ), a critical level of ε denoted ε̄,
government bond holdings b, and borrowing limits φb , φc , such that

       • Ex ante, banks choose b to maximize their expected return on deposits;

       • Ex post, banks with

            – ε ≥ ε̄ borrow in the interbank market up to the limit φ = φb + φc ;

            – ε < ε̄ either lend in the interbank market or store goods;

       • φb and φc are determined so that banks with ε ≥ ε̄ invest rather than abscond;

       • Beliefs about the distribution of types of banks borrowing in the interbank market are
         consistent with the equilibrium outcome;

       • Markets for interbank loans, deposits and government bonds clear.

       The flow of funds between banks is illustrated in Figure 5. As is clear, the determination
of ε̄ is fundamental to characterizing an equilibrium and determining the reallocation of funds
within the banking sector through the interbank market.
  15
       For a proof of this, see the Appendix.


                                                    19
                 Figure 5: Interbank Reallocation and Financial Intermediation

                                                   Projects



                                              ε̄
                          Low quality banks                   High quality banks




                                                   Household



 4.3.1   Normal Times

We first study outcomes which are solutions to (20)a. These solutions become the basis for
a subset of the equilibria. The right side of (20)a is predetermined and constant. Under
Assumption 5, the left side is hump shaped —the exact shape will depend on the assumed form
for G(·) and the parameters of the model. As a consequence, a solution ε̄ > γ to (20a) does
not always exist. Equilibria in the interbank loan market are shown in Figure 6. Since banks
always have the outside option to get a return γa by storing goods, only the values ε̄ ≥ γ
are relevant. The figure illustrates one solution to (20) at point A (see also point A in Figure
4). This equilibrium determines a value of ε̄ > γ such that banks with ε ≥ ε̄ borrow on the
interbank market, and will be referred to as “normal times”. In this type of equilibrium, no
bank uses the storage technology, and all deposits are invested into projects. From this value of
ε̄, we can construct an equilibrium as follows. Use (2) to determine the interbank rate: r = ε̄a.
From the no-arbitrage condition, (12), rb = r. Relations (13) and (14) yield φb and φc given ε̄.
Finally, the equilibrium number of “rounds” in the interbank market that underlies φc is given
by (16). Under Assumption 4, φc and N are strictly positive.

                         Figure 6: Multiple Equilibria in the Interbank Market


                                                           H(ε̄)
                                                                                            f
          θ(1− b                        B                             A            ↑ with
               s)
                                                                                            s
              θ f
          1− γa ·s                                                                          b
                                                                                   ↓ with   s

            H(γ)                   C




                     0         γ               γ̃ ε̄max                                     1   ε̄


   Since H(ε̄) is hump–shaped, another interior solution (point B) can exist. Relative to A,


                                                      20
the value of ε̄ is lower, there are more banks borrowing but their borrowing constraint is tighter,
loan quality is lower, and the intermediation process is less efficient. In the analysis that follows,
we focus on the equilibrium at A as it is locally stable and thus has “reasonable” comparative
statics. But, as we shall see, there is another equilibrium outcome other than B that is of
interest.

 4.3.2      Collateral Trap

Another equilibrium, which we term a “collateral trap”, can arise as a solution to (20b) with
ε̄ = γ. In this case, there is an excess supply of loans on the interbank market, and some banks
store goods. Hence, aggregate productivity and output are low. In Figure 6, this equilibrium
is represented by point C (see also point C in Figure 4). At this point, the banks with ε ≤ γ
are indifferent between lending to other banks and storing goods, and they are the only banks
that supply interbank loans. The supply of interbank loans is infinitely elastic, as illustrated
by the vertical dashed line. In a collateral trap, banks engineer little inside collateral, and the
borrowing constraint holds tight: productive banks, who cannot distinguish themselves from
other banks, are unable to commit themselves to lending to projects, and therefore cannot raise
more funding. Despite the low interbank rate, the demand for loans remains below supply,
there is an excess supply of interbank funding, and the interbank market clears by having low
productivity banks use the storage technology. This equilibrium exists if and only if (using
(20b)):

                                                                  b
                                                                      
                                                        θ 1−      s
                                             H (γ) <          θ       f
                                                                          .                                   (21)
                                                        1−   γa   ·   s

    Though some banks store goods, interbank borrowing is still possible, i.e. φ > 0, because
banks can pledge as collateral both their government bonds as well as the cash flows of the
projects that are operated.16 However, the volume of collateral is reduced compared to normal
times, and so is the level of interbank activity. On the one hand, banks are limited in the
creation of safe assets, because counter–party fears on the interbank market reduce the degree
of pledgeability of the cash flows. On the other hand, counter–party fears are high because
banks have little safe assets to pledge as collateral. Hence the collateral trap. In Figure 6,
the collateral trap equilibrium in C co-exists with the normal times equilibrium in A. In this
sense, the interbank market is susceptible to swings in confidence. It is natural to associate
outcomes like A with optimism about the quality of borrowing banks, with high returns on
interbank loans and relaxed borrowing restrictions. It is also natural to think of crises, like C,
as the outcome of pessimism. A and C are self–fulfilling equilibria. Assume for example that
banks are pessimistic: they believe that unproductive banks demand interbank funding. Since
  16
     If b = 0 (no outside collateral) and θ = 0 (no inside collateral) then in a collateral trap φ = 0 and there is
no demand for interbank loans.



                                                        21
                            Figure 7: Unique Equilibrium Configurations

 θ(1− b
      s)
     θ f
 1− γa ·s
                               H(ε̄)                                               H(ε̄)


  H(γ)              C                                    H(γ)
                                                       θ(1− b
                                                            s)
                                                                                             A
                                                          θ f
                                                      1− γa ·s
            0   γ          ε̄max                 1    ε̄         0   γ         ε̄max             1    ε̄
                    Collateral Trap                                  Deep Interbank Market



unproductive banks are prone to absconding, lenders require borrowers to put more “skin in
the game”, and reduce φ. As every borrower demands less funding, the equilibrium interbank
loan rate goes down, and the net present value of the unproductive banks’ projects increases.
Hence, unproductive banks do indeed demand interbank funding.

 4.3.3      Conditions for a Collateral Trap

Not all economies possess multiple equilibria. Other possible outcomes are illustrated in Figure
7, which shows cases of unique equilibria. In panel (a), there are no solutions to (20a), and
there is a collateral trap equilibrium. In panel (b), by contrast, there is a solution to (20a)
but not to (20b); in this case the normal times equilibrium is the only possible outcome. To
describe the conditions of existence of a collateral trap and normal times equilibria, it is useful
to define two critical levels of government debt, b̄ and b, as:

                                                               
                                           f              H (γ)
                                      b̄ =    H (γ) + 1 −         s                           (22)
                                           γa               θ
and
                                                       H (ε̄max )
                                                                 
                                      f       max
                                   b=    H (ε̄ ) + 1 −              s                         (23)
                                      γa                   θ

with b < b̄. There are three regions for the level of public debt. In the upper dominance
region, with b > b, banks can use so much public debt as collateral that crises are ruled out,
irrespective of banks’ beliefs about borrowers’ quality in the interbank market. Then there is
a lower dominance region, with b < b, where instead there is a shortfall of pledgable assets in
the economy. The government did not issue enough debt to avoid the collateral trap. Finally,
there is an intermediate region, where beliefs matter and sunspot equilibria arise; in this case,
crises are self–fulfilling. Proposition 1 formalizes this characterization.

Proposition 1. (Equilibrium)

    • When b < b, there is a unique collateral trap equilibrium, with ε̄ = γ as solution to (20b);



                                                     22
     • When b > b, there is a unique normal times equilibrium, with ε̄ > ε̄max as solution to
       (20a);

     • When b ∈ [b, b̄], there are sunspot equilibria, with either ε̄ > ε̄max or ε̄ = γ.

Proof. The results follow directly from the definition of b and b in (22) and (23).

 5     Equilibrium Analysis

In this section we discuss the main properties of the equilibria, compare collateral traps and
normal times, and analyse the effects of savings on the operation of the interbank market.

 5.1    Aggregate Output and Consumption

For the discussion, it is useful to derive aggregate output, y, as the sum of the outputs of banks’
projects and storage:
                     Z        1
                y=                εa ((1 + φ)s − b) dG(ε) +γa ((s − b)G(ε̄) − (1 − G(ε̄))φs),
                         ε̄                                   |             {z             }
                     |                     {z           }                 storage
                                         projects


which using relation (15) and Proposition 1 yields:
                                                R1
                                       s−b
                                  
                                  
                                     1−G(ε̄)    ε̄   εadG(ε) in normal times
                                  
                     y=                                                                           (24)
                                          θ f
                                  
                                     1− γa ·s       R1
                                                          (ε − γ)adG(ε) + γa(s − b) otherwise.
                                  
                                  
                                        1−θ      s    γ


Aggregate output is determined both by the size of the economy s and by the degree of effi-
ciency, ε̄, with which the banking sector allocates resources across projects. Since the household
consumes aggregate output (i.e. c = y), consumption too is determined by the level of ε̄. Both
output, consumption, and welfare increase with ε̄.

 5.2    Comparing Outcomes: Collateral Traps versus Normal Times

The key feature of collateral traps is the reduction in ε̄; this has important implications. First,
at a lower ε̄, a larger fraction of banks borrow in the interbank market. This increase on the
extensive margin means that lower productivity banks that would lend to higher productivity
banks during normal times actually borrow in a collateral trap. The fact that low productivity
banks demand funding raises counter-party fears, and therefore reduces the degree of pledge-
ability of cash flows. Hence, in a collateral trap, the collateral multiplier is low, as illustrated by
the smaller collateral pyramid C in Figure 4. Countering this change on the extensive margin
is also a reduction in borrowing limits. With lower quality banks borrowing, these limits fall
to avoid moral hazard. In addition to the reduction in size of the interbank loans, there is a
composition effect. Specifically, the volume of inside collateral collapses and the share of outside


                                                                  23
collateral in total collateral goes up. Essentially, the limit on the borrowing backed by outside
collateral (φb ) is less sensitive than that on the borrowing backed by the cash flow from projects
(φc ), because the latter is also driven by variations in the collateral multiplier. In a collateral
trap there is less activity in the interbank market, and some banks store goods, which reduces
aggregate productivity. This fall in productivity has not only an overall negative real effect on
the levels of output, consumption, and welfare, but also a positive effect on the cross-sectional
dispersion of banks’ returns. The output and productivity implications are consistent with the
evidence in Foster, Grim, and Haltiwanger (2013). To the extent the Great Recession con-
tained more of a financial collapse than other recessions, the implications of our model, which
attributes recessions to the collapse of the interbank market, are relevant.

Proposition 2. (Features of a Collateral Trap) Relative to normal times and all other
things being equal, in a collateral trap:

  1. the cut-off bank productivity, ε̄, is lower;

  2. the interbank loan rate, r, is lower;

  3. the spread between the deposit rate and the interbank loan rate (and therefore the shadow
       value of government bonds as collateral) is higher;

  4. the spread between the government bond yields and the interbank loan rate remains null;

  5. the volume of interbank transactions secured by outside collateral, φb , is lower;

  6. the volume of interbank transactions secured by inside collateral, φc , is lower;

                 φb
  7. the ratio   φc   is higher;

  8. there are fewer bank subsidiaries (N is lower);

  9. banks store goods, and not all deposits (net of government bonds) are used to finance
       productive projects;

 10. output, consumption and welfare fall;

 11. the cross–sectional dispersion of bank productivity (the εs) is higher.

Proof. See Appendix 9.3.

 5.3    Effects of Savings on Financial Stability, Efficiency, and Complexity

The rapid increase in bank deposits and the large demand for safe assets addressed to the
US banking sector by the rest of the world (see Figure 1) has been put forward as one of the
key structural factors behind the 2007–8 financial crisis (see, e.g., Caballero and Krishnamurthy


                                                24
(2009)). The aim of this section is to shed light on the relationship between savings and financial
stability, efficiency, and complexity. In the context of our model, we interpret the size of the
region of multiplicity as indicative of financial instability: the larger b − b, the higher the degree
of financial instability. There is a distinction between financial stability and financial efficiency.
The financial sector can be efficient and yet unstable, as in Point A on Figure 6; or it can be
stable and yet inefficient, as in Point C on Figure 7; or it can be both stable and efficient, as in
Point A in Figure 7.

Proposition 3. (Savings and Stability) An increase in savings s widens the range of gov-
ernment debt levels, b − b, for which there are multiple equilibria, and thus is conducive to
interbank market instability. Moreover, following the increase in s, the level of government debt
required to rule out crises (b̄) goes up if θ < G(γ).

Proof. From Appendix 9.2, ε̄max is independent of s. Using (22) and (23), it is easy to see that
(b − b)/s is proportional to (1 − θf /(γas)), which increases monotonically with s; hence b − b
increases with s. From relation (22) it is clear that b̄ increases with s if and only if θ > H(γ),
which is equivalent to (using the definition of H(ε̄) in (20)) θ < G(γ).

   Proposition 3 means that the rise in bank deposits not only is detrimental to financial
stability but also can trigger a crisis if following the rise b̄ goes up above b. This may happen
when θ is small (θ < G(γ)) and the banking sector creates too little inside collateral out of the
additional savings to make it up for the reduction in the collateral base, b/s. Besides influencing
the range of multiplicity, the level of savings also has an effect on the degree of efficiency and
complexity of the banking sector in normal times.

Proposition 4. (Savings and Efficiency) Following an increase in savings, financial effi-
ciency (ε̄) deteriorates in normal times if b/f > θ/(γa).

Proof. From Figure 6 it is easy to see that ε̄ goes down with s if the term on the right hand
side of (20) increases with s, that is, if b/f > θ/(γa).

Proposition 5. (Savings and Complexity) There exists  > 0 such that, if b/f < θ/(γa)+,
then an increase in savings s raises the complexity of the banking sector, N , in normal times.

Proof. From relation (16), N is a continuous, increasing function of both s and ε̄. The direct
effect of s is independent of b. The indirect effect of s goes through ε̄ and —from Proposition
4— is negative if b/f > θ/(γa), and positive otherwise. It follows that there exists  > 0 such
that those two effects exactly offset each others when b/f = θ/(γa) + . Hence, the overall
effect of s on N is positive if and only if b/f < θ/(γa) + .

   The results in Propositions 4 and 5 reflect the ambiguous effects of an increase in savings
on collateral availability. To see this, compare in Figure 4 the collateral pyramid before the

                                                 25
increase in savings, delineated by the thick black line, with that after, delineated by the dotted
line. When s goes up, the volume of outside collateral relative to savings (b/s) diminishes, and
the base of the pyramid shrinks. However, as projects grow larger, economies of scale make the
fixed liquidation cost and the financial engineering of new assets affordable (i.e. f /s decreases);
the height of the pyramid goes up. When b/f = θ/(γa), then the two effects exactly offset each
other. The economy creates endogenously exactly the same amount of inside collateral as the
amount of outside collateral it lost. In this case, financial efficiency does not change, but the
banking sector is more complex and less stable.

 6     Back to the Facts

We use our model to understand the link between the observed increase in savings and shortage
of outside collateral (Facts #1) and the evolution in interbank market flows and interest rates
before and during the 2007–8 crisis (Facts #2 and #3). The model is structured around
“normal” and “crisis” times. With this in mind, the pre-crisis period, roughly from 2003 to
mid-2007, is viewed as “normal” times. The crisis begins at that point.

 6.1    Pre-Crisis

Figure 1 shows that the increase in the level of household deposits and holding of US treasuries
by the rest of the world accelerated from 1995 to the onset of the crisis and that, over the
same period, the volume of US treasuries held by the US financial sector fell like never before.
As a consequence, in 2008 the treasuries–to–deposit ratio of the US financial sector was less
than half of what it was in 2003. At the same time the number of SPVs increased and the
volume of collateralised lending rose (see Figure 2). One interpretation of those events is that
the US banking sector became more complex and engineered collateralised debt as substitutes
to treasuries to quench the rest of the world’s thirst for US safe assets (this is consistent with
Caballero (2009)). From the perspective of our model, the increase in bank deposits is seen
as an increase in s and the fall in treasuries as a decrease in b (see Fact #1 and Figure 1).
The creation of SPVs and the rise in ABCP markets is seen as the number of subsidiaries N
going up (Fact #2). Our interpretation of those events is that, by reducing US banks’ collateral
base b/s, the crowding of US banks out of treasuries by the rest of the world made the US
financial system more fragile. The concomitant increase in deposits enabled banks to generate
more cash flows and to create more inside collateral, as through economies of scale the number
of SPVs increased. These dynamics resulted in a change in the composition of banks’ collateral,
with the relative increase in inside collateral. From a financial stability perspective, this change
is important, as the wholesale funds secured by cash flows are less stable than those secured
by treasuries; they are subject to changes in beliefs. Based on our model, we argue that the
reduction in the volume of US treasuries held US banks drove the economy from the upper
dominance region (with b > b) into the multiple equilibrium or the collateral trap region (with

                                                26
b ≤ b); hence the crisis.

 6.2      Crisis: Falling into the Collateral Trap

We interpret events post-2008 as a fall in confidence of lenders in the interbank market, made
possible by the change in collateral composition. In our model, a crisis is defined by a dramatic
fall in cut-off productivity determining the borrowers and lenders in the interbank market (ε̄).
The implications of this switch from optimistic to pessimism are summarized in Proposition 2.
During the crisis, the repo rate (r) and the ratio between the repo and the corporate loan rates
(ε̄) fell, as as seen in Figure 3, and so did the repo, ABCP and ABS-CDO activity (relative
to deposits), as seen in Figure 2. The latter figure also shows that repo activity fell relatively
little to stabilize at its 2003 level, whereas the ABS-CDO activity fell by over 80% from its
2007 peak. The ABCP volume fell more than repo but less than the ABC-CDO volumes.
These relative flows (Fact #2) are in accord with the model’s predictions, particularly items
8–9 in Proposition 2. We interpret the ABCP flow as indicative of φc(1) and the more dramatic
reduction in ABS-CDO as reduction in the number of SPVs, N .

 7     Policy Responses

Our focus is on analyzing policies intended to increase household consumption. To discipline
our discussion, we assume that, absent any policy interventions, there initially exist multiple
equilibria (i.e. b ∈ [b, b̄]). In this context, one question that we ask is, whether policy interven-
tions can guide the economy out of multiplicity toward the normal times equilibrium. Formally,
this amounts to discussing which policy lowers the upper dominance region threshold, b̄. As
expression (22) shows, this threshold depends on two different types of parameters, namely: the
parameters governing the collateral creation process, θ and f ; and those governing the banks’
returns, γ and a. We discuss the policies related to those parameters in turn.

 7.1      Narrow Banking

The first type of intervention that we consider is a restriction on the assets that can be pledged
as collateral in interbank trades. We refer to such a restriction as “narrow banking”. In the
context of our model, narrow banking takes the form of an interdiction to pledge as collateral
the future cash flows from projects. This corresponds to a reduction in the recovery rate θ
down to zero. Gorton and Metrick (2010) recently proposed a similar intervention, with the
creation of regulated “narrow funding banks”, whose regulator would decide which classes of
assets are eligible as collateral.17 In our case, only the interbank trades secured by government
debt are feasible, interbank loans are backed by outside collateral only (φn = 0 and φ = φb ),
and financial complexity is eliminated (N = 0).
      The following proposition compares the equilibrium without inside collateral to the outcome
 17
      For a discussion of similar narrow banking proposals, see e.g. Chow and Surti (2011).



                                                        27
with inside collateral.

Proposition 6. (Narrow Banking) The introduction of narrow banking does not rule out
the collateral trap, may eliminate the normal times equilibrium (b̄ goes up), and impairs the
functioning of the interbank market in normal times (ε̄ goes down), if such an equilibrium still
exists. Whatever the initial level of b ∈ [b, b̄], narrow banking reduces consumption both in
normal times and in the collateral trap.

Proof. It is easy to see from (20) that both H(ε̄) and ε̄max increase monotonically with θ, and
therefore that b and b decrease with θ (from (22) and (23)). It follows that, under narrow
banking (i.e., for θ = 0) the normal times equilibrium may be eliminated (b goes up), the
collateral trap is not eliminated (b does not go down), and the banking sector is less efficient (ε̄
is lower) in the normal time equilibrium, if such an equilibrium still exists. Since the banking
sector is less efficient in normal times, output is lower, and so is consumption in normal times
(from (24)). Finally, since no inside collateral is created, there is less reallocation in a collateral
trap, and both output and consumption go down.

       The implications of this intervention are clear. First, the normal times equilibrium has a
lower level of ε̄ than in the comparable equilibrium with valued inside collateral. This reduction
in ε̄ means that φ is lower in the economy without inside collateral. Accordingly, the reallocation
through the interbank market is reduced.
       Second, the collateral trap remains and is associated with even less funding of projects. For
this economy, collateral restrictions not only do not eliminate the moral hazard and asymmetric
information frictions but also reduce the ability of the banking system to respond to these
sources of inefficiency. This makes clear that a collateral trap does not arise because of the
presence of inside collateral: multiple equilibria can exist even if all loans are backed by outside
collateral.
       Also, notice that it is possible that collateral restrictions eliminate the multiplicity of equi-
libria. But this occurs by supporting a unique equilibrium with low interbank flows. This is
exactly the same outcome as in the collateral trap, so that the intervention does not improve
welfare.

 7.2      Bank Subsidy

The second policy intervention is a government subsidy that raises the return on projects.
Since the subsidy is conditional on the bank operating its projects, it resembles a conditional
bank capital injection by a government, akin to the US Treasury’s 2009 “Capital Assistance
Program”. Indeed, under this program, banks received capital from the Treasury conditional on
them lending to the real economy.18 The subsidy is announced at the beginning of the period,
  18
    More precisely, as part of the application process, US banks were required to submit a plan for how they
intended to use the capital injected to preserve and strengthen their lending capacity. The access to the program


                                                       28
and is financed by a lump sum tax on the household at the end of the period.
    In the context of our model we assume that banks are given ex post a subsidy that raises
the unit return of their projects from a to ã, with a > ã. The following proposition compares
the equilibrium without the subsidy to the outcome with the subsidy.

Proposition 7. (Bank Subsidy) A subsidy on projects may eliminate the collateral trap
equilibrium, and always improves the functioning of the interbank market, be it in normal times
or in the collateral trap. The effect of such a subsidy on consumption is positive in both cases.

Proof. Following the rise in a, the term on the right hand side of (20) decreases. Hence, the
banking sector is more efficient in normal times (ε̄ goes up). From (22) it is easy to see that b goes
down, which means that the collateral trap equilibrium may be avoided. Since in normal times
ε̄ is higher, so are output and consumption (see (24)). Finally, since the subsidy stimulates the
creation of inside collateral, there is also more reallocation in a collateral trap, less deadweight
losses, and hence higher output and consumption.

    By giving banks more incentives to operate their projects, the subsidy mitigates the moral
hazard problem on the interbank market. For a given volume of collateral, the demand for
interbank loans goes up, and so does the equilibrium interbank rate. As a consequence, ε̄
goes up: some unproductive banks that were borrowing on the interbank market now lend,
and funds are allocated to the best projects. As the quality of borrowers goes up and their
heterogeneity diminishes, the asymmetric information problem recedes, and a larger fraction of
cash flows become pledgeable, which further relaxes the borrowers’ collateral constraint. Hence
the positive effect of a subsidy on the economy.

 7.3    Deposit Facility

The next intervention that we consider is the opening of a deposit facility by a central bank,
through which the latter offers banks interest–bearing deposits. One recent example of such
intervention is the “Term Deposit Facility”, which the US Federal Reserve Bank established in
2008.
    To analyse this policy we assume that banks now have the possibility to deposit their excess
cash with a central bank at a rate of return γ̃a, with γ̃ > γ. Hence, banks have two outside
options: storage and central bank deposits. Moreover, we assume that banks cannot abscond
with funds deposited at the central bank, and that the central bank stores those funds. Hence,
central bank deposits are not being used productively, and the government raises lump sum
taxes from the household at the end of the period to make it up for the central bank’s losses
(i.e. for γ̃ − γ).
was also conditional on restrictions on dividend payments, executive compensation requirements, etc.




                                                     29
   The following proposition compares the equilibrium without the deposit facility to the out-
come with the deposit facility.

Proposition 8. (Deposit Facility) The existence of a deposit facility eliminates the collateral
trap equilibrium if and only if the offered deposit rate, γ̃a, is above a certain threshold. In the
normal times equilibrium, the deposit facility is not used, and consumption is the same as in a
normal times equilibrium without deposit facility. In the collateral trap (if this equilibrium still
exists), the deposit facility is used and consumption is higher than without deposit facility.

Proof. Let ε̄B be the smallest solution to equation (20a); this solution corresponds to point B
in Figure 6, with ε̄B > γ. Then, by construction, the collateral trap is still a possible outcome
if and only if aggregate demand intersects aggregate supply for ε̄ = γ̃, that is, if and only if
ε̄B ≤ γ̃. It follows that the threshold for γ̃, above the collateral trap is avoided, is ε̄B . In the
collateral trap (if this equilibrium still exists), the banks that borrow funds on the interbank
market are on average more productive, and output and consumption are therefore higher, than
without the deposit facility.

   One important result in Proposition 8 is that a central bank can eliminate coordination
failures on the interbank market by setting its deposit facility rate high enough. Indeed, as
the central bank raises γ̃, it also reduces banks’ supply of funds on the interbank market, and
the equilibrium interbank increases. This, in turn, gives unproductive banks more incentives to
lend, which by resorbing the asymmetry of information about borrowers’ quality helps avoid the
collateral trap. The use of central bank deposit as coordination device is illustrated in Figure
6. The gray circles represent the supply curve after the central bank opens the deposit facility.
For a rate of return below γ̃a, there is no supply, and point C is ruled out as an equilibrium.
Banks then coordinate on the normal time equilibrium in A, where the interbank rate is above
γ̃a; in this equilibrium, banks do not use the central bank’s deposit facility.

 7.4   Collateral Swap

In March 2008, the Federal Reserve set up the TSLF program, which gave banks (in effect,
primary dealers) the possibility to bid a fee to borrow Treasury securities from the Fed for
one month, while agreeing to provide other (less liquid) securities as collateral in exchange.
Banks could then use the borrowed Treasury securities as collateral to obtain cash in the private
markets. Fleming, Hrung, and Keane (2010) show that such a measure precipitated a significant
narrowing of repurchase agreement (repo) spreads between Treasury collateral and less liquid
collateral and that, overall, the provision of Treasury collateral through the TSLF mitigated a
more general shortage of liquid collateral.
   The last intervention that we consider is similar to the TSLF. We assume that the govern-
ment issues new government debt, and swaps every unit of the new debt against 1/θ̃ units of


                                                 30
cash flow from projects at the beginning of the period, with θ̃ ∈ (0, 1). At the end of the period,
all swaps are reversed, and banks get their corporate claims back.19 Following those swaps,
banks then have the possibility to pledge the new government bonds as collateral instead of
cash flows.

Proposition 9. (Collateral Swap) A collateral swap may rule out the collateral trap only
if θ̃ > θ. In any case, the policy always improves the functioning of the interbank market and
the channelling of savings toward the best projects. Hence, the effect on aggregate output and
consumption is always positive.

Proof. The results follow from the fact that the collateral swap has the same effect as an increase
in θ up to θ̃.

     The collateral swap policy enhances the pledgeability of banks’ cash flows, so that banks
have more skin in the game, and lose more if they abscond. The effects of this policy are
therefore similar to those of a bank subsidy (Section 7.2).

 8    Conclusion

In this paper we explore how banks’ holdings of outside collateral (like treasuries) affect banks’
production of inside collateral, and how this collateral creation process affects the efficiency and
stability of wholesale financial markets. We highlight sudden swings in both collateral value
and collateral creation as a source of fragility in interbank markets leading to a collateral trap.
     Due to the presence of moral hazard and adverse selection, loans between heterogeneous
banks have two main features. First, these loans are collateralized, either by treasuries (outside
collateral) and/or cash flows (inside collateral). Second, limits emerge endogenously on the
amount banks can borrow in this market. Confidence is central to the functioning of the
interbank market. When lenders are optimistic about the quality (productivity) of borrowing
banks, quantity restrictions are relatively lax and interbank loan rates are high. In equilibrium,
only high productivity banks borrow in the market and the reallocation of deposits across banks
is relatively efficient.
     But, for the same parameters, the economy may be stuck in a collateral trap. In this case,
lenders are pessimistic about bank quality. The volume of inside collateral is low, borrowing
restrictions are tight, and lending rates are low. Relatively low productivity banks borrow so
that the interbank market is much less efficient in the reallocation of deposits. The reduction
in interbank flows is more pronounced in loans backed by inside collateral than in loans backed
by outside collateral.
  19
     In effect, those swaps can be seen as the government lending government debt securities to the banks against
the corporate cash flows as collateral. The securities lending transactions unravel at the end of the period, and
banks collect cash flows; in this way, we make sure that even the banks with a high ε are willing to enter the
swap, and that the productivity of bank ε cannot be revealed based on whether or not the bank enters the swap.



                                                       31
   The disruption of financial reallocation in a collateral trap has real effects as well. The most
profitable banks are unable to attract the flow of funds they would receive in normal times.
The aggregate economy is less productive: output, consumption and welfare are lower.
   Though the model is purposefully simple, structured to capture the interactions of inside
and outside collateral, it is capable of matching some key features of the recent financial crisis.
This includes the reduction in the interbank loan rate, the fall in the flow of funds financed by
inside collateral relative to outside collateral and the consequent fall in output.
   Finally, we use the model to discuss the effects of four policies on financial efficiency and
stability. A key finding is that asset portfolio restrictions are costly in terms of welfare; indeed,
such restrictions may eliminate the fragility of these markets but they do so by supporting a
unique equilibrium with low interbank flows. We also find that bank subsidies, a central bank
deposit facility, and collateral swaps contribute to the stability of the financial sector.

 References

Acharya, V., P. Schnabl, and G. Suarez (2013): “Securitization without risk transfer,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 107(3), 515–536.

Acharya, V. V., and P. Schnabl (2010): “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbal-
  ances&quest; Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007–09,” IMF
  Economic Review, 58(1), 37–73.

BCBS (2009): “Report on Special Purpose Entities,” BIS, The Joint Forum.

Benmelech, E., and N. Bergman (2012): “Credit Traps,” American Economic Review,
  102(6), 3004–32.

Caballero, R. (2009): “The “Other” Imbalance and the Financial Crisis,” MIT, Working
  Paper 09-32.

Caballero, R., and E. Fahri (2015): “The safety trap,” MIT, mimeo.

Caballero, R. J., and A. Krishnamurthy (2009): “Global Imbalances and Financial
  Fragility,” American Economic Review, 99(2), 584–88.

Chow, J., and J. Surti (2011): “Making Banks Safer: Can Volcker and Vickers Do It?,” IMF
  Working Paper #WP/11/236.

Copeland, A., A. Martin, and M. Walker (2011): “Repo run: evidence from the tri-party
  repo market,” Discussion paper, Staff Report, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Coval, J., J. Jurek, and E. Stafford (2009): “The Economics of Structured Finance,”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 3–25.


                                                 32
Covitz, D. M., N. Liang, and G. A. Suarez (2009): “The evolution of a financial crisis:
  Panic in the asset-backed commercial paper market,” Discussion paper, Division of Research
  & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board.

Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983): “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,”
  Journal of Political Economy, pp. 401–419.

Fleming, M. J., W. B. Hrung, and F. M. Keane (2010): “Repo market effects of the term
  securities lending facility,” The American Economic Review, pp. 591–596.

Foster, L., C. Grim, and J. Haltiwanger (2013): “Reallocation in the Great Recession:
  Cleansing or Not?,” US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-
  13-42.

Gorton, G. (1988): “Banking Panics and Business Cycles,” Oxford Economic Papers, 40,
  751–781.

Gorton, G., and A. Metrick (2010): “Regulating the Shadow banking System,” Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 26–312.

           (2012): “Securitized banking and the run on repo,” Journal of Financial Economics,
  104(3), 425–451.

Gorton, G., and G. Ordonez (2014): “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review.

Gorton, G., and N. Souleles (2005): “Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitization,” NBER
  discussion paper # 11190.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole (1998): “Private and public supply of liquidity,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 112, 1–40.

Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): “Credit cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
  211–248.

Krishnamurthy, A., S. Nagel, and D. Orlov (2014): “Sizing up repo,” The Journal of
  Finance.

Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012): “The aggregate demand for trea-
  sury debt,” The Journal of Political economy.

           (2015): “The impact of treasury supply on financial sector lending and stability,”
  Stanford University, mimeo.

Pozard, Z., T. Adrian, A. Ashcraft, and H. Boesky (2012): “Shadow Banking,” Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report #458.

                                               33
Tirole, J. (2006): “The Theory of Corporate Finance,” Princeton University Press.

 9     Appendix

 9.1    Proof of Lemma
A bank of productivity ε who borrows B on the interbank market obtains εa(s − b + B) − rB
from borrowing and financing projects. That same bank can earn r(s − b) from lending on the
interbank market. Therefore, a bank with ε = ε̄ ≡ r/a is just indifferent between borrowing and
lending on the interbank market, regardless of the amount it can borrow, B (item 1). Iterating
(9) links φc (n) to (1 − sb + φb ): φc(n) = (θε̄/γ)n (1 − b/s + φb ). Using this in (10) and solving
for the n = N such that (10) is met with equality yields:
                                             N
                                        θε̄                 b           f
                                                   (1 −       + φb ) =     ,                   (25)
                                        γ                   s          γas

Putting the rounds together, one gets the total amount of interbank loans secured by inside
collateral:
                              n=N                                  f
                               X           θε̄ sb (rb − r) + ε̄a − s
                         φc =      φc(n) =    ·                      .                 (26)
                                           γ          γa − θε̄a
                                  n=1

Maximizing the profit of the bank π b in (11) with respect to b, given the expressions of φc
above and of φb in (4), one gets the arbitrage condition rb = r as first order condition (item 2).
Given the arbitrage condition (12), expression (4) simplifies to φb = γε̄ − 1 + sb (item 3). Given
the arbitrage condition (12), expression (26) simplifies to φc = (θε̄/γ) · (ε̄ − f /(as))/(γ − θε̄)
(item 4). Summing φb and φc yields φ ≡ (ε̄/γ) · (γ − θf /(as))/(γ − θε̄) − 1 + b/s (item 5). Using
(13) and (25), one gets N = (ln(ε̄) − ln (f /(as))) / (ln(γ) − ln(θε̄)) (item 6).
 9.2    Proof that H(ε̄) is hump-shaped
We want to prove that H(ε̄) is humped–shaped over interval [0, 1]. From the definition of H(ε̄)
in (20), one gets:
                                           γ       ε̄G0 (ε̄)  γ
                            H 0 (ε̄) > 0 ⇔    − ε̄             < .                        (27)
                                            θ       1 − G(ε̄)   θ
   Given Assumption 4, γ > θ and it is easy to see that the left hand side of relation (27) is
equal to zero when ε̄ = 0 and goes to infinity when ε̄ % 1. Therefore, H(ε̄) reaches at least one
maximum over [0, 1]. It remains to show that this maximum is unique. To do so, we re–write
(27) as:                                              
                                    1        1 − G(ε̄)     θ
                                        1−       0
                                                         < ,                                 (28)
                                    ε̄        ε̄G (ε̄)    γ
                                    |        {z        }
                                                    χ(ε̄)

and show that, under Assumption 5, χ0 (ε̄) > 0: χ0 (ε̄) > 0 ⇔ 2G0 (ε̄) + ε̄G00 (ε̄) > 0.
 9.3    Proof of Proposition 2
The proposition compares multiple equilibria A and C in Figure 6. The effects of the reduction
in ε̄ (item 1) so that banks use the storage technology (item 9) defines a collateral trap, as in
Figure 6. As ε̄ = r/a, the interbank rate falls with ε̄ (item 2), and from (2) and (18), it is easy
to see that the spread between rd and r go up (item 3). Item 4 results from (12). The effects
of a fall in ε̄ on outside and inside collateral (items 5 and 6) come directly from (13) and (14).

                                                          34
The effects of a fall in the ratio of outside to inside collateral (item 7) can be seen from relation
(see (13) and (15)) φb + 1 − b/s / φc + φb + 1 − b/s = (γ − θε̄) / (γ − θf /(as)): the left
                                                             

hand side increases with φb /φc , and the right hand side decreases with ε̄ and hence rises in a
collateral trap. Complexity (item 8) is given by (16) and this is increasing in ε̄ and so falls.
Since aggregate output increases monotonically with ε̄ (see (24)), output, consumption, and
welfare are lower (item 10). Item 11 follows from ε̄ being reduced in a collateral trap.
 9.4   Relaxation of Assumption 1
Assume that the creditors of a bank’s subsidiary can seize all the seizable cash flows of the other
subsidiaries in the group. Then, the gain of the bank if its second round subsidiaries default is
equal to:
                  
                     γaφc(1) s + max[brb + ε̄a s − b + φb s − φb sr − φc(1) sr; 0],
                                                           
                  
                  
                  
                   if (1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s < φb sr
                  
                                              
                  
                                                                                               (29)
                        c(1)                         b       b
                                                      
                     γaφ s + (1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φ s − φ sr
                  
                  
                  
                  
                   + max[brb + θε̄a s − b + φb s − φc(1) sr; 0], otherwise.
                  


The comparison of (29) with the left side of (5) clearly shows that the gain from default is
smaller absent Assumption 1. In the above term, we singled out the cash flows from the first
round projects that can be seized by the first round lenders but not by the second round lenders,
(1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s . (Remember that the second round lenders can only seize a fraction θ
                       

of the first round subsidiaries’ cash flows, unlike the first round lenders, who have full access to
those cash flows.) If those cash flows suffice to pay the first round lenders (second line), then
the bank gets the return on storage, γaφc(1) s, the cash flows of the first round project that
are not seizable by the second round lenders, net of the repayment of the first round lenders,
(1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s − φb sr, plus whatever is left after the second round lenders seized all the
                       

assets they could, max[brb + θε̄a s − b + φb s − φc(1) sr; 0].
                                                

    When (1 − θ)ε̄a s − b + φb s < φb sr, in contrast, the borrowers cannot keep any cash from
                                  

the first round projects. The comparison with the right side of (5) shows that the gain of the
bank in default is always less than its gain when it does not default, irrespective of φc(1) . This
is a case where, absent Assumption 1, φc(1) = +∞ and the economy reaches the First Best.




                                                 35
