                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DO FUNDS MAKE MORE WHEN THEY TRADE MORE?

                                        Lubos Pastor
                                     Robert F. Stambaugh
                                      Lucian A. Taylor

                                     Working Paper 20700
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20700


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2014


Pastor is at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Stambaugh and Taylor are at the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Pastor and Stambaugh are also at the NBER.
Pastor is also at the National Bank of Slovakia and the CEPR. The views in this paper are the
responsibility of the authors, not the institutions they are affiliated with. Email:
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu, stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu, luket@wharton.upenn.edu.
We are grateful for comments from Jonathan Berk, Justin Birru, David Chapman, Alex Edmans,
Gene Fama, Miguel Ferreira, Francesco Franzoni, Vincent Glode, Todd Gormley, Christian
Hansen, Marcin Kacperczyk, FabioMoneta, DavidMusto, Jonathan Reuter, Sergei Sarkissian,
Clemens Sialm, from the audiences at the 2016 AFA, 2015 WFA, 2015 EFA, 2015 FIRS, 2016
IPC Winter Research Symposium, 2015 Conference on Advances in the Analysis of Hedge Fund
Strategies, 2015 Finance Down Under conference, 2015 Liquidity Risk in Asset Management
conference, 2015 Nova BPI Asset Management Conference, 2015 Q Group, 2014 German
Finance Association conference, and the following universities and other institutions: Aalto, BI
Oslo, Cass, Cheung Kong, Chicago, Columbia, Copenhagen, Dartmouth, Duke, Georgia State,
Houston, Imperial, Indiana, Mannheim, McGill, Michigan, NBIM, NHH Bergen, SAIF, Tsinghua
PBCSF, Tsinghua SEM, Vanderbilt, and Wharton. We are also grateful to Yeguang Chi and
Gerardo Manzo for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Funds Make More When They Trade More?
Lubos Pastor, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 20700
November 2014, Revised April 2016
JEL No. G10,G20,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

We model optimal fund turnover in the presence of time-varying profit opportunities. Our model
predicts a positive relation between an active fund’s turnover and its subsequent benchmark-
adjusted return. We find such a relation for equity mutual funds. This time-series relation
between turnover and performance is stronger than the cross-sectional relation, as the model
predicts. Also as predicted, the turnover-performance relation is stronger for funds trading less-
liquid stocks, such as small-cap funds. Turnover has a common component that is positively
correlated with proxies for stock mispricing, consistent with funds exploiting time-varying
opportunities. Turnover’s common component helps predict fund returns.

Lubos Pastor                                    Lucian A. Taylor
University of Chicago                           Finance Department
Booth School of Business                        The Wharton School
5807 South Woodlawn Ave                         University of Pennsylvania
Chicago, IL 60637                               2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
and NBER                                        3620 Locust Walk
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
                                                luket@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert F. Stambaugh
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
stambaugh@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

Mutual funds invest trillions of dollars on behalf of retail investors. The lion’s share of this
money is actively managed, despite the growing popularity of passive investing.1 Whether
skill guides the trades of actively managed funds has long been an important question, given
active funds’ higher fees and trading costs. We take a fresh look at skill by analyzing time
variation in active funds’ trading activity. We explore a simple idea: A fund trades more
when it perceives greater profit opportunities. If the fund has the ability to identify and
exploit those opportunities, then it should earn greater profit after trading more heavily.

       We formalize this idea by developing a model of fund trading in the presence of time-
varying profit opportunities. Each period, funds identify opportunities to establish positions
that yield profits in the subsequent period, net of trading costs. A fund’s optimal amount
of turnover maximizes its expected net profit, conditional on equilibrium prices. Profit
opportunities vary over time, jointly determining turnover and performance. A fund trades
more in periods when it has more profit opportunities. Our model’s key implication is a
positive time-series relation between optimally chosen turnover and subsequent return.

       Consistent with the model, we find that a fund’s turnover positively predicts the fund’s
subsequent benchmark-adjusted return. This new evidence of skill comes from our sample
of 3,126 active U.S. equity mutual funds from 1979 through 2011. The result is significant
not only statistically but also economically: a one-standard-deviation increase in turnover is
associated with a 0.65% per year increase in performance for the typical fund. Funds seem
to know when it’s a good time to trade.

       We focus on the time-series relation between turnover and performance for a given fund.
In contrast, prior studies ask whether there is a turnover-performance relation across funds.
The evidence on this cross-sectional relation is mixed. For example, Elton, Gruber, Das, and
Hlavka (1993) and Carhart (1997) find a negative relation, Wermers (2000), Kacperczyk,
Sialm, and Zheng (2005), and Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2007) find no significant relation,
and Dahlquist, Engström and Söderlind (2000) and Chen, Jagadeesh and Wermers (2001)
find a positive relation. In accord with this mixed message, our sample delivers a weak
positive cross-sectional relation, marginally significant at best.

       Consistent with the empirical results, our model predicts that the time-series relation
between turnover and performance should be stronger than the cross-sectional relation. The
   1
    As of 2013, mutual funds worldwide have about $30 trillion of assets under management, half of which
is managed by U.S. funds. About 52% of U.S. mutual fund assets are held in equity funds, and 81.6% of the
equity funds’ total net assets are managed actively (Investment Company Institute, 2014).


                                                   1
reason is that a given trade’s cost reduces current return, whereas its profit increases future
return. Trading costs therefore do not dampen the time-series turnover-performance relation
as much as they dampen the cross-sectional relation, where the timing of profit and trading
cost is irrelevant.

   Our model also predicts that funds trading less-liquid stocks should have a stronger time-
series relation between turnover and performance. The turnover of such funds optimally
responds less to profit opportunities, so a given change in turnover implies a greater change
in profit opportunities. Consistent with this prediction, we find that funds holding stocks
of small companies, or small-cap funds, have a significantly stronger turnover-performance
relation than do large-cap funds. Similarly, we find a stronger relation for small funds than
large funds, consistent with the ability of smaller funds to trade less-liquid stocks, given that
smaller funds trade in smaller dollar amounts.

   We find a stronger turnover-performance relation as well for funds charging higher fees.
This result has a skill-based interpretation, under the plausible assumption that funds with
greater skill charge higher fees. If a less-skilled fund trades on profit opportunities that are
not really there, then some of the fund’s turnover is unrelated to expected future return.
The turnover-performance relation is therefore weaker for less-skilled funds.

   We find strong evidence of commonality in fund turnover. Turnover’s common com-
ponent appears to be related to mispricing in the stock market. Average turnover across
funds—essentially the first principal component of turnover—is significantly related to three
proxies for potential mispricing: investor sentiment, cross-sectional dispersion in individual
stock returns, and aggregate stock market liquidity. Funds trade more when sentiment or
dispersion is high or liquidity is low, suggesting that stocks are more mispriced when funds
collectively perceive greater profit opportunities. We also find that commonality in turnover
is especially high among funds sharing similar characteristics, suggesting more comovement
in profit opportunities across similar funds.

   Average turnover positively predicts a fund’s future return, even when we control for the
fund’s own turnover. This predictive relation is significant: a one-standard-deviation increase
in average turnover is associated with a 0.71% per year increase in fund performance. The
relation is even stronger when average turnover is computed only across similar funds.

  The predictive ability of average turnover is consistent with the presence of error in our
empirical measure of an individual fund’s turnover. This measure aims to exclude trades aris-
ing from a fund’s inflows and outflows, thereby reflecting only trades arising from the fund’s
decisions to replace some stocks with others, but this objective can be accomplished only

                                                2
imperfectly. The common component of individual fund turnover—average turnover—helps
capture a fund’s true turnover and thus helps to predict the fund’s performance. Measure-
ment error can also explain our finding that a fund’s performance is predicted even more
strongly by the average turnover of similar funds. Since commonality in turnover is greater
among similar funds, average turnover of similar funds is particularly useful in capturing a
fund’s true turnover in the presence of measurement error.

       Average turnover should also predict returns if funds trade suboptimally in that only a
portion of their trading exploits true profit opportunities. If those opportunities are cor-
related across funds while funds’ trading mistakes are not, then higher average turnover
indicates greater profit opportunities in general. Any opportunity identified by a given fund
is likely to be more profitable if there is generally more mispricing at that time, as indicated
by other funds’ heavy trading. Suboptimal trading can also explain the superior predictive
power of similar funds’ average turnover, as that turnover reflects especially relevant profit
opportunities—those shared by similar funds.

       The literature investigating the skill of active mutual funds is extensive. Average past
performance delivers a seemingly negative verdict, since many studies show that active funds
have underperformed passive benchmarks, net of fees.2 Yet active funds can have skill.
Skilled funds might charge higher fees, and some funds might be more skilled than others.
Moreover, with fund-level or industry-level decreasing returns to scale, skill does not equate
to average performance, either gross or net of fees.3 Our finding of a significant positive
time-series relation between turnover and performance provides novel evidence of skill.

       While we find that funds perform better after increasing their trading activity, others
have related fund activity to performance in different ways. Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng
(2005) find that funds that are more active in the sense of having more concentrated port-
folios perform better. Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008) find that a fund’s actions be-
tween portfolio disclosure dates, as summarized by the “return gap,” positively predict fund
performance. Cremers and Petajisto (2009) find that funds that deviate more from their
benchmarks, as measured by “active share,” perform better. Cremers, Ferreira, Matos, and
Starks (2016) find similar results. In the same spirit, Amihud and Goyenko (2013) find bet-
ter performance among funds having lower R-squareds from benchmark regressions. These
studies are similar to ours in that they also find that more active funds perform better, but
there are two important differences. First, all of these studies measure fund activity in ways
   2
     See, for example, Jensen (1968), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), Malkiel (1995), Gruber (1996),
Carhart (1997), Wermers (2000), Pástor and Stambaugh (2002), and Fama and French (2010), among others.
   3
     See Berk and Green (2004), Pástor and Stambaugh (2012), Stambaugh (2014), Berk and van Binsbergen
(2015), and Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015).


                                                    3
different from ours. Second, all of them identify cross-sectional relations between activity
and performance, whereas we establish a time-series relation.

   Given this time-series perspective, our study is also related to the literature on time
variation in mutual fund performance. Some authors, inspired by Ferson and Schadt (1996),
model performance as a linear function of conditioning variables (e.g., Avramov and Wer-
mers, 2006). Others relate fund performance to the business cycle (e.g., Moskowitz, 2000,
Glode, 2011, Kosowski, 2011, and Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp, 2016),
to aggregate market returns (Glode, Hollifield, Kacperczyk, and Kogan, 2012), and to time
variation in fund risk (e.g., Brown, Harlow, and Starks, 1996, and Huang, Sialm, and Zhang,
2011). None of these studies relate fund performance to fund turnover.

   While we analyze funds’ ability to time their turnover, others have investigated the
value of active fund management by examining different fund actions. Chen, Jegadeesh,
and Wermers (2000) find that stocks recently bought by funds in aggregate outperform
stocks recently sold, suggesting that funds have stock-picking skill. Baker et al. (2010) find
that much of this outperformance takes place around corporate earnings announcements,
indicating one likely source of the funds’ skill. Cohen, Coval, and Pástor (2005) find that
funds whose portfolio decisions are similar to those of other funds with strong track records
perform better. Alexander, Cici, and Gibson (2007) show that funds’ valuation-motivated
buys (i.e., large stock buys concurrent with heavy fund outflows) outperform benchmarks
whereas liquidity-motivated buys do not. Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) find that fund
managers perform better when they trade shares of firms they are connected to through
their educational networks. Like us, all of these studies report that active management adds
value, but they examine different dimensions of fund skill. Our finding that funds are able
to successfully time their trading activity seems new in the literature.

   Lastly, our analysis of the common variation in fund turnover is related to the literature
on correlated trading behavior of mutual funds, or “herding.” Early studies include Nofsinger
and Sias (1999) and Wermers (1999). More recently, Koch, Ruenzi, and Starks (2016) and
Karolyi, Lee, and van Dijk (2012) argue that such correlated trading gives rise to common-
ality in liquidity among stocks. Commonality in individual stock turnover is analyzed by Lo
and Wang (2000), Cremers and Mei (2007), and others. None of these studies examine fund
turnover. Our analysis of the common component of fund turnover is novel.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model, which implies
a positive relation between a fund’s turnover and subsequent return. Section 3 reports
strong evidence of such a relation in our mutual fund sample and, in the context of our


                                              4
model, contrasts the time-series relation with the weaker cross-sectional relation. Section
4 explores differences in the strength of the time-series relation across categories of funds
differentiated by size, fees, and investment styles. Section 5 analyzes the common component
of fund turnover and its predictive power for fund returns. Section 6 concludes.


2. Model of the Turnover-Performance Relation

In this section we present a simple model of optimal fund turnover in the presence of
time-varying profit opportunities. A manager trades more when he identifies more alpha-
producing opportunities, so a skilled manager should perform better after he trades more.
The model implies a positive turnover-performance relation: a time-series regression in which
a fund’s turnover is positively related to the fund’s subsequent return.


2.1    Profit Opportunities and Trading Costs

Active mutual funds pursue alpha—profit in excess of their benchmarks. A fund perceives
opportunities for producing alpha and trades to exploit them. Let Xt denote a given level
of turnover that the fund can choose in period t. Let P (Xt ) denote the resulting expected
benchmark-adjusted profit (alpha) in period t + 1, before fees and trading costs, if the fund
makes optimal buy-sell decisions conditional on its turnover being Xt . The profit represented
by P (Xt ) reflects the fund’s ability to exploit opportunities in period t for which the payoff
occurs in period t + 1. A prime example is a purchase of underpriced securities in period t
followed by the correction of the mispricing in period t + 1.

   If the fund wishes to maintain a well diversified portfolio of stocks, the fund is likely to
replace more of its stocks when Xt is high than when Xt is low. As the fund moves further
down its list of potential stocks to buy, the alphas on the additional stocks are likely to be
lower than those on stocks higher up the fund’s list. As a result, P (Xt ) is likely to be concave
in Xt . We represent this concave profit function as
                                       P (Xt ) = πtXt1−θ ,                                    (1)
where 0 < θ < 1. Variation over time in the fund’s profit opportunities is summarized by
the parameter πt . The higher is πt , the more profitable are the fund’s opportunities.

   Let C(Xt ) denote the trading cost in period t incurred by the fund as a result of turning
over Xt in that period. We represent the trading cost function as
                                        C(Xt ) = cXt1+γ ,                                     (2)

                                                5
where γ ≥ 0. We allow this function to be convex because it is generally accepted that the
cost of trading a given stock is convex in the amount of that stock traded (e.g., Kyle and
Obizhaeva (2013)). To the extent that a higher value of Xt corresponds to the fund trading
more of any given stock, we would expect some convexity in C(Xt ). On the other hand, if a
higher value of Xt corresponds to the fund mainly replacing a greater number of its stocks,
as opposed to trading a greater amount of any given stock, then C(Xt) should be close to
linear. That is, γ should be close to zero. As we explain below, a near-zero value of γ is
consistent with our empirical evidence on the turnover-performance relation.


2.2     Optimal Turnover

The fund’s chosen level of turnover maximizes expected next-period profit net of the current
trading cost incurred to produce that profit. We assume that the fund maximizes this after-
cost profit before subtracting fees charged to investors.4 Recall that P (Xt ) in equation (1)
is profit before both fees and trading costs. The fund’s choice of Xt therefore solves

                                         max {P (Xt ) − C(Xt )} .                                           (3)
                                          Xt

This objective function is concave and hump-shaped in Xt . The first-order condition is

                                   πt (1 − θ)Xt−θ − c(1 + γ)Xtγ = 0 ,                                       (4)

from which the optimal level of turnover is
                                                  "           #    1
                                                  πt(1 − θ)       θ+γ
                                          Xt∗   =                       .                                   (5)
                                                  c(1 + γ)

We see that the fund trades more when its profit opportunities are better (i.e., when πt is
higher). Also, higher trading costs (c) imply less trading. Both results are intuitive.

   When the fund decides how much to trade, it conditions on equilibrium prices. We do
not model the formation of equilibrium prices, which reflect the joint effects of all funds’
trading. Instead, we rely on a simple point: Whatever the price formation process, if equi-
librium prices do not offer the fund a higher net profit at the fund’s chosen level of turnover
than at any other level of turnover, then the fund is not optimizing. When specifying the
fund’s optimization problem in equation (3), we assume there are many funds and that any
individual fund takes equilibrium prices—and thus its own after-cost profit opportunities—
as given when deciding how much to trade. In other words, C(Xt) does not represent price
   4
    One justification for this assumption is that a higher profit before fees essentially provides the fund with
a higher fee, if fund flows result in zero net alpha provided to investors, as in Berk and Green (2004).


                                                       6
impact that affects the equilibrium prices on which the fund conditions. Rather, C(Xt )
is best viewed as compensation to liquidity-providing intermediaries for taking short-lived
positions to facilitate the ultimate market clearing between the fund and other investors.5


2.3        Turnover-Performance Relation

To relate turnover to performance, we first solve equation (5) for πt , obtaining

                                                  c(1 + γ)
                                           πt =            (Xt∗ )θ+γ .                                         (6)
                                                   (1 − θ)

Substituting for πt into equation (1) when Xt = Xt∗ then gives the time-series relation

                                                      c(1 + γ)
                                         P (Xt∗ ) =            (Xt∗ )1+γ .                                     (7)
                                                        1−θ
The profit and cost given by equations (1) and (2) can be viewed as being scaled by the
fund’s assets, so that they represent contributions to the fund’s rate of return. With that
normalization, the fund’s overall before-fee realized return in period t+1, Rt+1 , equals P (Xt∗ )
plus a mean-zero deviation minus C(Xt+1
                                    ∗
                                        ), the trading costs associated with the optimal
turnover chosen in period t + 1. That is, using equations (2) and (7),

                                       c(1 + γ)
                              Rt+1 =            (Xt∗ )1+γ − c(Xt+1
                                                               ∗
                                                                   )1+γ + ηt+1 ,                               (8)
                                         1−θ
where ηt+1 is the mean-zero deviation of realized before-cost profit from its expectation. We
assume that profit opportunities vary over time in a manner that allows the conditional
mean of (Xt+1
          ∗
              )1+γ given Xt∗ to be well approximated as

                                    ∗
                                E{(Xt+1 )1+γ |Xt∗ } = µ(1 − ρ) + ρ(Xt∗ )1+γ ,                                  (9)

where µ and ρ are a constants and |ρ| < 1.6 Taking the expectation of the right-hand side
of equation (8) conditional on Xt∗ then gives

                                        c(1 + γ)              h                     i
                     E{Rt+1 |Xt∗ } =             (Xt∗ )1+γ − c µ(1 − ρ) + ρ(Xt∗ )1+γ .                        (10)
                                          1−θ
As noted earlier, γ is likely to be close to zero if higher turnover largely corresponds to
replacing a greater number of stocks rather than buying more of a given set of stocks. We
see from (10) that a near-zero γ delivers a near-linear relation between turnover (Xt∗ ) and
   5
    One might imagine funds trading with many intermediaries who access different sources of liquidity or
act at slightly different times. A similar approach is taken by Stambaugh (2014) in a general equilibrium
model of active management and price formation.
                                                                             1+γ
   6
       From (5), we see that a sufficient condition for this result is that πtγ+θ follows an AR(1) process.


                                                         7
expected return. Our empirical analysis reveals no significant departure from linearity in
the turnover-performance relation, consistent with the assumption of γ ≈ 0. Given this
assumption, from (9) we see that µ = E(Xt∗ ) and ρ is the autocorrelation of Xt∗ . With
γ ≈ 0, the turnover-performance relation in (10) is well represented by the linear regression

                                   Rt+1 = a + bXt∗ + t+1 ,                                 (11)

where E(t+1 |Xt∗ ) = 0 ,
                                    a = −c(1 − ρ)E(Xt∗ ),                                   (12)

and                                                   
                                            1
                                   b=c         −ρ .                                  (13)
                                          1−θ
Note that b is positive because 0 < θ < 1 and |ρ| < 1. In other words, a fund’s optimally
chosen turnover exhibits a positive time-series relation to the fund’s subsequent return.


2.4     Time-Series versus Cross-Section

Most studies investigating the relation between fund turnover and performance focus on
the cross-section. The question generally asked is whether there is a relation, across funds,
between average turnover and average return. Taking the unconditional expectation of the
time-series relation in equation (11), using equations (12) and (13), gives

                                      E(Rt ) = h E(Xt∗ ) ,                                  (14)

where                                                !
                                            θ
                                       h=c     .                                            (15)
                                           1−θ
If c and θ are the same across funds, then h is the same for each fund. In that case, equation
(14) represents the relation between average turnover and average performance across funds.
From equation (5) we see that funds typically experiencing higher values of πt , and thus
greater profit opportunities, trade more and thus have higher values of E(Xt∗ ). From (14),
this higher average turnover is accompanied by higher return, because the slope in the cross-
sectional relation, h, is positive (recalling 0 < θ < 1). However, this cross-sectional slope is
lower than the slope of the time-series relation, b. Specifically, from equations (13) and (15),

                                      b − h = c(1 − ρ) ,                                    (16)

which is positive. The time-series slope is greater because trading costs associated with
turnover do not subtract from the fund’s return in the same period as the profit resulting

                                               8
from that turnover. In contrast, the timing of profit and trading cost is irrelevant for the
cross-sectional relation. Trading costs therefore weaken the time-series turnover-performance
relation by less than they weaken the cross-sectional relation. The empirical results in the
next section are consistent with the model’s implied difference between the time-series and
cross-sectional slopes, given in equation (16).


3. Estimating the Turnover-Performance Relation

Following equation (11), we specify the time-series turnover-performance relation for a given
fund i as the linear regression

                                        Ri,t = ai + bi Xi,t−1 + i,t ,                                     (17)

where Ri,t is the fund’s benchmark-adjusted return in period t, and Xi,t−1 is the fund’s
turnover in period t − 1. As implied by our model, a positive bi reflects the fund’s skill to
identify and trade on opportunities in period t−1 for which a significant portion of the payoff
occurs in period t. One can imagine other forms of skill, outside of the model, that we would
not detect. For example, a fund could have skill to identify short-horizon opportunities,
such as liquidity provision, that deliver all of their profits in period t − 1.7 Or a fund could
identify only long-horizon opportunities that bear fruit after period t. Moreover, detecting
skill using the turnover-performance relation requires time variation in the extent to which
profit opportunities arise, i.e., variation in πt in equation (1). Although the regression in
equation (17) cannot detect all forms of skill, it nevertheless provides novel insights into the
ability of funds to identify and exploit time-varying profit opportunities.

       We explore the turnover-performance relation using the dataset constructed by Pástor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), who combine CRSP and Morningstar data to obtain a sample
of 3,126 actively managed U.S. domestic equity mutual funds covering the 1979–2011 period.
To measure the dependent variable Ri,t , we follow the above study in using GrossRi,t , the
fund’s net return minus the return on the benchmark index designated by Morningstar, plus
the fund’s monthly expense ratio taken from CRSP. Following our model, we use gross return,
i.e., the return before fees charged to investors. We estimate all regressions at a monthly
frequency, but a fund’s turnover is reported only as the total for its fiscal year. Thus, we
measure turnover, Xi,t−1 , by the variable F undT urni,t−1, which is the fund’s turnover for
   7
    In the presence of skill, a higher Xi,t−1 can contribute positively to both Ri,t−1 and Ri,t . Thus, one might
also look for a positive contemporaneous relation between turnover and return. Such a relation, however,
could simply reflect a manager’s trading in reaction to return, thereby confounding an inference about skill.
We therefore focus on the predictive turnover-performance relation in equation (17).



                                                       9
the most recent fiscal year that ends before month t. This measure is defined as
                                             min (buysi,t−1, sellsi,t−1)
                         F undT urni,t−1 =                               ,                  (18)
                                                 avg (T NAi,t−1)
where the numerator is the lesser of the fund’s total purchases and sales over its most recent
fiscal year that ends before month t, and the denominator is the fund’s average total net
asset value over the same 12-month period. We have no discretion over this definition; this
is the measure of turnover that funds are required to report to the SEC, and it is also the
measure provided by CRSP. We discuss some properties of this measure later in Section
3.2.1. We winsorize F undT urni,t−1 at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

   To increase the power of our inferences in equation (17), we estimate a panel regression
that imposes the restriction
                                      b1 = b2 = · · · = b .                                 (19)
Initially we pool across all funds, and then later we pool within various fund categories when
investigating heterogeneity in the turnover-performance relation. We include fund fixed ef-
fects, so that b reflects only the contribution of within-fund time variation in turnover. The
fund fixed effects correspond to the ai ’s in equation (17) when the restriction in (19) is im-
posed across all funds. The regression specification combining equations (17) and (19), which
isolates the time-series relation between turnover and performance, is our main specification.
For comparison, we also consider other specifications, as we explain next.


3.1. Time-series versus cross-sectional estimates

Table 1 reports the estimated slope coefficient on turnover, or bb, for various specifications of
the panel regression capturing the turnover-performance relation. The top left cell reports bb
from our main specification, which combines equations (17) and (19):

                                   Ri,t = ai + bXi,t−1 + i,t .                             (20)

This specification includes fund fixed effects, so the OLS estimate bb reflects only time-series
variation in turnover and performance. This statement emerges clearly from the fact that,
with fund fixed effects, bb is a weighted average across funds of the slope estimates from
fund-by-fund time-series regressions. The weighting scheme places larger weights on the
time-series slopes of funds with more observations as well as funds whose turnover fluctuates
more over time. See the Appendix for details.

    The estimate bb in the top left cell of Table 1 is positive and highly significant, with a
t-statistic of 6.63. This finding of a positive turnover-performance relation in the time series

                                               10
is the main empirical result of the paper. The relation is significant not only statistically but
also economically. The average within-fund standard deviation of Xi,t−1 is 0.438. Therefore,
the estimated slope of 0.00123 implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in a fund’s
turnover translates to an increase in annualized expected return of 0.65% (= 0.00123 ×
0.438 × 1200). This number is substantial, in that it is comparable in magnitude to funds’
overall average annualized Ri,t , equal to 0.60%. In other words, conditioning fund returns
on turnover implies fluctuations in the conditional expected return that are of first-order
economic importance, often as large as the unconditional expected return.

   The top right cell of Table 1 reports bb from a panel regression that includes both fund
and month fixed effects. The resulting estimate, 0.00106, is only slightly smaller than its
counterpart in the top left cell, and it is similarly significant (t = 6.77). The only differ-
ence from the top left cell is the addition of month fixed effects. This addition controls for
any unobserved variables that change over time but not across funds, such as macroeco-
nomic variables, regulatory changes, and aggregate trading activity. Since the results with
and without month fixed effects are so similar, such aggregate variables cannot explain the
positive relation between turnover and performance.

   The bottom left cell reports bb when no fixed effects are included in the panel regression.
This specification imposes not only the restriction (19) but also

                                      a1 = a2 = · · · = a .                                 (21)

By removing fund fixed effects from our main specification, this additional restriction brings
cross-sectional variation into play when estimating b. The estimate bb in the bottom left
cell of Table 1 thus reflects both cross-sectional and time-series variation. This estimate is
positive, 0.00040, but only marginally significant, with a t-statistic of 1.92.

   The bottom right cell of Table 1 reports bb from a purely cross-sectional specification, in
which fund fixed effects ai are replaced by month fixed effects at :

                                   Ri,t = at + bXi,t−1 + i,t .                             (22)

The OLS estimate bb from this panel regression reflects only cross-sectional variation in
turnover and performance. To see this, note that including month fixed effects makes bb
equal to a weighted average across periods of the slope estimates from period-by-period
cross-sectional regressions of performance on turnover. The weighting scheme places larger
weights on periods with more observations and periods in which the independent variable ex-
hibits more cross-sectional variance. If each period receives the same weight, then this panel
regression produces the same slope coefficient as the well known Fama-Macbeth (1973) esti-
mator. (See the Appendix.) The estimate of b from equation (22), 0.00030, is positive but the

                                               11
t-statistic is only 1.61. The point estimate is smaller than in the bottom left cell, which shows
that isolating cross-sectional variation further weakens the turnover-performance relation.

       Table 1 clearly shows that the turnover-performance relation is stronger in the time
series than in the cross section. Recall from our model that we expect such a result, with
the difference between the time-series and cross-sectional slopes given by equation (16). In
fact, the difference between these slopes in Table 1 is roughly in line with equation (16),
given estimates of ρ and c. For ρ, we take the average autocorrelation of F undT urni,t−1,
which is equal to 0.507. For c, we turn to Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013), who report
that, on average, the equity mutual funds in their sample have annual turnover of 82.4%
and incur 1.44% of fund value annually in trading costs. The implied value of c is then
0.0144/0.824 = 0.0175. From equation (16), the difference between the time-series and
cross-sectional slopes is then equal to c(1 − ρ) = 0.0175(1 − 0.507) = 0.0086. Given that ρ
and c are annual quantities, this value is the implied difference in slopes when annual return
is regressed on annual turnover. Table 1 instead reports slopes for monthly return regressed
on 12-month turnover. Multiplying the latter slopes by 12 puts them roughly on a 12-month
basis. Subtracting the cross-sectional slope in the lower-right cell of Table 1 from the time-
series slope in the upper-left cell, multiplying by 12, gives 12(0.00123 − 0.00030) = 0.0112,
which rounds to 0.01, just like the above implied difference of 0.0086.8

       In sum, consistent with our model in which fund managers identify and exploit time-
varying profit opportunities, a fund’s performance exhibits a highly significant positive rela-
tion to its lagged turnover. As our model also predicts, this time-series relation is stronger
than the weakly positive cross-sectional relation between turnover and performance. More-
over, the magnitude of the difference between the time-series and cross-sectional slopes con-
forms well to our model.


3.2. Robustness

The positive turnover-performance relation documented above, which is our main result, is
robust to a variety of specification changes. We summarize the robustness results here and
report them in detail in the online appendix, which is available on our websites.

       We have already shown that the turnover-performance relation obtains whether or not
month fixed effects are included in the panel regression, which rules out all aggregate variables
   8
    The time-series and cross-sectional slopes when 12-month return is regressed on 12-month turnover equal
0.0200 and 0.0107, as reported in the online appendix. The difference in these slopes, 0.0093, is also quite
close to the above implied difference of 0.0086.


                                                    12
as the source of this relation. Furthermore, the relation obtains when we include benchmark-
month fixed effects, ruling out any variables measured at the benchmark-month level.9 An
example of such a variable is benchmark turnover, which can be reflected in a fund’s turnover
to the extent that some of the fund’s trading passively responds to reconstitutions of the
fund’s benchmark index. Adding benchmark-month fixed effects has a tiny effect on the
estimated turnover-performance relation, strengthening our interpretation of this relation as
being driven by skilled active trading. The relation also obtains, and is equally strong, when
gross fund returns are replaced by net returns.

      Importantly, the positive turnover-performance relation does not obtain in a placebo test
in which we replace active funds by passive index funds, as identified by Morningstar. When
we produce the counterpart of Table 1 for the universe of passive funds, we find no slope
coefficient significantly different from zero. In fact, the estimated slope coefficients in the
specifications with fund fixed effects are not even positive (the corresponding t-statistics in
the top row of Table 1 are -0.51 and -1.07). This result is comforting because passive funds
should not exhibit any skill in identifying time-varying profit opportunities. The fact that
the turnover-performance relation emerges for active funds but not passive funds supports
our skill-based interpretation of this relation.

      If a fund’s turnover is negatively correlated with the fund’s contemporaneous or lagged
return, then a finite sample tends to produce a positive sample correlation between return
and lagged turnover even if this correlation’s true value is zero. This bias, essentially the same
as analyzed by Stambaugh (1999), arises because the sample’s relatively high (low) turnover
values tend to be accompanied by the sample’s low (high) current and past returns. Those
high (low) turnover values thus tend to precede the sample’s relatively high (low) returns,
thereby producing an apparent positive relation between return and lagged turnover. We
find that the correlations between turnover and both contemporaneous and lagged return
are negative but statistically insignificant. We nevertheless conduct a simulation analysis to
gauge the potential magnitude of the bias as well as the effectiveness of a simple remedy in
our setting—adding Ri,t−1 and Ri,t−2 as independent variables to the regression in equation
(20). The simulation reveals that the finite-sample bias is very small and that adding the
lagged returns is nevertheless effective in eliminating it. When we add Ri,t−1 and Ri,t−2 to
the regression in (20), the resulting slope on Xi,t−1 and its t-statistic are virtually unchanged.

      We estimate the turnover-performance relation at the monthly frequency. Even though
funds report their turnover only annually, most of the variables used in our subsequent
  9
    Gormley and Matsa (2014), among others, advocate the use of a fixed-effects estimator as a way of
controlling for unobserved group heterogeneity in finance applications.



                                                 13
analysis, such as fund returns, fund size, industry size, sentiment, volatility, liquidity, and
business-cycle indicators, are available on a monthly basis. Therefore, we choose the monthly
frequency in an effort to utilize all available information. Nonetheless, when we reestimate
the turnover-performance relation by using annual fund returns, we find a positive and highly
significant time-series relation, just like in Table 1. In addition, we consider a specification
that allows the slope coefficient from the monthly turnover-performance regression to depend
on the number of months between the end of the 12-month period over which F undT urn
is measured and the month in which the fund return is computed. Specifically, we add a
term to the right-hand side of the regression that interacts the above number of months with
F undT urn. We find that the interaction term does not enter significantly, suggesting that
our constant-slope specification is appropriate.

    To judge the statistical significance of the turnover-performance slope estimates in the
presence of fund fixed effects, we compute standard errors clustered by sector times month,
where sector denotes a Morningstar style category. We choose this approach because there is
mild correlation between benchmark-adjusted fund returns within the same sector but very
little across sectors. For robustness, we also consider stricter clustering schemes, namely, by
month, and by fund and month, and continue to find significant results.10

    Our turnover-performance relation captures the predictive power of F undT urn in a given
fiscal year for fund performance in the following fiscal year (e.g., turnover in 2014 predicts
returns in 2015). In principle, some fund trades could take longer to play out (e.g., a trade in
2014 could lead to profits in 2016).11 To test for such long-horizon effects, we add two more
lags of F undT urn to the right-hand side of regression (20). We find that neither of those
additional lags has any predictive power for returns after controlling for the most recent
value of F undT urn, which retains its positive and significant coefficient. Therefore, we use
only the most recent F undT urn in the rest of our analysis.

    Our results are not driven by manager changes. When we replace fund fixed effects by
fund-manager fixed effects, the results are very similar. The turnover-performance relation
thus holds not only at the fund level but also at the manager level. One implication is that
our results are not driven by portfolio turnover during manager transitions. In addition, our
results easily survive the addition of controls for manager age and manager tenure.
  10
      In turnover-performance regressions that exclude fund fixed effects, we cluster not only by sector times
month but also by fund, to account for potential residual correlation induced by the exclusion of fund fixed
effects. In subsequent regressions with F undT urn as the dependent variable, we cluster by fund, since
F undT urn is highly persistent, and by year, to allow cross-sectional dependence in F undT urn.
   11
      The relations between fund performance and funds’ investment horizons are analyzed by Yan and Zhang
(2009), Cremers and Pareek (2016), and Lan, Moneta, and Wermers (2015), among others.



                                                     14
    We run a linear turnover-performance regression. Besides its natural simplicity, the
linear specification is motivated by our model. Recall that if the trading cost function is
approximately linear (γ ≈ 0), so is the turnover-performance relation (see equation (11)).
In principle, the relation could also be convex (if γ > 0), but we find no such evidence.
We estimate a nonparametric regression of Ri,t on Xi,t−1 , both demeaned at the fund level.
We find that the fitted values from that regression are remarkably close to linear, providing
support for our regression specification in equation (20).

    The positive turnover-performance relation emerges not only from the panel regression
in Table 1, which imposes the restriction (19), but also from fund-by-fund regressions. For
each fund i, we estimate the slope bi from the time-series regression in equation (17) in the
full sample. We find that 61% of the OLS slope estimates bbi are positive. Moreover, 9% (4%)
of the bbi ’s are significantly positive at the 5% (1%) confidence level. A weighted average of
these bbi’s appears in the top left cell of Table 1, as shown in equation (37).12 Apart from
this brief summary, we do not analyze the bbi estimates because their precision is generally
low given the funds’ relatively short track records. Instead, we focus on the panel-regression
estimate of b whose precision is higher thanks to information-pooling across funds. The panel-
regression slope characterizes the typical fund-month observation, rather than the typical
fund. Therefore, we do not find that the typical fund exhibits a positive turnover-performance
relation. Rather, we find that the typical fund-month exhibits a positive relation, which
implies that there must exist some funds that exhibit a positive relation.

    Mutual funds sometimes benefit from receiving allocations of shares in initial public
offerings (IPOs) at below-market prices. Lead underwriters tend to allocate more IPO shares
to fund families from which they receive larger brokerage commissions (e.g., Reuter, 2006).
To the extent that higher commissions are associated with higher turnover, this practice
could potentially contribute to a positive turnover-performance relation. This contribution
is unlikely to be substantial, though. Fund families tend to distribute IPO shares across
funds based on criteria such as past returns and fees rather than turnover (Gaspar, Massa,
and Matos, 2006). In addition, the high commissions that help families earn IPO allocations
often reflect an elevated commission rate rather than high family turnover, and they are often
paid around the time of the IPO rather than over the previous fiscal year.13 Moreover, the
contribution of IPO allocations to fund performance seems modest. For each year between
1980 and 2013, we calculate the ratio of total money left on the table across all IPOs, obtained
from Jay Ritter’s website, to total assets of active domestic equity mutual funds, obtained
  12
     The cross-sectional correlation between bbi and the length of fund i’s track record is insignificant at 0.02,
indicating that the turnover-performance relation is no stronger for longer-lived funds.
  13
     See, for example, Nimalendran, Ritter, and Zhang (2007) and Goldstein, Irvine, and Puckett (2011).


                                                       15
from the Investment Company Institute. This ratio, whose mean is 0.30%, exceeds the
contribution of IPO allocations to fund performance because mutual funds receive only about
25% to 41% of IPO allocations, on average.14 IPOs thus boost average fund performance
by only about 7.5 to 12 basis points per year. Furthermore, the IPO market has cooled
significantly since year 2000. Money left on the table has decreased to only 0.10% of fund
assets on average, so that IPOs have boosted average fund performance by only 2.5 to 4
basis points per year since January 2001. Yet the turnover-performance relation remains
strong during this cold-IPO-market subperiod: the slope estimates in the top row of Table
1 remain positive and significant, with t-statistics in excess of 3.2.

   If we were to redefine our dependent variable from fund returns to dollar value added
(Berk and van Binsbergen, 2015), the results would be very similar, by the following logic.
When the dependent variable is dollar value added, the independent variable should be
turnover in dollars. Making these changes amounts to multiplying both sides of our cur-
rent regression by fund size. The new regression suffers from a heteroskedasticity problem,
because larger funds have more-volatile (dollar) residuals. Adjusting for this heteroskedas-
ticity requires down-weighting larger funds, for example, by dividing both sides of the new
regression by fund size. After this division, we are back to our current regression.

    We report all of our results based on the full sample period of 1979–2011. In addition, we
verify the robustness of our results in the 2000–2011 subperiod, motivated by two potential
structural changes in the data. The first change relates to the way CRSP reports turnover.
Prior to September 1998, all funds’ fiscal years are reported as January–December, raising
the possibility of inaccuracy, since after 1998 the timing of funds’ fiscal years varies across
funds.15 The second change, identified by Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), relates to
the reporting of fund size and expense ratios before 1993. Using the 2000–2011 subperiod
provides a robustness check that is conservative in avoiding both potential structural changes.
We find that all of our main conclusions are robust to using the 2000–2011 subperiod.
For example, the time-series turnover-performance relation in Table 1 remains positive and
significant, with t-statistics of 4.37 and 3.74 in the top row. In the online appendix, we
report the counterparts of all of our tables estimated in the 2000–2011 subperiod.
  14
     These estimates are from Reuter (2006), Ritter and Zhang (2007), and Field and Lowry (2009).
  15
     In private communication, CRSP explained that this change in reporting is related to the change in its
fund data provider from S&P to Lipper on August 31, 1998. CRSP has also explained the timing convention
for turnover, which is the variable turn ratio in CRSP’s fund fees file. If the variable fiscal yearend is present
in the file, turnover is measured over the 12-month period ending on the fiscal yearend date; otherwise
turnover is measured over the 12-month period ending on the date marked by the variable begdt.




                                                       16
3.2.1. Measuring Turnover


We measure fund turnover by its official SEC definition from equation (18). One advantage
of this measure is that, by taking the minimum of purchases and sales, it largely excludes
turnover arising from persistent inflows and outflows to and from the fund. For example,
if a fund experiences inflows throughout the year, it will probably use those inflows to buy
stocks, but the SEC turnover will pick up the fund’s sales, which are not driven by flows.
Similarly, if a fund experiences persistent outflows, there will be flow-driven selling, but our
turnover measure will pick up the fund’s purchases. Since fund flows are well known to be
persistent, our turnover measure is largely immune to flows. Instead, it reflects mostly the
fund’s active portfolio decisions to replace some holdings with others.

    Our turnover measure is not completely immune to fund flows, though. If flows are non-
persistent then some of our turnover is flow-driven. Flow-driven trading is fairly mechanical
in that its timing is determined mostly by the fund’s investors rather than the fund’s man-
ager. Therefore, flow-driven turnover should exhibit a weaker relation to fund performance
than our turnover measure, F undT urn. To test this hypothesis, we construct two mea-
sures of flow-driven fund turnover. Both measures rely on monthly dollar flows, which we
back out from the monthly series of fund size and fund returns, and both cover the same
12-month period as F undT urn. The first measure is the sum of the absolute values of the
12 monthly dollar flows, divided by the average fund size during the 12-month period. The
second measure is the smaller of two sums, one of all positive dollar flows and one of all neg-
ative flows during the 12-month period, divided by average fund size. Consistent with our
hypothesis, we find that neither measure of flow-driven turnover has any predictive power for
fund returns, whether or not we include F undT urn as a control. Moreover, the inclusion of
flow-driven turnover does not affect the significant predictive power of F undT urn. Finally,
when we adjust our turnover measure for flows by subtracting flow-driven turnover from
F undT urn, we find that the difference strongly predicts fund performance. All these results
provide additional support for our interpretation of the turnover-performance relation.16

   In our final test related to fund flows, we calculate their time-series volatility, which could
in principle be related to the time variation in fund turnover. We compute flow volatility
for each fund as the standard deviation of the fund’s 12 monthly net flows during the same
period over which F undT urn is measured. When we add flow volatility as a control in our
turnover-performance regression, the control does not enter significantly and the slope on
F undT urn remains very similar and highly significant.
  16
     Our results are also broadly consistent with those of Alexander, Cici, and Gibson (2007) who find that
future returns of funds’ discretionary trades are higher than those of flow-induced trades.


                                                    17
   In addition to fund flows, some portion of turnover could be driven by other non-
discretionary forces such as manager transitions, benchmark index reconstitutions, portfolio
rebalancing, etc. Turnover driven by manager transitions cannot explain our results because
those hold up when we replace fund fixed effects by manager fixed effects, as noted earlier.
Benchmark index reconstitutions cannot explain our results either because those survive the
inclusion of benchmark-month fixed effects, as explained earlier. Another way to account
for benchmark index turnover is to estimate it from the turnover of index funds tracking
the fund’s benchmark. For each active fund, we calculate benchmark-adjusted turnover as
F undT urn minus the median turnover of all index funds in the same Morningstar cate-
gory, measured over the same period as F undT urn. When we replace F undT urn by its
benchmark-adjusted version, we continue to find a positive and highly significant turnover-
performance relation.

   Regardless of its source, any trading unrelated to profit motive widens the gap between
a fund’s turnover and its optimal turnover in the context of our model. Therefore, any
such trading should make it more difficult for us to find a positive turnover-performance
relation. Yet we do find a strong relation, even without adjusting reported turnover for
non-discretionary trading. It is possible that some adjustment could enhance the predictive
power of SEC turnover, but it is not our goal to find the best predictor of fund returns. For
simplicity, we use the SEC turnover measure throughout our main analysis.

   For robustness, we consider one more modification of our turnover measure. The denom-
inator of our measure is average fund size over the previous fiscal year. To see whether this
averaging somehow influences our results, we rescale our turnover measure by the ratio of
the same average fund size to fund size at the beginning of the previous fiscal year. The
denominator of the turnover measure thus changes from average size to fund size at the
beginning of the previous fiscal year. We find that this rescaled turnover measure predicts
performance even more strongly than our standard SEC measure.

   Even though we analyze equity mutual funds, some of the funds’ turnover could be due
to non-equity assets. To see whether non-equity turnover matters, we obtain data from
Morningstar on the percentage of each fund’s assets invested in stock. When we add this
percentage as a control in our turnover-performance regression, it enters with a small positive
coefficient, but the explanatory power of F undT urn is virtually unchanged.




                                              18
3.2.2. Alternative Benchmark Models


We benchmark each fund’s performance against the index selected for the fund’s category
by Morningstar. For example, for small-cap value funds, the benchmark is the Russell 2000
Value Index; for large-cap growth funds, it is Russell 1000 Growth. Morningstar assigns
funds to categories by relying heavily on the funds’ reported portfolio holdings. Since these
assignments are made by Morningstar rather than by funds themselves, there is no room
for benchmark manipulation of the kind documented by Sensoy (2009). The benchmark
assigned by Morningstar can differ from that reported in the fund’s prospectus.

   Our index-based approach is likely to adjust for fund style and risk more precisely than
the commonly used loadings on the three Fama-French factors. The Fama-French factors
are popular in mutual fund studies because their returns are freely available, unlike the
Morningstar benchmark index data. Yet the Fama-French factors are not obvious benchmark
choices because they are long-short portfolios whose returns cannot be costlessly achieved by
mutual fund managers. Moreover, Cremers, Petajisto, and Zitzewitz (2013) argue that the
Fama-French model produces biased assessments of fund performance, and they recommend
using index-based benchmarks instead. We follow this advice. But we find similar results
when we adjust fund returns by using the three Fama-French factors: the slope coefficients in
the top row of Table 1 continue to be highly significant, with t-statistics of 7.09 and 8.27, while
the slopes in the bottom row remain insignificant. We also find similar results when using
three additional alternative benchmark models: the four-factor model that includes the three
Fama-French factors and momentum, the five-factor model of Fama and French (2014), and
the modified Fama-French three-factor model of Cremers, Petajisto, and Zitzewitz (2013).
In all three cases, our main slope coefficients in the top row of Table 1 continue to be highly
significant, with t-statistics ranging from 5.93 to 9.34. The slope coefficients in the bottom
row remain insignificant, except when we use the Fama-French five factors or Cremers-
Petajisto-Zitzewitz factors, for which the t-statistics range from 2.05 to 3.71. That is, under
those two benchmark models, the positive turnover-performance relation emerges also from
the cross-section, but in general, the relation appears only in the time series.

   We assess fund performance by subtracting Morningstar’s designated benchmark return
from the fund’s return, effectively assuming that the fund’s benchmark beta is equal to
one. This simple approach is popular in investment practice, and it circumvents the need to
estimate the funds’ betas. When we estimate those betas using OLS, we find very similar
results. To avoid using imprecise beta estimates for short-lived funds, we replace OLS betas
of funds having track records shorter than 24 months by the average beta of funds in the same
Morningstar category. Just as in Table 1, we find that the slope estimates in the bottom

                                                19
row are insignificant while the slopes in the top row are highly significant, with t-statistics
of about 7.6.

   The tests described above assume that funds’ betas are time-invariant. In separate tests,
we allow funds’ betas on benchmarks or factors to vary over time in order to assess the
extent to which turnover-related performance might reflect variation in systematic risk. If
high turnover were associated with more systematic risk, then the higher returns following
high turnover could represent risk compensation or simply factor timing—identifying factor-
related mispricing. While it is not clear a priori why higher turnover should be followed
by more as opposed to less systematic risk, we nevertheless allow time variation in funds’
betas on their Morningstar benchmarks and the factors in the four alternative factor models
described above. In those results, the turnover-performance relation weakens only modestly,
suggesting that relation might include some risk compensation or factor timing. In all cases,
however, the t-statistic for the slope on turnover exceeds five. In general, turnover can reflect
various sources of profitable trading—stock picking, industry rotation, factor timing, etc.



4. Differences Across Funds

Our evidence so far reveals that the typical fund performs better after it trades more. Next,
we ask whether this time-series relation differs across funds. We distinguish funds along
four characteristics: fund size, expense ratio (or “fee,” for short), and two common style
classifications—small-cap versus large-cap and value versus growth. For each of these four
characteristics, we assign a fund to one of three categories. For fund size and fee, in each
month t we compute the terciles of F undSizei,t−1 and ExpenseRatioi,t−1, the most recent
values of fund i’s assets under management and fees available from CRSP prior to month t.
For the two style classifications, we use the 3 × 3 “style-box” assignments of Morningstar,
which uses a fund’s holdings to classify the fund as (i) small-cap, mid-cap, or large-cap and
(ii) value, blend, or growth. In our sample, these two style classifications are held constant
over a fund’s history.

   Panels A through D of Table 2 report the estimated slope coefficients on turnover for each
of the four characteristics used to classify funds. Each panel reports two sets of regressions.
In the first set (indicated by “Controls” as “No”), the simple regression in equation (20)
is run without additional control variables. The second set of regressions (with “Controls”
as “Yes”) controls for the other three fund characteristics by including category dummies
interacted with lagged turnover. For the latter regressions, the slopes reported in each panel
should be interpreted as applying to a fund falling in the given category of that panel’s

                                               20
characteristic and having middle-category values of the characteristics in the other three
panels. For example, the slopes in Panel A correspond to a blend fund with medium size
and medium expense ratio.

   Table 2 reveals a significantly positive turnover-performance relation in eight of the nine
no-controls regressions. The only exception is large funds, having a t-statistic of 1.46 (Panel
C, third column). In other words, a positive turnover-performance relation is quite pervasive
across the various subsets of funds produced by the four classifications. The relation is
significant for small-cap funds, small funds, and high-fee funds even when we include controls,
thereby characterizing funds whose other three characteristics are in the middle category.

   We also see in Table 2 that turnover-performance slopes are significantly larger for small-
cap funds as compared to large-cap funds (Panel A), small funds as compared to large funds
(Panel C), and high-fee funds as compared to low-fee funds (Panel D). These significant
differences occur in both the no-controls and with-controls results, and they are rather dra-
matic. For example, in the with-control results, small-cap funds have a slope of 0.00205
(t = 3.53), nearly seven times the large-cap slope of 0.00030 (t = 0.81). The differences
associated with fund size and fees are similarly large. In contrast, growth and value funds
do not exhibit a significant difference in turnover-performance slopes.

   Our model helps explain the differences across funds’ turnover-performance slopes. Con-
sider Panel A of Table 2, which shows a larger slope for small-cap funds than for large-cap
funds. From equation (13), the turnover-performance slope is increasing in the trading cost
per unit of turnover, c, and decreasing in the autocorrelation of turnover, ρ. If a fund has
higher trading costs (higher c), then it optimally adjusts its turnover less when profit op-
portunities πt change (equation (5)). Therefore, any observed change in turnover must be
associated with a larger change in profit opportunities and hence performance. Small-cap
stocks are generally understood to be less liquid than large-cap stocks, so c is likely to be
greater for small-cap funds. If a fund’s turnover is less persistent (lower ρ), then the profits
from last period’s high turnover are less likely to be offset by trading costs from high turnover
this period. Table 3 shows that the turnover of small-cap funds has significantly lower au-
tocorrelation than that of large-cap funds. According to our model, having both a higher
c and a lower ρ makes small-cap funds more likely to have a higher turnover-performance
slope. We see from Table 2 that small-cap funds indeed have a higher estimated slope.

   A similar interpretation applies to the results in Panel C of Table 2, which reports a
significantly larger turnover-performance slope for small funds than for large funds. Small
funds, by virtue of their trading smaller dollar amounts, are better suited for trading less-


                                               21
liquid stocks than are large funds. As stock size is surely an imperfect liquidity measure,
it seems reasonable that fund size also helps proxy for the liquidity of the fund’s holdings.
That is, the c for small funds is likely to be greater than for large funds, even controlling for
stock size. In addition, we see from Table 3 that small-fund turnover has a significantly lower
autocorrelation than does large-fund turnover. Therefore, as with small-cap funds, having a
higher c and a lower ρ makes small funds more likely to have a higher turnover-performance
slope, also consistent with our estimates.

    Recall from Panel B of Table 2 that there is no significant difference in turnover-performance
slopes for value versus growth funds. Even this result is somewhat in keeping with our
model, in that Edelen, Evans, and Kadlec (2013) report fairly similar trading costs (per unit
of turnover) for value and growth funds, consistent with c being similar for both categories.
On the other hand, we do see in Table 3 that turnover for growth funds has a significantly
higher autocorrelation than does turnover of value funds.

    The differences in turnover-performance slopes related to expense ratio, reported in Panel
D of Table 2, must be interpreted outside our model, in which expense ratio does not appear.
Expense ratio, closely related to the management fee rate, may proxy for skill. One would
expect managers with more skill to receive more fee revenue (e.g., Berk and Green (2004)),
and fee revenue is proportional to the fee rate, conditional on a given fund size. The fee
rate is not necessarily positively correlated with skill unconditionally, as that correlation
depends on how size covaries with fees and skill in the cross-section, but it seems reasonable
for managers with greater skill to charge higher fee rates.17 Also, we find a higher slope
for high-fee funds regardless of whether we condition on fund size by including controls
in Panel D. Less-skilled (and thus lower-fee) funds are likely to have a lower turnover-
performance slope, because they tend to make two mistakes. First, they sometimes trade
too much, perceiving profit opportunities that do not really exist. Consistent with this idea,
Christoffersen and Sarkissian (2011) argue that overconfidence sometimes leads mutual funds
to trade too much.18 Second, less-skilled funds sometimes trade too little, failing to perceive
profit opportunities that truly exist. Because of these mistakes, some of the time variation
in a less-skilled fund’s turnover is unrelated to time variation in true profit opportunities,
producing a weaker turnover-performance relation. If a fund is so unskilled that its turnover
  17
     Consistent with this idea, Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014) report that funds with
superior stock-picking skill charge significantly higher expense ratios.
  18
     Christoffersen and Sarkissian (2011) find that excessive trading is more prevalent among fund managers
working in major financial centers. They also find that excess turnover declines with experience, consistent
with overconfident managers gradually learning their true ability. While the authors’ focus is on demographic
determinants of turnover, they also report a mixed relation between turnover and performance based on panel
regressions similar to ours but without fund fixed effects.



                                                     22
is pure noise, the turnover-performance slope is zero.

   Besides fees, we consider two additional proxies for fund skill. First, we take a fund’s
gross alpha over the fund’s lifetime. Second, we compute gross alpha adjusted for both fund-
level and industry-level returns to scale, following Pástor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015).
For both proxies, we find that high-skill funds exhibit a significantly stronger turnover-
performance relation than low-skill funds. These results, which are consistent with those in
Table 2 based on fees, are in the online appendix.

    The appendix also shows the results from an exercise that takes a different perspective
on skill. Del Guercio and Reuter (2014) argue that broker-sold mutual funds face a weaker
incentive to generate alpha than funds sold directly to retail investors. Motivated by their
evidence, we compare the strength of the turnover-performance relation across these market
segments.19 We find that the relation is somewhat stronger in direct-sold funds than in
broker-sold funds. The turnover-performance slope is 40% larger in magnitude for direct-
sold funds, but the slope difference is not statistically significant (the p-value is 15%). While
this evidence is inconclusive, it points in the direction of direct-sold funds having a stronger
incentive to perform, consistent with Del Guercio and Reuter (2014).

  Finally, the average gross fund returns reported in Table 3 are also consistent with the
model, in two ways. In each of the four panels of Table 3, the average gross return of
the top category is significantly greater than the bottom category. The same is true for
two other quantities that our model predicts to be related to expected gross return: average
turnover (Table 3) and the turnover-performance slope (Table 2). The observed link between
the average gross return and average turnover is consistent with the model’s prediction of
a positive cross-sectional turnover-performance relation (cf. equations (14) and (15)), and
also with the positive cross-sectional slope estimate in Table 1.20 The observed link to the
turnover-performance slope is consistent with equations (13) through (15). According to
equation (13), the slope should be larger for funds with higher values of c and θ, holding ρ
constant. According to equations (14) and (15), funds with higher c and θ should also have
higher expected gross returns, holding average turnover constant. Interestingly, the only top-
minus-bottom difference for which the slope in Table 2 is insignificant, growth minus value,
is also the only difference for which the average gross return in Table 3 is only marginally
  19
     To classify fund share classes by distribution channel, we use the approximation method of Sun (2014).
We treat a share class as broker-sold if it has a non-zero front load, non-zero back load, or 12b-1 fee exceeding
25 bps; otherwise, we treat it as direct-sold. Following Del Guercio and Reuter (2014), we classify a fund as
broker-sold (direct-sold) if at least 75% of its assets are broker-sold (direct-sold) on average over time.
  20
     This evidence is also consistent with the result of Kacperczyk, van Nieuwerburgh, and Veldkamp (2014)
that funds with superior stock-picking skill have significantly higher average turnover.



                                                       23
significant, which jibes well with the model.



5. The Common Component of Fund Turnover

Given our focus on the time variation in fund turnover, it seems natural to examine the
extent to which this variation is common across funds. In this section, we aggregate turnover
across funds and explore its time variation. In Section 5.1, we analyze comovement in fund
turnover. In Section 5.2, we investigate the determinants of the common component of
turnover. Finally, in Section 5.3, we study the predictive power of the common component
for fund performance.


5.1. Commonality in Turnover

In our model, time variation in fund turnover is driven by variation in the fund’s profit
opportunities. Those opportunities are likely to be positively correlated across funds. Any
mispriced stock presents a profit opportunity to many different funds that can potentially
trade this stock. Moreover, if mispricing has market-wide causes such as liquidity disruptions
or investor sentiment, many stocks can be mispriced at the same time. If profit opportunities
are indeed correlated across funds, the model predicts comovement in fund turnover.

   To see whether such comovement exists, we first compute category-level averages of
individual fund turnover. We consider the same fund categories as before: three stock-size
categories, three value-growth categories, three fund-size categories, and three expense-ratio
categories. For each category, we compute the average turnover across all funds in that
category. Specifically, average turnover in month t is the equal-weighted average turnover
across category funds in the 12-month fiscal period that includes month t.

   Figure 1 plots the time series of the category-level average turnover over the 1979-2011
period. The figure shows strong comovement in turnover. The times series of average
turnover are highly correlated both within and across the four panels. For example, the
correlation between the average turnovers of small-cap and large-cap funds, both of which
are plotted in Panel A, is 59%. We observe similar correlations, ranging from 52% to 61%,
between the average turnovers of value and growth funds (Panel B), small and large funds
(Panel C), and high-fee and low-fee funds (Panel D). All pairwise correlations within each
panel are reported in Table 4. In the context of our model, this evidence of comovement
in turnover indicates that profit opportunities are positively correlated across funds—even


                                                24
across funds with different characteristics.

   Panel B of Figure 1 provides more evidence on the result from Table 3 that growth funds
turn over more than value funds. Interestingly, the turnover of growth funds exceeds that of
value funds not only on average but also in every single year, and by a wide margin. Value
funds appear to be more patient than growth funds in exploiting their profit opportunities.
We also see in Panel D that more expensive funds tend to turn over more than cheaper
funds. The patterns in Panels A and C are less consistent over time.

    In addition to computing average turnover at the category level, we compute it at the
aggregate level. We let AvgT urn denote the average of individual fund turnover computed
across all funds. Analogous to the category-level variable, AvgT urnt is the average turnover
across funds’ 12-month fiscal periods that contain month t. AvgT urnt, plotted in Panel A
of Figure 2, fluctuates between 59% and 102% per year from 1979 to 2011.21 It has a 95%
correlation with the first principal component of individual fund turnover. Therefore, we
view AvgT urnt as the simplest measure of the common component of turnover.

    To shed more light on commonality in turnover, we regress individual fund turnover in
month t on its common component, AvgT urnt.22 To isolate time-series variation in turnover,
we run a panel regression with fund fixed effects. We report the results in the first column
of Table 5. The slope coefficient from the regression of F undT urn on AvgT urn is 0.65
(t = 8.65), indicating strong evidence of commonality in turnover.

   The evidence of commonality strengthens further when we add category-level average
turnover to the right-hand side of the above regression. For each fund i, we calculate
AvgT urn Stock Size as the average turnover across funds in the same stock-size category
as fund i. In the regression of F undT urn on both AvgT urn and AvgT urn Stock Size, the
category-level average is highly significant (t = 5.27), the sum of the slopes on the two aver-
ages is again 0.65, and the R2 increases by almost half. We also calculate average turnover
across funds in the same value-growth category (AvgT urn Stock V G), same fund-size cate-
gory (AvgT urn F und Size), and same expense-ratio category (AvgT urn F und Exp). While
the value-growth average is insignificant when added to the above regression, the other
two averages produce results very similar to those obtained for the stock-size average: the
  21
     CRSP turnover data are missing in 1991 for unknown reasons. We therefore treat AvgT urn as missing
in 1991 in our regressions. In Figure 2, though, we fill in average turnover in 1991 by using Morningstar data,
for aesthetic purposes. We rely on CRSP turnover data in our analysis because Morningstar is ambiguous
about the timing of funds’ fiscal years.
  22
     For the purpose of this regression, we recalculate AvgT urnt corresponding to each fund i as the average
turnover across all funds j 6= i. By excluding fund i from the calculation of average turnover, we exclude
any mechanical correlation that could create a spurious perception of commonality. Analogously, we exclude
fund i from all other measures of average turnover discussed in the following paragraph.


                                                      25
category-level average is highly significant, the sum of the slopes on the two averages is a bit
larger than 0.65, and the R2 increases by almost half. Finally, we calculate average turnover
across “similar” funds, AvgT urnSim, by averaging across funds in the same stock-size,
fund-size, and expense-ratio categories. (We exclude value-growth due to its insignificance
observed earlier.) When added to the above regression, this variable comes in highly sig-
nificant (t = 7.35), the sum of the slopes on AvgT urn and AvgT urnSim is 0.68, and the
R2 almost doubles. This evidence, which is reported in Table 5, shows that commonality in
turnover is especially strong among funds with similar characteristics.


5.2. Mispricing and Trading

When do funds trade more than usual? In our model, funds trade more when their profit
opportunities are better. If such opportunities arise from mispricing, then funds should trade
more in periods with more mispricing. We thus ask whether fund turnover is higher when
mispricing is more likely. We use three proxies for the likelihood of mispricing: Sentimentt,
V olatilityt, and Liquidityt. We plot the three series in Panel B of Figure 2.

   The first mispricing proxy, Sentimentt, is the value in month t of Baker and Wurgler’s
(2006, 2007) investor-sentiment index. If sentiment-driven investors participate more heav-
ily in the stock market during high-sentiment periods, the mispricing such investors create
is more likely to occur during those periods (e.g., Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan, 2012). We
thus expect funds exploiting such mispricing to trade more when sentiment is high. Con-
sistent with this prediction, time-series regressions of both F undT urni,t and AvgT urnt on
Sentimentt produce significantly positive slope coefficients (t = 3.35 and t = 3.17, respec-
tively), as shown in columns 1 and 5 of Table 6. We include a time trend in both regressions,
given the positive trend in AvgT urnt evident in Figure 2. The time trend is significant in
the latter regression but not in the former. As reported in the last row of of Table 6, the R2
in the regression of AvgT urnt on Sentimentt and the time trend exceeds the R2 from the
regression on the time trend alone by 0.171. Sentiment, in other words, explains a substantial
fraction of the time variation in aggregate fund turnover.

   The second mispricing proxy, V olatilityt, is the cross-sectional standard deviation in
month t of the returns on individual U.S. stocks.23 The rationale for this variable is that
higher volatility corresponds to greater uncertainty about future values and thus greater
potential for investors to err in assessing those values. As a result, periods of high volatility
admit greater potential mispricing, and we expect funds exploiting such mispricing to trade
 23
      We thank Bryan Kelly for providing this series.


                                                        26
more when volatility is high. Consistent with this prediction, regressions of both F undT urni,t
and AvgT urnt on V olatilityt produce significantly positive slopes (t = 7.78 and t = 7.23,
respectively), as shown in columns 2 and 6 of Table 6. The R2 in the latter regression, which
again includes a time trend, exceeds the R2 in the trend-only regression by 0.188.

    The third proxy, Liquidityt, is the value in month t of the stock-market liquidity measure
of Pástor and Stambaugh (2003). Empirical evidence suggests that higher liquidity is accom-
panied by greater market efficiency (e.g., Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam, 2008, 2011).
In other words, periods of lower liquidity are more susceptible to mispricing. Therefore, we
might expect funds to trade more when liquidity is lower. On the other hand, lower liquid-
ity also implies higher transaction costs, which could discourage funds from trading. Our
evidence suggests that the former effect is stronger: Regressing F undT urni,t and AvgT urnt
on Liquidityt yields significantly negative slope estimates (t = −4.55 and t = −4.14, respec-
tively), reported in columns 3 and 7 of Table 6. Including Liquidityt increases the R2 versus
the trend-only regression by a more modest amount than the other two proxies.

    When all three mispricing proxies are included simultaneously as regressors, each enters
with a coefficient and t-statistic very similar to when included just by itself. These all-
inclusive regressions, reported in columns 4 and 8 of Table 6, also add two additional variables
that control for potential effects of the business cycle and recent stock-market returns, but
neither variable enters significantly. (The two variables are the Chicago Fed National Activity
Index and the return on the CRSP value-weighted market index over the previous 12 months.)
The combined ability of the three mispricing proxies to explain variance in AvgT urnt is
substantial: the R2 exceeds that of the trend-only regression by 0.324.24 Overall, the results
make sense: funds trade more when there is more mispricing.

  What mispricing are funds exploiting? To see whether funds trade based on well-known
market anomalies, we regress the returns of eleven such anomalies, as well as their composite
return, on lagged average fund turnover. The eleven anomalies, whose returns we obtain from
Stambaugh, Yu, and Yuan (2012), involve sorting stocks based on two measures of financial
distress, two measures of stock issuance, accruals, net operating assets, momentum, gross
profitability, asset growth, return on assets, and the investment-to-assets ratio. We find no
significant slopes on average turnover. To the extent that funds trade more when there is
  24
    If we exclude the time trend from the regressions, we find results similar to those reported in Table 6.
V olatility and Liquidity continue to enter significantly with the same signs as in Table 6, and the business
cycle and market return remain insignificant. The only difference relates to Sentiment, whose coefficient
retains the positive sign but loses statistical significance in the regression that involves AvgT urn (it remains
significant in the regression that involves F undT urn). This evidence suggests that Sentiment is better at
capturing deviations of AvgT urn from its trend than in capturing the raw variation in AvgT urn.



                                                       27
more mispricing, they are exploiting mispricing beyond these eleven anomalies.

  Finally, we consider the role of stock market turnover in explaining AvgT urnt. We
measure market turnover as total dollar volume over the previous 12 months divided by
total market capitalization of ordinary common shares in CRSP. Market turnover reflects
trading by all entities, including mutual funds, so it could potentially be related to AvgT urnt.
It could also be related to Sentimentt, which is constructed as the first principal component
of six variables that include NYSE turnover. However, when we add market turnover to
the all-inclusive specification in column 8 of Table 6, it does not enter significantly, whereas
the slope on Sentimentt remains positive and significant. The other two mispricing proxies
also retain their signs and significance, and the remaining variables remain insignificant. In
short, adding market turnover does not affect our inferences in Table 6.


5.3. Predicting Fund Performance

Given its significant link to the mispricing proxies, it is natural to ask whether the common
component of fund turnover helps predict fund performance. In fact, a positive relation
between the common component and future performance can be motivated directly within
our model. In the model, optimal fund turnover, Xt∗ from equation (5), results solely from
the fund’s decision to change the composition of its portfolio. In the data, however, inflows
and outflows of investors’ capital also give rise to trading by the fund. The reported turnover
measure that we observe empirically, X̃t , abstracts from flow effects, but only imperfectly,
so it is not precisely equal to Xt∗ . There could also be other reasons why a fund’s observed
turnover could differ from its true, optimally chosen value. In other words, we observe

                                        X̃t = Xt∗ + ut ,                                     (23)

where ut denotes the measurement error. We assume that ut has mean zero and is un-
correlated with Xt∗ . With many funds in the market, an additional explanatory variable
useful in addressing this error-in-variable problem is the cross-sectional average turnover,
which we denote by X t . Intuitively, since turnover comoves across funds, average turnover
contains additional information about a fund’s true turnover beyond the information in our
imperfect F undT urn measure. We assume that there are sufficiently many funds that the
measurement errors in turnover diversify away when computing X t . Let

                                       Xt∗ = βX X t + φt ,                                   (24)

and assume that φt is uncorrelated with X t and that the residuals φt , ut , and t+1 are mutually
uncorrelated. Let σu2 and σφ2 denote the variances of ut and φt , respectively. Consider the

                                               28
linear regression of the fund’s return Rt+1 on fund turnover X̃t and average turnover X t :

                                  Rt+1 = θ̂0 + θ̂1X̃t + θ̂2 X t + et+1 .                                (25)

As we show in the Appendix, the slope coefficients have probability limits
                                                              !
                                                        σφ2
                                         θ1 =                 b                                         (26)
                                                    σφ2 + σu2
                                                              !
                                                     βX σu2
                                         θ2 =                 b.                                        (27)
                                                    σφ2 + σu2
Both θ1 and θ2 are positive as long as b from equation (11) and βX from equation (24) are
positive, which is consistent with the data (see Tables 1 and 5). Moreover, the coefficient on
average turnover (θ2) is large when the measurement error in turnover is large (i.e., σu2 large)
and when the commonality in turnover is large (i.e., σφ2 small). Given our strong evidence of
commonality, our model suggests a role for average turnover in predicting fund performance.

    We find such a role in the data. We run a panel regression of the gross benchmark-
adjusted fund return (GrossRi,t ) on average lagged turnover, with fund fixed effects. We de-
note average lagged turnover, or the average of F undT urnj,t−1 across j 6= i, by AvgT urnt−1.25
Column 1 of Table 7 reports the slope from the regression of GrossRi,t on AvgT urnt−1.26
The slope is positive and significant (t = 2.25), indicating that the common component of
fund trading helps predict individual fund performance. The magnitude of the estimate,
0.00784, implies substantial economic significance. Given the time-series standard deviation
of AvgT urnt−1, 0.076, a one-standard-deviation increase in the variable translates to an
increase in expected return of 0.71% per year (= 0.00784 × 0.076 × 1200).

    The information in AvgT urnt−1 about a fund’s subsequent performance is undiminished
by conditioning on the fund’s own turnover. Column 4 of Table 7 shows that the coeffi-
cient and t-statistic for AvgT urnt−1 are little changed by controlling for F undT urni,t−1.
Similarly, the significance of the slope on F undT urni,t−1 is little changed by controlling for
AvgT urnt−1. The fund’s performance is predictable by both average turnover and the fund’s
own turnover. In the context of our model, we find θ̂1 > 0 and θ̂2 > 0 in equation (25).
  25
      We omit the i subscript from AvgT urni,t−1 because excluding fund i from the average makes very little
difference. Note that AvgT urnt−1 uses only information available before month t because it is the average of
turnovers computed over 12-month periods that end before month t. It is thus reasonable to use AvgT urnt−1
to predict performance in month t. Also note that the notation for time subscripts is complicated by the fact
that funds report turnover only annually. In Section 5.1, we use the notation AvgT urnt to denote average
turnover across funds’ 12-month fiscal periods that contain month t. That notation is slightly inconsistent
with the notation in this section because given our definition of F undT urni,t, the contemporaneous average
turnover in Section 5.1 is the average of F undT urni,t+11 across i. We prefer to use the notation AvgT urnt
(instead of AvgT urnt+11 ) in Section 5.1 to emphasize the contemporaneous nature of the analysis in that
section. We hope the reader will pardon this slight abuse of notation.
   26
      The regressions in Table 7 exclude a time trend, but the results are very similar if we include one.


                                                     29
   The above discussion suggests the predictive power of average turnover is due to common-
ality in turnover. Since this commonality is stronger among funds with similar characteristics
(recall Table 5), the predictive power of average turnover might improve if the average is
computed across only similar funds. To examine this hypothesis, we regress GrossRi,t on
AvgT urnSimt−1.27 Column 2 of Table 7 shows that the slope on AvgT urnSimt−1 is posi-
tive and significant (t = 3.69), and column 5 shows that it remains so when controlling for
F undT urni,t−1. In column 6, we consider the regression in which both average turnovers are
included, along with F undT urni,t−1. In this horserace, AvgT urnSimt−1 remains positive
and significant whereas AvgT urnt−1 turns insignificant. The variable that better captures
commonality in turnover is thus more important in predicting fund performance.

   We have shown that a fund’s performance is predictable not only by the fund’s own
turnover but also by the average turnover of other funds, especially similar funds. We have
motivated this result in the context of our model, based on the commonality in turnover
and measurement error. The turnover of other funds can also predict performance for other
reasons that are outside the model. For example, in the model, funds always trade optimally,
but suboptimal trading can also create a predictive role for AvgT urnt−1, as we explain next.

   Suppose that funds trade suboptimally, so that only a fraction of a typical fund’s turnover
involves exploiting true profit opportunities. Also suppose that funds’ profit opportunities
are positively correlated. This setting can arise, for example, if some stocks are mispriced
while others are not, funds trade both types of stocks (the latter erroneously), and the
degree of mispricing in the former stocks varies over time in a way that many funds can
exploit. In this setting, as long as funds’ deviations from optimal trading are approxi-
mately uncorrelated, heavier trading by other funds indicates more mispricing. Therefore,
not only F undT urni,t−1 but also AvgT urnt−1 can predict performance. F undT urni,t−1 is
higher—and fund i’s subsequent performance is better—when fund i’s own manager identifies
more profit opportunities. When many managers identify such opportunities, AvgT urnt−1 is
higher, and there is more mispricing in general. Even when a fund’s own manager does not
identify unusually many opportunities in a given period, the opportunities he does identify
are likely to be more profitable if there is generally more mispricing in that period.

   The same story can also explain why AvgT urnSimt−1 drives out AvgT urnt−1 in column
6 of Table 7. If trading by other funds signals the presence of greater mispricing, then
heavier trading by funds similar to one’s own could signal greater mispricing that is especially
relevant. In other words, heavier trading by less-similar funds could be less relevant to one’s
own fund. This possibility is consistent with our evidence that the turnover of one’s own
 27
      As we did for AvgT urnt−1 , we exclude fund i from the average yet omit the i subscript.


                                                      30
fund typically comoves more with the turnover of similar funds.



6. Conclusions

We develop a model of fund trading in the presence of time-varying profit opportunities. The
model’s key implication is a positive time-series relation between an active fund’s turnover
and its subsequent benchmark-adjusted return. We find strong support for this implication
in a comprehensive sample of equity mutual funds. Funds exhibit an ability to identify time-
varying profit opportunities and adjust their trading activity accordingly. This time-series
relation between turnover and performance is stronger than the cross-sectional relation, as
our model predicts. The model also predicts a stronger time-series relation for funds trading
less-liquid stocks. Indeed, we find a stronger relation for small-stock funds and small funds.
We also find a stronger relation for funds with higher fees, consistent with such funds having
greater skill in identifying time-varying profit opportunities.

   We provide strong evidence of commonality in mutual fund turnover. Turnover’s common
component, average turnover, is positively correlated with mispricing proxies. Funds trade
more when investor sentiment is high, when cross-sectional stock volatility is high, and when
stock market liquidity is low, consistent with funds identifying more profit opportunities
in periods when mispricing is more likely. The common component of turnover positively
predicts fund returns, even controlling for the fund’s own turnover. This predictive ability of
average turnover is consistent with an individual fund’s observed turnover being a noisy proxy
for the fund’s true turnover. Turnover’s common component helps capture a fund’s true
turnover and thereby helps predict the fund’s performance. Average turnover’s predictive
ability is also consistent with suboptimal trading by funds, where only some trades exploit
true profit opportunities. Whatever true opportunities a fund does identify are likely to
be more profitable when turnover’s common component is high. Commonality in turnover
is especially high among funds sharing similar characteristics, and a fund’s performance is
predicted even more strongly by the average turnover of similar funds.

   Heavier trading by funds when mispricing is more likely underscores the role of active
management in the price discovery process. While the active management industry may not
provide superior net returns to its investors (consistent with both theory and evidence), it
creates a valuable externality. The combined trading of many funds helps correct prices and
thereby enables more efficient capital allocation. French (2008) characterizes his estimated
cost of active management as a societal cost of price discovery. Stambaugh’s (2014) calibra-
tion of a general equilibrium model implies that active management corrects a large portion

                                              31
of the mispricing that would otherwise exist in the presence of noise traders. Our results
support this view of active management’s societal value, given our evidence that funds have
skill and that they more actively apply that skill when mispricing is more likely.

   Our study could be extended in several directions. For example, while we relate funds’
turnover to their future performance, it could also be interesting to relate turnover to fund
flows. Such analysis would reveal whether fund investors are aware of turnover’s ability to
predict returns. In the Berk and Green (2004) model, investors respond to fund returns,
but our results suggest that they might also benefit from responding to turnover. Another
promising direction is to go beyond turnover and analyze the funds’ trading activity in more
detail. For example, one could analyze changes in fund holdings or adjust turnover for non-
discretionary trading. Such analysis could potentially produce even more powerful predictors
of future fund performance. Finally, finding exogenous variation in profit opportunities
and funds’ ability to exploit them would help identify any causal relations between fund
performance, trading, and mispricing. We leave these challenges for future work.




                                             32
Appendix.

       The Pooled Fixed-Effects Slope Estimator for an Unbalanced Panel
          as a Weighted Average of Single-Equation Slope Estimators


    Here we derive a result supporting the interpretations of the time-series and cross-
sectional slopes in Table 1 as weighted averages of fund-by-fund and period-by-period re-
gressions. The result also sheds light on the well-known estimator of Fama and MacBeth
(1973). Consider the fixed-effects panel regression model

                                                   yij = ai + bxij + eij ,

where i takes N different values in the data. Let mi denote the number of observations
whose first subscript is equal to i. For each i, define

  yi : mi × 1 vector of yij observations,

  xi : mi × 1 vector of xij observations,

  ιi : mi × 1 vector of ones.

Also define the sample variance of the elements of xi ,
                                                                             !2
                                                          x0 xi ι0 xi
                                                 σ̂x2i   = i − i                       ,
                                                           mi   mi

and the single-equation least-squares estimator,
                             "         #
                                 âi
                                           = (Xi0 Xi )−1 Xi0 yi, where Xi = [ιi xi ] .
                                 b̂i

Note that the slope coefficient b̂i can be written as
                                                                                   !
                                                       1         x0iyi
                                                 b̂i = 2               − x̄i ȳi       ,                      (28)
                                                      σ̂xi       mi

where x̄i and ȳi are the sample means of xi and yi , respectively (i.e., x̄i = ι0i xi /mi and
ȳi = ι0i yi /mi ). For the pooled sample, define
                                                               
                        ι1       0         ···    0       x1                                         
                
                                                 ..            
                                                                
                                                                               y1                    x1
                       0        ι2                .      x2                 .                   . 
              X=       ..                 ..              ..   ,       y =  .. 
                                                                             
                                                                                   ,          x =  .. 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         ,
                                                               
                        .                  . 0             .                 yN                    xN
                        0 ···              0 ιN xN




                                                                    33
and the least-squares estimator
                                                                
                                                  â1
                                                 . 
                                                 .. 
                                                      = (X 0 X)−1 X 0 y .                                          (29)
                                                     
                                                 âN 
                                                        b̂


Proposition A1. The fixed-effects slope estimator b̂ obeys the relation
                                                                        N
                                                                        X
                                                                 b̂ =          wi b̂i ,                              (30)
                                                                        i=1

where
                                                               mi σ̂x2i
                                                        wi = PN           .                                          (31)
                                                              k=1 mk σ̂xk
                                                                        2




Proof. First observe
                                                                                  
                                         ι01        0        ···    0                                   
                                                                   ..    ι1 0 · · · 0 x1
                                        0       ι02                 .                ..               
                                                                       0 ι            . x2            
                             0          ..                  ..              2                         
                         XX      =       .                      . 0     .
                                                                                   .        ..           
                                                                       .          .. 0                
                                                                   0    .                 .           
                                        0                         ιN 
                                                                           0 · · · 0 ιN xN
                                         x01 x02             · · · x0N
                                                                                                    
                                         m1                 0        ···               0    ι01 x1
                                   
                                                                                      ..            
                                                                                                     
                                          0            m2                              .   ι02 x2   
                                          ..                        ..                        ..    
                                 =         .                             .   0                 .                   (32)
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                           0    ···                  0     mN ι0N xN                
                                         ι01 x1 ι02 x2               · · · ιN xN x0x
                                                                            0
                                     "                  #
                                         D v
                                 =                           ,
                                         v0 q

and therefore
                         "                                                                                   #
           0    −1           D−1 + D−1 v(q − v 0D−1 v)−1 v 0D−1 −D−1 v(q − v 0 D−1 v)−1
        (X X)        =                                                                                           .   (33)
                                 −(q − v 0D−1 v)−1v 0D−1          (q − v 0D−1 v)−1

Next observe that the ith element of the vector D−1 v contains the sample mean of the
elements of xi ,                                       
                                   (ι01 x1)/m1        x̄1
                                         ..            
                        D−1 v =                =  ..  = x̄ ,                 (34)
                                          .       . 
                                    0
                                  (ιN xN )/mN        x̄N
and that

                     q − v 0D−1 v = x0x − x̄0Dx̄

                                                                              34
                                      = x01x1 + · · · + x0N xN − m1 x̄21 − · · · − mN x̄2N
                                                            !                               !
                                              x01 x1      2                  x0N xN       2
                                      = m1            − x̄1 + · · · + mN            − x̄N
                                               m1                              mN
                                      = m1σ̂x21 + · · · + mN σ̂x2N .                                                          (35)

Also,
                                                                                               
                                          ι01    0         ···    0                    ι01 y1
                                                                 ..    y1                      
                                
                                         0      ι02                 
                                                                   .            
                                                                                   
                                                                                         ι02 y2   
                                                                                                  
                              0          ..               ..          y2
                                                                                
                                                                                 =        ..    
                             Xy=          .                   . 0       ..                .     .                         (36)
                                                                                             
                                                                     .          ι0 y         
                                         0                      ιN  y
                                                                  0                 N N          
                                                                           N
                                          x01 x02          · · · x0N                     x0 y
The last element of the pooled least-squares estimator in (29) can now be computed by
pre-multiplying the vector in (36) by the last row of the matrix in (33), using (34) and (35)
and then (28), to obtain
                                               −1
   b̂ =         m1σ̂x21 + · · · + mN σ̂x2N             (−x̄1ι01 y1 − · · · − x̄N ι0N yN + x01 y1 + · · · + x0N yN )
                                               −1
        =       m1σ̂x21 + · · · + mN σ̂x2N             [(x01y1 − m1x̄1ȳ1 ) + · · · + (x0N yN − mN x̄N ȳN )]
                                                       "                         !                                       !#
                                            −1                 x01y1                                x0N yN
        =       m1σ̂x21   + ··· +   mN σ̂x2N            m1             − x̄1ȳ1 + · · · + mN                 − x̄N ȳN
                                                                 m1                                    mN
                                               −1 h                                        i
        =       m1σ̂x21 + · · · + mN σ̂x2N              m1σ̂x21 b̂1 + · · · + mN σ̂x2N b̂N
            N
            X
        =         wi b̂i .
            i=1

Q.E.D.

   We can now interpret the time-series coefficient in the upper-left cell of Table 1. Let bbi
denote the estimated slope from the time-series regression in equation (17). Then bb from
equation (20) is given by
                                                                 N
                                                                 X
                                                            b
                                                            b=         wibbi ,                                                (37)
                                                                 i=1

where the weights wi are given by

                                                              Tiσb 2
                                                       wi = PN xi 2 ,                                                         (38)
                                                             n=1 Tn σb xn

Ti is the number of observations for fund i, and σb x2i is the sample variance of Xi,t−1 across t.

   Similarly, we can interpret the cross-sectional coefficient in the bottom-right cell of Table
1. Let bbt denote the slope from the cross-sectional regression of Ri,t on Xi,t−1 estimated at
time t. Then bb from equation (22) obeys the relation
                                                                 T
                                                                 X
                                                           b
                                                           b=          wtbbt ,                                                (39)
                                                                 t=1


                                                                  35
where the weights wt are given by

                                                                     Nt σb x2t
                                                              wt = PT                ,                                       (40)
                                                                    s=1 Ns σ   b x2s

Nt is the number of observations at time t, and σb x2t is the sample variance of Xi,t−1 across
i. The relation in equation (39) is very general and therefore of independent interest. It
provides an explicit link between panel regressions with time fixed effects and pure cross-
sectional regressions. It also sheds light on the well-known estimator of Fama and MacBeth
(1973), which is an equal-weighted average of bbt . The Fama-MacBeth estimator is a special
case of equation (39) if the panel is balanced (i.e., Nt = N for all t) and the cross-sectional
variance of Xi,t−1 is time-invariant (i.e., σb x2t = σb x2 for all t).


                       Proof of Statements in Equations (26) and (27)


   We now prove the statements related to equations (26) and (27) from Section 5.3. Com-
bining equations (11) and (24) gives

                                              Rt+1 = a + bβX X t + bφt + t+1 ,                                              (41)

and combining (23) and (24) gives

                                                      X̃t = βX X t + φt + ut .                                               (42)

The probability limits of the estimated regression slope coefficients in (25) are given by
                  "        #       "                                                 #−1 "                      #
                      θ1                 Var(X̃t )      Cov(X̃t , X t )                      Cov(Rt+1 , X̃t )
                               =                                                                                    .        (43)
                      θ2                Cov(X̃t , X t )  Var(X t )                           Cov(Rt+1 , X t )
      2
Let σX̄ denote the variance of X t . Equations (41) and (42), along with the assumptions that
all quantities on the right-hand sides of those equations are mutually uncorrelated, allow
(43) to be simplified as
         "        #            "                                             #−1 "                      #
                                    2 2
             θ1                    βX σX̄ + σφ2 + σu2 βX σX̄
                                                           2                            2 2
                                                                                     b(βX σX̄ + σφ2 )
                      =                      2           2                                    2
             θ2                         βX σX̄         σX̄                              bβX σX̄
                                                      "                                          #"                      #
                                                            2                2                           2 2
                              1                            σX̄        −βX σX̄                         b(βX σX̄ + σφ2 )
                      =                                        2   2 2
                         2    2
                        σX̄ (σφ + σu2 )                   −βX σX̄ βX σX̄ + σφ2 + σu2                           2
                                                                                                         bβX σX̄
                                          2
                                                             
                                          σφ
                                        2
                                        σφ +σu2       b       
                      = 
                                       
                                                2
                                                              .
                                                                                                                            (44)
                                              σu
                                   βX        2 +σ 2
                                            σφ
                                                          b
                                                  u




                                                                        36
                                Panel A: Stock Size Categories                                 Panel B: Stock Value−Growth Categories
                          1.4                                                            1.4
                                                                                                       Growth
                          1.2                                                            1.2           Blend
                                                                                                       Value
       Average Turnover




                                                                      Average Turnover
                           1                                                              1

                          0.8                                                            0.8

                          0.6                         Small Cap                          0.6
                                                      Mid Cap
                          0.4                         Large Cap                          0.4

                            1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                             1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010



                                Panel C: Fund Size Categories                                  Panel D: Fund Expense Ratio Categories
                          1.4                                                            1.4
                                    Small                                                               Low
                          1.2       Medium                                               1.2            Medium
                                    Large                                                               High
       Average Turnover




                                                                      Average Turnover

                           1                                                              1

                          0.8                                                            0.8

                          0.6                                                            0.6

                          0.4                                                            0.4

                            1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010                             1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010




Figure 1. Average Turnover Across Fund Categories. Each panel splits funds
into three categories and plots the time series of category-level average turnover. Aver-
age turnover in month t is the equal-weighted average turnover across category funds in
the 12-month period that includes month t. Panel A compares small-cap, mid-cap, and
large-cap funds; we use Morningstar’s stock-size classification. Panel B compares growth,
blend, and value funds; we use Morningstar’s value-growth classification. Panel C catego-
rizes funds according to their size, splitting the sample each month into terciles based on
their lagged assets under management. Panel D categorizes funds according to their expense
ratio, splitting the sample each month into terciles based on their lagged expense ratio. We
drop months containing less than ten funds in the category, and we drop all months before
those months to avoid discontinuous lines. Data are from 1979–2011.




                                                                 37
                                           1
          Average Turnover
                             0.9


                             0.8


                             0.7


                             0.6

                                      Jan 1980   Jan 1990           Jan 2000   Jan 2010




                                                       Sentiment
                                                       Volatility
                                                       Liquidity
                             Normalized value




                                      Jan 1980   Jan 1990           Jan 2000   Jan 2010




Figure 2. Average Turnover, Sentiment, Volatility, and Liquidity over time.
Panel A plots the time series of AvgT urnt, the equal-weighted average turnover across sam-
ple funds in the 12-month period that includes month t. Panel B plots the time series of
Sentiment (from Baker and Wurgler, 2007); V olatility (the cross-sectional standard devia-
tion in monthly stock returns); and Liquidity (the level of aggregate liquidity from Pástor
and Stambaugh, 2003).




                                                            38
                                   Table 1
      Turnover-Performance Relation in the Cross Section and Time Series
The table reports the estimated slope coefficients from four different panel regressions of GrossRi,t
on F undT urni,t−1 . GrossRi,t is fund i’s net return plus expense ratio minus Morningstar’s des-
ignated benchmark return in month t. F undT urni,t−1 is fund i’s turnover for the most recent
fiscal year that ends before month t. The four regressions differ only in their treatment of fixed
effects. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics clustered by sector × month are in parentheses, where
“sector” is defined as Morningstar style category. Data are from 1979–2011. There are 285,897
fund-month observations in the panel.


                                                      Month Fixed Effects
                         Fund Fixed Effects            No         Yes
                              Yes                     0.00123    0.00106
                                                       (6.63)     (6.77)
                              No                      0.00040    0.00030
                                                       (1.92)     (1.61)




                                                 39
           Table 2: Heterogeneity in the Turnover-Performance Relation
This table shows how the slope of fund performance on lagged turnover varies across funds. Each
panel contains results from two regressions, one without controls, one with. The dependent variable
in all regressions is GrossRi,t, fund i’s net return plus expense ratio minus Morningstar’s designated
benchmark return in month t. We tabulate the slope coefficients for F undT urni,t−1 interacted with
three dummy variables for the categories denoted in each panel’s first row. The dummy variables
vary within funds in Panels C and D, so we include these dummies as additional regressors. All
regressions include fund fixed effects. The specifications with controls also include F undT urni,t−1
interacted with the following variables: dummies for small-cap and large-cap funds (except in
Panel A), dummies for growth and value (except in Panel B), dummies for small and large fund
size (except in Panel C), and dummies for low and high expense ratio (except in Panel D). The
tabulated slopes in specifications with controls can therefore be interpreted as the slopes for a
medium-sized, medium-expense ratio, blend fund in Panel A (for example). Heteroskedasticity-
robust t-statistics clustered by sector × month are in parentheses, where “sector” is defined as
Morningstar style category. Data are from 1979–2011.


                                Panel A: Stock Size Categories
                Small Cap     Mid Cap Large Cap Small - Large              Controls
                 0.00313      0.00143    0.00091        0.00222              No
                  (5.87)       (2.88)     (4.72)         (3.92)
                 0.00205      0.00056    0.00030        0.00175               Yes
                  (3.53)       (1.08)     (0.81)         (3.05)

                          Panel B: Stock Value-Growth Categories
                  Growth     Blend       Value    Growth–Value Controls
                  0.00147   0.00141     0.00125      0.00021     No
                   (5.06)    (5.45)      (4.66)       (0.54)
                  0.00070   0.00056     0.00061      0.00009     Yes
                   (1.28)    (1.08)      (1.23)       (0.24)

                                 Panel C: Fund Size Categories
                   Small       Medium      Large     Small–Large           Controls
                  0.00186      0.00086    0.00043       0.00143              No
                   (7.56)       (3.74)     (1.46)        (4.11)
                  0.00143      0.00056    0.00030       0.00113               Yes
                   (2.69)       (1.08)     (0.54)        (2.82)

                            Panel D: Fund Expense Ratio Categories
                    High      Medium        Low       High–Low     Controls
                  0.00170     0.00094     0.00058      0.00112       No
                   (6.38)      (4.62)      (2.84)       (4.06)
                  0.00130     0.00056     0.00034      0.00096       Yes
                   (2.35)      (1.08)      (0.65)       (3.35)



                                                 40
Table 3: Properties of Fund Turnover and Performance Across Fund Categories
This table contains summary statistics on fund turnover (F undT urn) and returns in the full sample
(Panel A) as well as in categories of funds formed on Morningstar’s stock-size categories (Panel
B), Morningstar’s value-growth categories (panel C), monthly terciles of fund assets (Panel D), and
monthly terciles of fund expense ratios (Panel E). When counting funds per category, we assign each
fund to the category in which it most often appears. The volatility of F undT urn equals the stan-
dard deviation of fund-demeaned F undT urn. The next column shows the correlation between the
current and previous year’s fund-demeaned turnover, pooling all fund/years. For the F undT urn
variables, we test for differences across fund categories by reporting the heteroskedasticity-robust
t-statistics clustered by fund and year. For return variables, we test for differences across categories
by reporting the heteroskedasticity-robust t statistic clustered by Sector × month and (since we
omit fund fixed effects) fund. Data are from 1979–2011.

                                                                        Average benchmark-
  Funds               Number      Fund turnover (fraction/year)     adjusted return (%/month)
  included            of funds   Average Volatility Autocorr.        Gross           Net
                                         Panel A: Full Sample
  All                   2722      0.850       0.450       0.507      0.0499        -0.0465
                                   Panel B: Stock Size Categories
  Small-Cap              545      0.932       0.405       0.440      0.1770         0.0775
  Mid-Cap                533      1.017       0.513       0.528     -0.0055        -0.0966
  Large-Cap             1399      0.762       0.425       0.506      0.0443        -0.0535
  Small – Large                   0.170      -0.020      -0.066      0.1327         0.1310
  (t-statistic)                   (4.75)     (-1.00)     (-2.11)     (2.31)         (2.34)
                               Panel C: Stock Value-Growth Categories
  Growth                1121      1.016       0.504       0.520      0.1084         0.0153
  Blend                  779      0.741       0.398       0.504      0.0260        -0.0748
  Value                  577      0.636       0.344       0.410      0.0089        -0.0877
  Growth – Value                  0.381       0.160       0.110      0.0995         0.1030
  (t-statistic)                  (12.82)     (7.69)      (2.10)      (1.90)         (1.98)
                                   Panel D: Fund Size Categories
  Small                 1260      0.908       0.478       0.422      0.0673        -0.0310
  Medium                 805      0.897       0.464       0.496      0.0580        -0.0465
  Large                  655      0.759       0.410       0.603      0.0276        -0.0620
  Small – Large                   0.149       0.068      -0.181      0.0397         0.0310
  (t-statistic)                   (5.39)     (3.95)      (-5.35)     (2.48)         (2.02)
                               Panel E: Fund Expense Ratio Categories
  High                  1028      0.979       0.512       0.491      0.0879        -0.0552
  Medium                 838      0.839       0.425       0.520      0.0394        -0.0596
  Low                    856      0.730       0.380       0.495      0.0228        -0.0455
  High – Low                      0.249       0.131      -0.004      0.0650        -0.0097
  (t-statistic)                   (7.79)     (6.68)      (-0.14)     (3.54)        (-0.53)




                                                  41
       Table 4: Correlations of Average Turnover Across Fund Categories
This table shows the pairwise correlations between the time series plotted in Figure 1. The
table’s four panels correspond to Figure 1’s four panels.


        Stock Size  S    M         L      Stock Value-Growth      G    B       V
        Small      1.00                   Growth                 1.00
        Mid        0.65 1.00              Blend                  0.72 1.00
        Large      0.59 0.54      1.00    Value                  0.60 0.82    1.00

        Fund Size     S    M       L      Fund Expense Ratio  L    M           H
        Small        1.00                 Low                1.00
        Medium       0.54 1.00            Medium             0.68 1.00
        Large        0.52 0.44    1.00    High               0.61 0.48        1.00




                                            42
                      Table 5: Commonality in Fund Turnover
The dependent variable is turnover of fund i in the fiscal year that includes month t
(F undT urni,t). The regressors are averages of turnover across funds j 6= i in month t.
AvgT urn is the average across all funds, AvgT urn Stock Size is the average across funds in
the same stock-size category as fund i, AvgT urn Stock V G across funds in the same stock
value-growth category as fund i, AvgT urn F und Size across funds in the same size-tercile
category as fund i, and AvgT urn F und Exp across funds in the same expense ratio-tercile
category as fund i. AvgT urnSim is the average across funds in the same stock-size, fund-
size, and expense-ratio category as fund i. All regressions include fund fixed effects. We
compute robust t-statistics clustering by fund and calendar year. Data are from 1979–2011.


                               (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)
      AvgT urn                0.651     0.120    0.473     0.162     0.186     0.401
                              (8.65)    (0.98)   (3.08)    (1.48)    (1.91)    (5.09)

     AvgT urn Stock Size                0.535
                                        (5.27)

     AvgT urn Stock V G                          0.180
                                                 (1.28)

     AvgT urn F und Size                                   0.527
                                                           (6.03)

     AvgT urn F und Exp                                              0.487
                                                                     (7.01)

     AvgT urnSim                                                                0.284
                                                                                (7.35)
     Observations            303,933   271,888   271,888   303,564   285,897   263,645
     Within-fund R2 (%)        1.28     1.83      1.38       1.81     1.84       2.27




                                            43
                           Table 6: What Explains Turnover?
The dependent variable in columns 1–4 is F undT urni,t, fund i’s turnover during the fiscal
year that includes month t. The dependent variable in columns 5–8 is AvgT urnt, the average
turnover across funds in month t. Sentimentt, measured in month t, is from Baker and
Wurgler (2007, JEP). V olatilityt is the cross-sectional standard deviation of CRSP stock
returns in month t. Liquidityt is the month-t level of aggregate liquidity from Pástor and
Stambaugh (2003). Business Cyclet is the Chicago Fed National Activity Index in month t.
Market Returnt is the return on the CRSP market portfolio from months t − 12 to month
t − 1. T ime T rendt equals the number of months since January 1979. We estimate columns
1–4 as an OLS panel regression with fund fixed effects, clustering by fund and calendar year.
We estimate columns 5–8 as a Newey-West time-series regression using 60 months of lags.
Columns 1–4 show within-fund R2 values. R2 − R2 (trend only) equals the R2 from the given
regression minus the R2 from a regression on the time trend only. Data are from 1979–2011.
t-statistics are in parentheses.



                         Dependent variable: F undT urnit         Dependent variable: AvgT urnt
                          (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)    (6)      (7)       (8)
 Sentimentt             0.0361                      0.0238      0.0531                    0.0487
                        (3.35)                      (2.98)      (3.17)                    (4.65)

 V olatilityt                     0.746               0.538              0.938               0.809
                                  (7.78)              (5.58)             (7.23)              (7.98)

 Liquidityt                                 -0.193    -0.0889                     -0.212    -0.138
                                            (-4.55)   (-3.96)                     (-4.14)   (-4.58)

 Business Cyclet                                      -0.0127                               -0.00334
                                                      (-1.99)                                (-0.66)

 M arket Returnt                                      -0.0342                               0.0171
                                                      (-1.26)                               (0.34)

 T ime T rendt          0.0000    -0.0001   -0.0001   -0.0001   0.0006   0.0004   0.0005    0.0005
                         (0.06)   (-0.57)   (-0.81)   (-0.47)   (5.21)   (3.88)   (3.44)    (5.20)
 R2                      0.002     0.007     0.001     0.010    0.524    0.541     0.377    0.677
 R2 − R2 (trend only)    0.002     0.007     0.001     0.010    0.171    0.188     0.024    0.324
 Observations           267,025   275,543   275,543   267,025    372      382       382      372




                                               44
      Table 7: Relation Between Fund Performance and Average Turnover
The dependent variable in each regression model is GrossRi,t , fund i’s net return plus expense
ratio minus Morningstar’s designated benchmark return in month t. AvgT urni,t−1 is the
lagged average turnover across funds j 6= i. AvgT urnSimi,t−1 is the lagged average turnover
across funds j 6= i that are in the same stock-size, fund-size, and expense-ratio category as
fund i. F undT urni,t−1 is fund i’s lagged turnover. All regressions include fund fixed effects.
Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics clustered by sector × month are in parentheses. Data
are from 1979–2011.

                              (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)
        AvgT urni,t−1       0.00784                           0.00785             0.00575
                             (2.25)                            (2.20)              (1.48)

       AvgT urnSimi,t−1                0.00327                          0.00306   0.00195
                                        (3.69)                           (3.26)    (2.50)

       F undT urni,t−1                              0.00123   0.00107   0.00127   0.00121
                                                     (6.63)    (6.53)    (7.37)    (7.39)
        Observations        310,908    286,738      285,897   285,897   263,645   263,645




                                               45
                                    REFERENCES

Alexander, Gordon J., Gjergji Cici, and Scott Gibson, 2007, Does motivation matter when
   assessing trade performance? An analysis of mutual funds, Review of Financial Studies
   20, 125–150.
Amihud, Yakov, and Ruslan Goyenko, 2013, Mutual fund’s R2 as predictor of performance,
  Review of Financial Studies 26, 667–694.
Avramov, Doron, and Russ Wermers, 2006, Investing in mutual funds when returns are
   predictable, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 339–77.
Baker, Malcolm, Lubomir Litov, Jessica A. Wachter, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2010, Can mutual
   fund managers pick stocks? Evidence from their trades prior to earnings announcements,
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 1111–1131.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
   returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645–1680.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2007, Investor sentiment in the stock market, Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 21, 129–157.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. van Binsbergen, 2015, Measuring skill in the mutual fund
   industry, Journal of Financial Economics 118, 1–20.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
   rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.
Brown, Keith C., W. Van Harlow, and Laura T. Starks, 1996, Of tournaments and temp-
   tations: An analysis of managerial incentives in the mutual fund industry, Journal of
   Finance 51, 85–110.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
   52, 57–82.
Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, The value of active
   mutual fund management: An examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund man-
   agers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 343–368.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
   mutual fund performance? American Economic Review, 94: 1276-1302.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2008, Liquidity and market
   efficiency, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 249–268.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2011, Recent trends in trad-
   ing activity and market quality, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 243–263.
Christoffersen, Susan E.K., and Sergei Sarkissian, 2011, The demographics of fund turnover,
   Journal of Financial Intermediation 20, 414–440.
Cohen, Randolph, Joshua Coval, and Ľuboš Pástor, 2005, Judging fund managers by the
   company they keep, Journal of Finance 60, 1057–1096.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing:
   Board connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951–979.


                                            46
Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new
   measure that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329–3365.
Cremers, Martijn, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro P. Matos, and Laura T. Starks, 2016, Indexing
   and active fund management: International evidence, Journal of Financial Economics,
   forthcoming.
Cremers, Martijn, and Jianping Mei, 2007, Turning over turnover, Review of Financial
   Studies 20, 1749–1782.
Cremers, Martijn, and Ankur Pareek, 2016, Patient capital outperformance: The invest-
   ment skill of high active share managers who trade infrequently, Journal of Financial
   Economics, forthcoming.
Cremers, Martijn, Antti Petajisto, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2013, Should benchmark indices have
   alpha? Revisiting performance evaluation, Critical Finance Review 2, 1–48.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Stefan Engström, and Paul Söderlind, 2000, Performance and charac-
   teristics of Swedish mutual funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35,
   409–423.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Jonathan Reuter, 2014, Mutual fund performance and the incentive
   to generate alpha, Journal of Finance 69, 1673–1704.
Edelen, Roger M., Richard Evans, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 2007, Scale effects in mutual fund
   performance: The role of trading costs, Working paper, University of California at Davis.
Edelen, Roger M., Richard Evans, and Gregory B. Kadlec, 2013, Shedding light on “invisible”
   costs: Trading costs and mutual fund performance, Financial Analysts Journal 69, 33–44.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin Jay Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, Efficiency with
   costly information: A reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of
   Financial Studies 6, 1–22.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2010, Luck versus skill in the cross section of
   mutual fund returns, Journal of Finance 65, 1915–1947.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2014, A five-factor asset pricing model, Journal
   of Financial Economics 116, 1–22.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical
   tests, Journal of Political Economy 81, 607–636.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance in
   changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425-461.
Field, Laura Casares, and Michelle Lowry, 2009, Institutional versus individual investment
    in IPOs: The importance of firm fundamentals, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 44, 489–516.
French, Kenneth R., 2008, Presidential address: The cost of active investing, Journal of
   Finance 63: 1537–1573.
Glode, Vincent, 2011, Why mutual funds “underperform,” Journal of Financial Economics
   99, 546–559.



                                            47
Glode, Vincent, Burton Hollifield, Marcin Kacperczyk, and Shimon Kogan, 2012, Time-
   varying predictability in mutual fund returns, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Goldstein, Michael A., Paul Irvine, and Andy Puckett, 2011, Purchasing IPOs with commis-
   sions, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 1193–1225.
Gormley, Todd A., and David A. Matsa, 2014, Common errors: How to (and not to) control
   for unobserved heterogeneity, Review of Financial Studies 27, 617–661.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An analysis of
   quarterly portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393–416.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual funds,
   Journal of Finance 51, 783–810.
Huang, Jennifer, Clemens Sialm, and Hanjiang Zhang, 2011, Risk shifting and mutual fund
  performance, Review of Financial Studies 24, 2575–2616.
Investment Company Institute, 2014, Investment Company Fact Book.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–1964, Journal
   of Finance 23, 389–416.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
   actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2011.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, Unobserved actions of mutual
   funds, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379–2416.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2014, Time-varying
   fund manager skill, Journal of Finance 69, 1455–1484.
Kacperczyk, Marcin, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Laura Veldkamp, 2016, A rational theory
   of mutual funds’ attention allocation, Econometrica, forthcoming.
Karolyi, G. Andrew, Kuan-Hui Lee, and Mathijs A. Van Dijk, 2012, Understanding com-
   monality in liquidity around the world, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 82–112.
Koch, Andrew, Stefan Ruenzi, and Laura Starks, 2016, Commonality in liquidity: A demand-
   side explanation, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Kosowski, Robert, 2011, Do mutual funds perform when it matters most to investors? US
   mutual fund performance and risk in recessions and expansions, Quarterly Journal of
   Finance 1, 607–664.
Kyle, Albert S., and Anna A. Obizhaeva, 2013, Market microstructure invariance: Theory
   and empirical tests, Working paper, University of Maryland.
Lan, Chunhua, Fabio Moneta, and Russ Wermers, 2015, Mutual fund investment horizon
   and performance, Working paper, University of New South Wales.
Lo, Andrew W., and Jiang Wang, 2000, Trading volume: definitions, data analysis, and
   implications of portfolio theory, Review of Financial Studies 13, 257–300.
Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 1971 to 1991,
  Journal of Finance 50, 549–572.




                                            48
Moskowitz, Tobias J., 2000, Discussion, Journal of Finance 55, 1695–1703.
Nimalendran, Mahendrarajah, Jay R. Ritter, and Donghang Zhang, 2007, Do today’s trades
   affect tomorrow’s IPO allocations? Journal of Financial Economics 84, 87–109.
Nofsinger, John R., and Richard W. Sias, 1999, Herding and feedback trading by institutional
   and individual investors, Journal of Finance 54, 2263–2295.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002, Mutual fund performance and seemingly
    unrelated assets, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315–349.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
    Journal of Political Economy 111, 642–685.
Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2012, On the size of the active management
    industry, Journal of Political Economy 120, 740–781.
Pástor, Ľuboš, Robert F. Stambaugh, and Lucian A. Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active
    management, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23–45.
Perold, André F., and Robert S. Salomon, 1991, The right amount of assets under manage-
   ment, Financial Analysts Journal 47, 31–39.
Reuter, Jonathan, 2006, Are IPO allocations for sale? Evidence from mutual funds, Journal
   of Finance 61, 2289–2324.
Reuter, Jonathan, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2013, How much does size erode mutual fund perfor-
   mance? A regression discontinuity approach, Working paper, Boston College.
Ritter, Jay R., and Donghang Zhang, 2007, Affiliated mutual funds and the allocation of
   initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 86, 337–368.
Sensoy, Berk A., 2009, Performance evaluation and self-designated benchmark indexes in the
   mutual fund industry, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 25–39.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 2014, Investment noise and trends, Journal of Finance 69, 1415–1453.
Stambaugh, Robert F., Jianfeng Yu, and Yu Yuan, 2012, The short of it: Investor sentiment
   and anomalies, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 288–302.
Sun, Yang, 2014, The effect of index fund competition on money management fees, Working
   paper, University of Hong Kong.
Wermers, Russ, 1999, Mutual fund herding and the impact on stock prices, Journal of
  Finance 54, 581–622.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stock-
  picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55, 1655–1695.
Yan, Xuemin, 2008, Liquidity, investment style, and the relation between fund size and fund
   performance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43, 741-768.
Yan, Xuemin, and Zhe Zhang, 2009, Institutional investors and equity returns: Are short-
   term institutions better informed?, Review of Financial Studies 22, 893–924.




                                            49
