NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PERVERSE IMPACT OF CALLING FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION
J. Scott Holladay
Michael K. Price
Marianne Wanamaker
Working Paper 20706
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20706
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

Thanks to seminar participants at the University of North Carolina Greensboro and the University
of Colorado Environmental and Resource Workshop. Holladay and Price gratefully acknowledge financial
assistance from the Howard B. Baker Center for Public Policy at the University of Tennessee. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by J. Scott Holladay, Michael K. Price, and Marianne Wanamaker. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Perverse Impact of Calling for Energy Conservation
J. Scott Holladay, Michael K. Price, and Marianne Wanamaker
NBER Working Paper No. 20706
November 2014
JEL No. D04,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
In periods of high energy demand, utilities frequently issue "emergency" appeals for conservation
over peak hours to reduce brownout risk. We estimate the impact of such appeals using high-frequency
data on actual and forecasted electricity generation, pollutant emission measures, and real-time prices.
Our results suggest a perverse impact; while there is no significant reduction in grid stress over superpeak
hours, such calls lead to increased off˙-peak generation, CO2 emissions, and price volatility. We postulate
that consumer attempts at load shifting lead to this result.
J. Scott Holladay
515 Stokely Management Center
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
jhollad3@utk.edu
Michael K. Price
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
mprice25@gsu.edu

Marianne Wanamaker
Department of Economics
University of Tennessee
524 Stokely Management Center
Knoxville, TN 37996
and NBER
wanamaker@utk.edu

1

Introduction

Policymakers and public utilities frequently rely upon targeted messages as a means to encourage energy conservation amongst residential and commercial customers. While varied in
content, such appeals generally reflect one of two primary concerns. “General” appeals for
conservation seek to impact long-term consumer behavior and emerge largely from concerns
with environmental quality, the desire to delay investments in new generation or transmission capacity, or regulatory pressures to promote energy efficiency.1 The second type of
conservation call focuses on short-run behavioral adjustments during specific hours on a
given day. These “emergency” calls are issued by individual utilities or independent system
operators (ISOs) during times of heavy energy usage. Such calls aim to promote reductions
in energy consumption during periods where the expected demand for power approaches
maximum grid capacity. During such periods, even small reductions in energy use would
have a significant impact on reliability and the threat of wide-scale brownouts.
While the effects of the first type of call are well documented (see, e.g., Costa & Kahn
(2013), Ayres et al. (2013), Dolan & Metcalfe (2011), Reiss & White (2008) or Allcott (2011)),
there is surprisingly little work exploring the effect of emergency calls.2 This study attempts
to fill this gap in the literature. We estimate the effect of emergency calls for conservation on
hour-by-hour patterns of energy generation in the Washington D.C. - Baltimore metropolitan
area from the late spring of 2000 through the end of summer in 2010. As our data include
information on pollutant emissions, we are also able to calculate the effect of emergency calls
on CO2 emissions in the broader generation footprint serving this area.
Our identification strategy exploits the fact that the ability of public utilities in the
D.C.-Baltimore area to reach consumers depends crucially on the decisions of local media to
broadcast emergency calls. The two public utilities in our sample, Baltimore Gas and Electric
(BGE) and Potomac Electricity Power Company (PEPCO), disseminate conservation calls
via a press release shared with local media outlets in advance of an anticipated peak event
day. As column space and reporter time are largely fixed in the short-run, not all press
1

Examples of such appeals include a recent advertising campaign by the AD Council and U.S. Department
of Energy urging individuals to save money by saving energy (http://www.adcouncil.org/News-Events/PressReleases/U.S.-Department-of-Energy-and-Ad-Council-Launch-Consumer-Education-Campaign-SaveMoney-By-Saving-Energy2) and OPOWER’s Home Energy Report letters - normative messages designed to
promote household level energy efficiency. Similar appeals have been used to promote water conservation.
See, e.g., Ferraro & Price (2013); Ferraro et al. (2011).
2
A notable exception is Ito et al. (2013) who study the impact of social pressure on the success of
emergency conservation appeals in an experimental setting.

2

releases are rebroadcast by local media outlets.3 The media thus introduce a degree of
randomness in whether consumers observe the utility’s call for conservation. Accordingly,
we use media coverage as an instrument and compare patterns of use across days where a
press release is rebroadcast with those where a release goes unreported. Although we do not
observe all media stories, we use the number of media stories we do observe as a proxy for
the intensity of overall media coverage.
The critical assumption in our empirical strategy is that the decisions of media outlets
to publish calls for energy conservation are independent of expected usage or generation.
If media publication decisions are driven by a factor unobserved to us, but relevant for
energy use, our results are biased. Controls for two potential confounders – air quality alerts
and previous heat-related news stories – do not substantially change our estimates. We
also evaluate the validity of the identifying assumption using market measures of day-ahead
demand and price. Conditional on the publication of a press release, future media coverage
is not discernably correlated with day-ahead load or day-ahead prices.4
Empirical results indicate that media coverage of an emergency call is associated with
distortions in the temporal profile of generation. We find a statistically significant increase
in generation over the late morning and early afternoon hours on media days. Between
the hours of 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., our estimates suggest that hourly generation increases
between 5.8 and 16.9 megawatts, on average, at each generating boiler in our sample. For
perspective, the increased production over these hours represents approximately 2.6 to 7.7
percent of available capacity at these boilers.5 Conversely, we find no discernible reduction in
generation and grid stress over so-called “superpeak” (evening) hours. In total, we estimate
that per boiler production increases by 58.1-76.5 megawatts (or approximately 1 percent of
available generating capacity) over the course of a full media day. Valuing the increase in
generation using prevailing prices on days with a press release but no media coverage, we
calculate the cost of a media event to be in the neighborhood of $1.0 million. The lack
of generation reduction at superpeak implies no commensurate benefit from brownout risk
3

See Eisensee & Strömberg (2007) for a similar identification strategy.
The determinants of the gap between day-ahead and real-time prices are not well understood. Borenstein
et al. (2008) finds that market power played a large role in the real-time (RT) to day-ahead (DA) price gap
during the California energy crisis. Mansur (2008) uses a different methodology to suggest that start up
and shut down costs of power plants could be more important than market power. He further finds that
our study region is a particularly efficient market. Whatever the source, interpreting the gap between day
ahead and real time prices should be done with caution. While the changes in the level of the RT-DA gap
are consistent with our hypothesis, we do not take a stand on the source of the average RT-DA price gap.
We discuss this issue further in 2.
5
The average boiler in our sample has the capacity to produce 220 megawatts of electricity per hour.
4

3

reduction.
This documented higher load on media days should intuitively translate into increases in
CO2 emissions, but the impact depends on the carbon content of the marginal fuel source
(Zivin et al. (2014)). We estimate net increases in CO2 emissions on media days of between
35 and 63 tons per boiler. Using current EPA estimates of the social cost of carbon, this
translates into approximately $147,000 to $161,000 increase in unpriced externalities per
media event.
Although our primary results are based on generation data, we show that electricity
demand (load) over the course of the day follows the pattern of generation, including on
days with highest grid congestion when excess supply cannot be exported nor shortages
imported. In the morning hours, load values peak along with generation before tapering
off in the afternoon hours. The load estimates indicate significant usage reductions only in
the late evening, mirroring the generation results. Additionally, estimated impacts of media
coverage on “exports” (the difference in generation and load) from our region are insignificant
for 23 of 24 hours.
Data on hourly real-time prices for energy traded on the wholesale market (operated
by the Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland interconnection (PJM), a regional transmission
operator (RTO)), indicate significant price spikes in the morning hours coincident with generation spikes. We hypothesize that the morning usage peak spurs utilities to ramp up power
across the grid, turning on last-resort sources of power such as low-efficiency coal, gas, and
oil-based generators.6 Estimated impacts by fuel source corroborate this view.
Taken jointly, our results provide a cautionary tale - emergency conservation calls appear
to have perverse effects. Although we have no data on consumer behavior, we conjecture
that consumers may respond to emergency calls by attempting to “store” cooling in advance
of possible brownout conditions or otherwise front-load energy consumption into non-peak
hours.7 Similar usage shifts are documented in Lang & Okwelum (2014) in advance of direct
load control interventions and in Herter et al. (2007) and Herter & Wayland (2010) in advance
of critical-peak pricing events. In our case, these shifts bring high-cost generation online early
6

Natural gas prices were at current market lows only in the last two years of our sample period.
In the absence of high frequency data on household electricity consumption, which does not exist over this
time period, we cannot confirm that the observed generation changes are driven by this specific consumer
behavior. Other plausible explanations consistent with this data are difficult to imagine; they require a
specific pattern of load shifting across the hours of the day and that the shifts are unanticipated by the
energy trading market. The day-of timing of the conservation calls is consistent with the inability of the
market to anticipate such shocks in day-ahead markets. We consider other candidate explanations in a series
of robustness checks.
7

4

in the day, and these plants continue to fire throughout the day, causing significant shifts in
real-time prices and increased pollution levels. We observe no commensurate reduction in
grid stress over peak hours, and hypothesize that consumers simply fail to reduce peak-hour
demand following the morning spikes.
We believe our results speak to the ability of non-price interventions to promote behavioral change in energy usage.8 Whereas prior work focused on the long-run behavioral
impacts of such interventions, ours is the first to focus on demand management and response to day-of emergency conservation requests. Moreover, ours is the first to examine the
environmental impacts as measured by CO2 emissions.
The evidence that consumers increase energy consumption after being exposed to conservation calls, yet no reduction in generation is observed over critical superpeak hours, is
consistent with an emergent body of work in environmental economics exploring the unintended consequences of various policy actions.9 Whereas previous work focuses on leakages
that arise through the spatial reallocation of actions, our paper highlights that a similar
phenomena can arise as agents shift actions temporally.

2

Identification Strategy

To estimate whether “emergency” appeals for conservation have a measurable impact on
consumer behavior, we exploit random variation in consumers’ exposure to utility press
releases calling for same-day conservation. PEPCO and BGE issue press releases calling
for energy conservation whenever their model of day-ahead load suggests peak usage above
some critical threshold.10 As utilities lack the ability to quickly disseminate such calls to
their customer base, they must rely upon media coverage to spread the call to the target
population. Importantly, however, media outlets do not always pick up the press release and
publish the associated conservation calls. This may happen for a number of reasons, and we
do not attempt to model editorial decisions. We refer readers to Eisensee & Strömberg (2007)
for evidence that higher priority news crowds out media coverage of international natural
8

See, e.g., Luyben (1982); Schultz et al. (2007); Goldstein et al. (2008); Costa & Kahn (2013); Allcott
(2011); Ayres et al. (2013); Harding & Hsiaw (2012); Jessoe & Rapson (2012); Reiss & White (2008); Lang
& Okwelum (2014).
9
See, e.g., Fowlie (2009); Davis & Kahn (2010); Goulder & Stavins (2011); Goulder et al. (2012).
10
In issuing a release, PEPCO and BGE rely on day-ahead models of peak load which forecast next-day
usage as a function of current and lagged weather, day-ahead weather predictions, and controls for prevailing
economic and energy market conditions. The threshold above which utilities publish a press release is contextspecific and therefore regression discontinuity approaches cannot be used to assess the impact of these calls
for conservation.

5

disasters. If editors (and producers) treat emergency press releases in a similar fashion, then
variation in media reporting of emergency calls is a function of other news events likely
orthogonal to electricity demand.11 We return to the exogeneity of media days later in the
paper.
We exploit this variation in editorial decision-making to identify the impact of mediaissued calls for conservation on subsequent energy generation. We assume that days with
utility-issued press releases and no media coverage reflect the counterfactual pattern of generation and measure the impact of media as the difference in production relative to this
baseline. To net out other confounding sources of variation across these days, we include
a full complement of controls for time-of-day, day-of-week, and month-of-year, in addition
to weather and energy market conditions. Our identification strategy thus relies upon the
assumption that the decision of a media outlet to publish a utility’s call for conservation
is orthogonal to expected energy generation after conditioning on other factors that could
influence production. We note that we have at our disposal the variables used by PJM
to predict day-ahead load, i.e., all variables the systems operator views as determinant of
energy usage.12
This empirical strategy allows us to abstract from two important confounding factors.
First, we need not assume that press releases themselves are random. Indeed, we can employ a predictive model including observed weather and electricity market data to identify
press release days with reasonable certainty. Rather, we rely on the assumption that the
media’s decision to publish a press release is uncorrelated with expected consumer demand,
conditional on the press release being issued and a vector of observable control variables. In
effect, the press release activity creates a perfect “match”: days when the treatment (media
coverage) did not happen but had high probability of doing so. We provide evidence in
support of this claim below. Second, the empirical strategy allows us to abstract from other
demand-control methods utilized by the utilities, including load shaving programs which
incentivize participating customers to reduce usage on high-demand days.13 We include con11

Data in Eisensee & Strömberg (2007) include 5,212 natural disasters over 34 years and eighteen Olympic
Games of several days’ duration. They show that media reports of international natural disasters are significantly less frequent during the Olympic Games and use the Games as an instrument for overall coverage.
Our data contain 28 press releases with 8 media coverage days, a far smaller sample with which to infer
editorial decision making processes. Still, as an example, the Crandall Canyon Mine collapse on August 6,
2007 occurred two days prior to a press release on August 8 which was not picked up by media. Similarly, an
August 4, 2005 press release went unreported the day after fourteen marines died in the worst IED attack
in Iraq to date. Again, with a sample this small, we do not attempt to fully explain the editorial decision
and must rely on other evidence to support exogeneity of media coverage.
12
We control for some socio-economic variables such as GDP and population using fixed effects.
13
Utilities in the region employ a number of load shaving programs, to directly control consumers’ energy

6

trols for peak shaving implementation but also note that in order for peak shaving to bias
our estimates, it must be correlated with the intensity of media activity and not just with
press release distribution itself. In addition, if peak shaving activity is positively correlated
with media activity, and if peak shaving successfully reduces usage, it will bias our results
towards finding a reduction in generation on press release days with media coverage. We
find no such reductions in the empirical results.
The critical remaining assumption is that the media’s decision to publish a press release
is uncorrelated with expected generation, conditional on a battery of weather and energy
market controls and fixed effects for time-of-day, day-of-week, and month-of-year. In support
of this claim, we provide three pieces of evidence. Later in the paper, we evaluate additional
scenarios whereby media coverage may be a proxy for some other factor correlated with
energy usage and find little evidence in favor of these scenarios.
First, consider Table 1 which contains the dates and outlets of media conservation calls
on press release days. As noted in the table, conditional on at least one outlet reporting
a conservation call, there is substantial variation in which outlets report any given release.
For example, while the Washington Post covers 5 of the 28 press releases in our data, the
Associated Press (AP) only wrote a story following one of these releases. Similarly, while
the local NBC broadcast affiliate (WBAL) provided coverage for four of the 28 releases, the
local ABC affiliate reported none (and is therefore not listed in Table 1.) The variation
with which any given outlet picks up a press release is consistent with our assumption that
the decision of any outlet to publish a release is orthogonal to expected energy generation
patterns. If not, one would expect to observe systematic patterns of coverage both within
and across outlets.
Second, for selection to bias our results it must be the case that, conditional on the set of
controls listed above, media coverage of a release is correlated with expected consumer use.
This would be the case if media outlets reported a utility’s call to consumers only on those
days where the counterfactual subsequent pattern of energy consumption is systematically
different from that expected on days where releases are not picked up.14 But we find such an
usage during times of high demand, primarily by cycling HVAC systems remotely. These programs are
marketed to consumers under a variety of names including “PeakRewards” and “Energy Wise Rewards”
and provide consumers with monthly bill credits in exchange for providing the utilities with the option of
reducing their electricity consumption a limited number of times during the summer. The utilities shared
with us the dates these programs were implemented, and we included two types of controls for these events.
Emergency peak shaving events occur when the utility requires all participants to have their HVAC cycle off.
Economic events occur when the utilities give consumers the possibility of opting out of the cycling event.
14
For example, utilities may lobby for press coverage on some days but not others and, if so, our identifying
assumption would be violated.

7

argument unlikely given the data in Figure 1 which presents the hour-by-hour difference in
real-time (RT) and day-ahead (DA) prices across days where press releases are and are not
picked up by a media outlet.15 The figure plots these difference (averaged across PEPCO
and BGE zones) on press release days, bifurcated by days with and without media coverage.
As indicated in the figure, the absolute values of the plotted differences are systematically
greater on days with media coverage than on those without coverage, particularly after 8
a.m. Between that hour and the end of the day, price gaps are substantially larger on media
days with the hour ending at 12 noon as the sole exception. These price gaps on media days
closely mirror generation and real-time price distortions we identify later in the paper.
Borenstein et al. (2008) find that market power played a large role in the RT-DA price
gap during the California energy crisis, a result which leads us to interpret the price gaps
in Figure 1 with caution. Although the exercise of market power has been estimated to
be far lower than that in Borenstein et al. (2008) in general and in the region covered by
our paper in particular (Mansur, 2008), the possible existence of market power implies that
day-ahead prices do not necessarily reflect aggregate expectations over future prices.16 In
addition to potential market power, the RT-DA price gap could be a function of start up
and shut down costs of power plants. Whatever the source, and provided market power is
not imparted differently and startup/shutdown costs not dissimilar on days preceding media
events relative to days where press releases go unreported, the changes in the level of the
RT-DA gap are consistent with our identification assumptions and subsequent estimated
outcomes.
The mechanism by which market power would be exercised differently in the day-ahead
market on media versus non-media days is difficult to imagine. Day-ahead markets clear
well in advance of press release issuance and media decisions, rendering implausible any
sort of back-channel effect whereby energy traders are tipped off to future media events.
On the other hand, there may be some unobserved factor that dictates the behavior of
monopsonistic market participants, media coverage of utility press releases, and subsequent
energy usage. Although we cannot definitely rule out the existence of such an unobserved
factor, all empirical specifications contain a rich set of controls and are robust to the inclusion
of both air quality measures and the overall public discussion of heat and humidity as
15

Hour labels in all figures and tables are hour-ending so that hour 8, for example, is the hour between
7:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
16
Mansur (2008) uses a different methodology which explicitly accounts for cost convexities and
startup/shutdown costs. This methodology generates estimated market inefficiencies far below those in
Borenstein et al. (2008). Mansur also finds BGE to be one of the least inefficient utilities in the PJM region.

8

proxied by media stories on the same. They are also robust to day-ahead grid constraint
expectations.17 The RT-DA price gap may provide support for our identification assumption,
but because the price gap may not be dictated purely through efficient market outcomes, we
provide a variety of other evidence to justify our empirical approach.
The significance of the RT-DA price differences documented in Figure 1 are evaluated in
the first column of Table 2, which estimates the effect of media coverage on the difference
between day-ahead and real-time prices, controlling for day-of-week, month-of-year, hour,
weather and energy market variables.18 The results indicate positive and significant differences early in the day, again in hours 10 through 13, and negative and significant differences
in hours 16, 17, 19 and 20.
Third, as additional evidence that media and non-media press release days have similar ex
ante usage expectations, we institute a “placebo test” on day-ahead load projections at the
PJM market level.19 If media coverage is a result of expectations about energy usage on highdemand days, those expectations would appear in day-ahead load projections. We estimate
the “impact” of media coverage on these day-ahead load projections and find significant
negative effects on ex ante expectations for hours 8 and 9 along with higher expected usage
in hour 22. (Table 2, Column 2). Because these effects are (a) not systematic and (b)
the opposite sign of what we find for media days in day-of generation regressions to follow,
we conclude that the day-ahead market fails to predict the load differences on media and
non-media press release days documented below.
Finally, we note that if selection in media coverage is the driving force behind our results,
this implies either (a) the editors of the Washington Post have additional information that
allows them to predict day-ahead use above and beyond that available to traders on the
wholesale electricity market or (b) that these editors act on other information that is correlated with the usage patterns we document but not incorporated into day-ahead markets.20
We view the first option as extremely unlikely given the sophistication of the day-ahead
energy trading market. And although we cannot completely rule out the possibility that
editors are acting on information correlated with subsequent usage, our results are robust
to controlling for air quality and air quality alerts and to controlling for other heat-related
media stories - two quantities which might influence editorial decisions.
17

Results available upon request. We also note that the changing pattern of electricity consumption driven
by media calls for conservation could affect existing market power or start-up/shut-down inefficiencies in the
energy market causing changes in the RT-DA price gap.
18
See Section 4.1 for a detailed list of control variables and estimating equation.
19
Unfortunately, day-ahead load forecasts are not available at the utility level.
20
This assumes prices in the BGE market are not driven by monopsonistic behavior.

9

3

Data

To estimate the impact of appeals for conservation during periods of high electricity demand
on grid reliability, we compile data from a variety of sources. We focus on the Washington
DC-Baltimore area media market and obtain the dates of press releases encouraging energy
conservation by searching the press release archives for the two utilities that service this
area: BGE and PEPCO. Both utilities purchase electricity on the PJM wholesale market.
We limit our search to announcements made between May 2000 and August 2010. From
these archives, we are able to identify 28 days for which at least one of the utilities issued a
press release calling for conservation.21
We next combine this data with information drawn from media search engines - Factiva,
Lexis-Nexis, and Proquest - to identify stories in media outlets (print, web, radio, TV) in
the DC - Baltimore area mentioning keywords related to electricity conservation and the
local utilities.22 The results of these searches were next filtered by hand to gather only
those containing direct calls for conservation. Using this procedure, we identify 10 days on
which such stories appear.23 We do not view Table 1 as an exhaustive list of press release
coverage. It is quite likely that outlets make reference to conservation requests in ways that
our internet search results cannot capture, e.g., as part of weather reports that are not part
of online indices. If so, this introduces noise in our treatment variable and attenuation bias
in our estimates.
The Environmental Protection Agency maintains hourly data of the power generation
and pollution emissions of every fossil fuel burning generator capable of producing at least
25 megawatts (MW) of power. From the EPA data, we obtain information on the hourly
production and emissions for 65 boilers at 16 different power plants located throughout the
state of Maryland. We augment the hourly production data to include a rich set of plant
level characteristics including primary fuel source and a measure of productivity (generation
as a fraction of nameplate capacity). We include all power plants in Maryland for which
21

Press releases in the archives are dated for the day that conservation is requested. Conversations with
media relations at PEPCO and BGE suggest that there are no informal back-channels through which press
releases are circulated to media members in advance of the official announcement by the utility itself.
22
The keywords used in this search included PJM, PEPCO, BGE, energy, demand, peak, power, reduce,
cut back, save, use, utilize, electricity, and root words conserve-, prudent-, and wise-.
23
There are 21 days with media stories calling for conservation, but 11 of those are days when there is
no press release calling for conservation. Those days have been excluded from this analysis. The pattern of
usage on those days is similar, but magnitudes are substantially reduced. This may reflect either consumers’
ability to discern days where official press releases have been issued or, more likely, the fact that these
“rogue” media stories do not reflect widespread media coverage across multiple outlets.

10

the EPA reports data to increase the probability of capturing the marginal generators which
may be located outside the immediate DC-Baltimore geographic region.24
Before proceeding we should note that the boilers in our sample account for nearly 82.7
percent of the generating capacity in the state of Maryland.25 Moreover, we do observe
expansions at existing plants that lead to changes over time in the fraction of the state’s
total generation that is included in our final data set. Importantly, however, the omitted
power plants all rely upon fuel sources that tend to have very low marginal costs and thus
serve base load. As such, we would not expect production at the omitted plants to respond
to short-term fluctuations in the electricity market.
We next augment the plant level data with information on weather and the wholesale
electricity market in which BGE and PEPCO participate. The end goal of conservation
calls is to reduce stress, and our focus on generation data allows us to both assess their
effectiveness in doing so and to measure environmental impacts. At the same time, these
calls rely on changes in consumer behavior to achieve their goal, and we incorporate demandside usage data to evaluate their effectiveness on that dimension. Hourly load data are
available from the PJM website and are measured at the zonal level for BGE and PEPCO.
In addition to hourly load, the PJM site provides (i) hourly prices for both the day-ahead and
real-time electricity markets and (ii) hourly day-ahead (predicted) and real-time load data
for the entire PJM footprint.26 Weather data are constructed using the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) online data repository for a weather station at
Baltimore-Washington International Airport. The intervals at which the monitors at BWI
record weather conditions vary over time. We convert this data to an hourly time series by
averaging over all observations within a given hour.
The merged data are a panel of approximately 1.6 million hour-boiler pairs for the years
2000 through 2010. As press releases and media calls only occur between the months of May
and August, we restrict attention to these months for purposes of the empirical analysis.
24

Because zone boundaries do not appear to be publicly available, we rely on the political region and err
on the side of being overly-inclusive. The inclusion of generators that do not respond to changes in DC Baltimore energy demand will also serve to bias our estimates towards finding no result.
25
We do not observe hourly generation at eleven small facilities that fall below the 25 MW cutoff. However,
these plants account for less than 0.5 percent of the state’s overall generation. We also eliminate from our
dataset any power plant that it is not active during the summer months (May-September) of our sample
period. This eliminates a number of steam plants that burn fossil fuel to provide energy for heating needs.
Potentially more problematic, we do not observe hourly production for a hydroelectric power plant and
a nuclear generator with combined capacity of 2150 MW - or 16 percent of the state’s overall capacity.
Fortunately, these facilities likely serve base load and are not marginal electricity generators.
26
Unfortunately, day-ahead load measures are not available at the level of the individual utility - PEPCO
or BGE.

11

Missing data for some boiler-hours bring the estimation sample to 1.4 million hour-boiler
pairs. Table 3 summarizes energy market and weather conditions across all summer days,
days with a press release and no media coverage, and days where a press release is accompanied by media coverage.
As expected, press releases and media coverage are more likely to occur on hot, humid
days when both load and price are higher. Press releases are also more likely to be picked
up on days where lagged temperature is relatively high suggesting that newspapers may be
responding to sustained heat waves as opposed to single day spikes in electricity demand.
We therefore test the robustness of our results to controlling for days of consecutive press
releases and for preceding media stories related to heat. However, there is no difference in
load levels (defined as percentage of yearly max) in the day ahead market on days when
press releases are picked up by the media and those when they are not. Moreover, while
price levels in the day-ahead market are higher on days with media coverage, the resulting
difference is not statistically significant at any meaningful level.

4

Empirical Results

We employ a difference-in-difference estimator to measure the impact of media coverage
on energy production and CO2 emissions. We define an indicator variable for a utility’s
conservation call through a press release on day t, PRt , and another for media coverage of
such an event, MEDIAt . The estimating equation for outcome Y at boiler i at hour h on
day t (Yith ) is:

−−→
−−→
−−→
Yith = αh hour + γp P Rt ∗ hour + γm P Rt ∗ M EDIAt ∗ hour + βXth + ηi + λ + δ + it . (1)
−−→
The hour vector contains an indicator for each of twenty-four hours and the vector Xth
contains weather data and data from the wholesale electricity market for hour h on day t
as listed in the bottom two panels of Table 3. Importantly, the set of controls for weather
and wholesale energy market conditions used in the analysis are based on the process used
by PJM to predict maximum load.27 The specification also includes boiler fixed effects
27

PJM’s forecasting approach is described in their Load Forecasting and Analysis Manual. Following the
PJM approach, we include controls for weather (temperature, dew point, high temperature and tomorrow’s
temperature) and wholesale energy market conditions (hour-specific day ahead load, maximum day ahead
load, next day’s day ahead load and today’s day ahead load as a percentage of the pervious year’s day ahead
load). Moreover, we interact temperature with dew point, temperature with time of day, and time of day

12

(ηi ) along with day-of-week (λ) and month-by-year (δ) fixed effects designed to capture
underlying macroeconomic conditions that may influence aggregate energy consumption.
We also include indicators for demand-control (cycling) hours. Standard errors are clustered
at the boiler level.
The set of fixed effects included in our specification ensures that identification of the
impact of a press release (the vector γp ) comes from differences in outcomes at a given boiler
on a particular day across the different weeks of the month. For example, PEPCO published
a press release calling for conservation on Monday, July 29, 2002. The generation impact
of that press release is estimated by comparing hour-by-hour generation at each boiler in
the state on that Monday compared to the other four Mondays that month - controlling
for weather and day-ahead conditions on the wholesale electricity market. The vector of
interest γm measures the impact of media messaging on conservation and is identified as the
hour-by-hour difference in the impact of a press release on days with and without media
coverage.

4.1

Media Coverage and Electricity Generation

We begin by examining the impact of conservation calls on electricity generation (Genith ).
As a first look, consider Figure 2 which presents the hour-by-hour residuals that arise from
estimating Equation 1 excluding the various media and press release indicators.28 Within the
figure, we bifurcate the resulting residuals on press release days by the value of M EDIAt .
The figure thus depicts the underlying differences in the unexplained variation in hour-byhour energy production across media and non-media days, conditional on a press release
having been issued.
Figure 2 shows a remarkable difference in the pattern of energy use over the course of the
day across media and non-media days. Although there is a similar pattern of usage over the
early hours of the day, usage patterns differ substantially after 7 a.m. - a time when many
consumers likely observe the media story for the first time. On days where press releases go
unreported, usage falls off over the late morning hours before beginning an upward climb at
around 5 p.m. Conversely, media coverage of a press release is associated with no tapering
of usage in the late morning. Instead, media days present a usage pattern with higher usage
with tomorrow’s day ahead load. PJM also incorporates atmospheric pressure, relative humidity and wind
speed in their models. Our results are robust to the inclusion of those variables (see the Online Appendix),
but they are missing for a significant percentage of the observations in our sample and are excluded from
the baseline.
−−−→
28
The estimating equation is Genith = αh hour + βXth + ηi + λ + δ + ith .

13

at every hour between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. and somewhat lower usage after 6 p.m until 11
p.m. when larger deficits are apparent.
To evaluate the statistical significance of these differences, we estimate Equation 1 using
the full sample of summer boiler-hour pairs. The parameters of interest are contained in the
vector γm which provides the hour-by-hour impact of media coverage on resulting energy
generation. Column 1 of Table 4 contains estimates of γm along with the estimated impact
aggregated over (i) the entire day, (ii) peak hours only, and (iii) superpeak hours only.29
Estimates indicate no significant impact of media coverage on generation over the early
morning hours (hour ending between 1 a.m. and 8 a.m.). Although point estimates suggest
that generation for each of these hours on media days is lower than that observed on days
with unreported press releases, none of these differences are significant at meaningful levels.
Such a null result is comforting given that most consumers are unlikely to have been exposed
to media messages during the overnight hours.
Starting with the hour ending at 9 a.m. and running through 3 p.m., our point estimates
suggest that hourly production increases between 8.4 and 16.9 MW over that observed on
days where press releases are not picked up by the media. With the exception of the 3 p.m.
hour, each of these differences is statistically significant at the p < 0.01 level. The estimated
impact on production over these hours is equivalent to approximately 3.8 to 7.7 percent of
the available generating capacity for the boilers in our sample.
The observed increase in morning load would be consistent with the utility’s goals for
brownout risk reduction if accompanied by subsequent reductions in generation during the
superpeak hours. Yet, we observe no such impact over these hours on media days. Between
the hours ending at 4 p.m. and 10 p.m., there is no discernible difference in hourly production
across media and non-media event days. Only during the 11 p.m. and 12 p.m. hours does
generation fall at a statistically significant level.
Aggregated over all superpeak hours, our results suggest a net increase in generation of
11.8 MW per boiler. If we extend this horizon to consider the impact of media calls on peak
generation, our estimates suggest that production rises by nearly 86.6 MW per boiler. Our
data are thus at odds with a pattern of successful load shifting. Higher generation over the
morning hours does not seem to “buy” significant changes in generation during the crucial
high demand hours. In fact, we observe no significant reductions in use on media days until
29

Peak hours are formally defined by PJM as hours 8-23 for trading in the wholesale market. Superpeak
is not defined formally, but is often cited as hours 15-22. Adjusting the range of superpeak hours to other
reasonable definitions - e.g., the 15-19 hour range frequently mentioned in PJM press releases - has no
substantive impact on our conclusions.

14

the very end of the day during the hours ending at 11 p.m. and midnight. Aggregated over
twenty-four hours, our estimates suggest a 58.1 MW increase in production per boiler on
media days.
Although we do not observe consumer-level data, we hypothesize that consumers respond
to calls for conservation by shifting usage earlier in the day but then fail to compensate for
this shift with reductions over peak hours. Consumers may attempt to store cooling or
otherwise shift elective activities to off-peak morning hours, similar to behavior documented
by Lang & Okwelum (2014) in the case of explicit demand management. In the afternoon,
when the electric grid is most at-risk for brownout conditions, consumers take some actions
to increase thermostats or otherwise limit use (as indicated by negative point estimates in
Table 4), but their actions are too weak to significantly impact overall grid stress.
Estimates bifurcated by single-day and consecutive conservation calls (located in Table 8)
indicate that consumers are more successful at reducing load over peak hours for stand-alone
conservation calls or calls that come on the first day in a series, but that some “burnout” may
obtain after consecutive calls.30 On these stand-alone days, evening reductions in generation
are apparent, although not statistically significant. Calls coming on consecutive days, on the
other hand, are characterized by even stronger increases in morning and mid-day generation
and positive point estimates for generation over super-peak hours. See Section 6 for further
discussion of these results. We also observe stronger responses in the morning hours on days
with higher temperature and humidity. (Results not shown, available upon request.)
Alternative explanations for the results highlighted in Table 4 would require factors that
are correlated with both media publication of a conservation call and energy generation. We
examine two possibilities in Section 6 below. First, we control explicitly for the presence
of air quality alerts in addition to underlying air quality index measures to ensure that the
results are not simply masking a correlation between media reports of conservation calls
and air quality alerts which might have encouraged more home energy usage as people stay
indoors on days with such alerts. Second, we control explicitly for media stories related to
excessive heat in the days prior to the observed press release days. In doing so, we ensure
that the results are not driven by correlation between previous media stories on excessive
heat and current reports of conservation calls. In neither case do the additional controls
affect the coefficients presented in Column 1 of Table 4. We also include a variety of lagged
weather variables in our baseline specification in robustness checks in Section 6 and observe
no remarkable change in the estimates.
30

We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this analysis.

15

4.2

Media Coverage and Changes in Carbon Emissions

Intuitively, the additional electricity generation observed on days when press releases are
picked up by the media may have environmental impacts. To ensure compliance with the
Acid Rain Program, the US EPA requires all boilers with capacity in excess of 25 MW
that use fuels with a sulfur content above a critical threshold to install monitors that continuously measure SO2 , NOx , and CO2 emissions. The EPA maintains detailed data on
pollution emissions at the hourly level for all such boilers, and we use this data to identify
the environmental impacts of media calls as reflected in changing emission levels.
Under the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments, SO2 and NOx emissions are subject to
cap-and-trade regulation. As such, there are no economic costs associated with changes in
emissions of these pollutants at any given boiler.31 CO2 emissions, in contrast, are currently
unregulated in our study region. Increased (decreased) emissions at any given source come
at a real economic cost - changes in an unpriced externality. We therefore focus our analysis
on the impact of media calls on subsequent carbon dioxide emissions. To do so, we replace
Genith with a boiler level measure of carbon dioxide emissions per hour (in tons) as the
dependent variable in Equation 1 - CO2ith .
Column 2 of Table 4 details the impact of media calls on hour-by-hour CO2 emissions,
and the estimates mirror those for electricity generation. Although emissions in the overnight
and early morning hours (midnight through 7 a.m.) are lower on media days, the observed
differences are not statistically significant. Starting with the hour ending at 9 a.m. and
running through the 3 p.m. hour, carbon emissions are estimated to be 5.8 to 11.3 tons per
hour greater on media days - differences that are statistically significant at the p < 0.05
level. Between the hours ending at 5 p.m. and 10 p.m., there is little discernible difference
in hourly carbon emissions across media and non-media event days, echoing the generation
results in the first column.
Aggregated over all twenty-four hours, our estimates suggest an approximate 35 ton
increase in carbon dioxide emissions on media days. Using current estimates from the EPA
on the social cost of carbon, this translates into an approximate $89,500 to $160,700 increase
in un-priced externalities per media event. To put this figure in perspective, the average
passenger car in the United States emits approximately 5.1 metric tons of CO2 per year.
Hence, the estimated external costs of a media call for conservation is equivalent to the
damages we would expect if there were an increase of 164,200 cars on the road per event
day.
31

We examine the impact of media conservation calls on SO2 and NOx in the Online Appendix.

16

In considering the external validity of these results, we should note that the emissions
impact in other parts of the country will depend on the carbon content of the marginal fuel
source - a figure that varies both across regions and over the course of a day. For example,
using data on marginal emissions rates for different regions of the U.S. in Zivin et al. (2014)
to construct an hour-by-hour index of carbon intensity, the impact of a similar distortion
in the Midwest would lead to a more than doubling of CO2 emissions and the resulting
un-priced externality. In contrast, if we were to focus on utilities in Texas and the ERCOT
interconnection, the estimated impact on carbon emissions would be reduced by nearly 30
percent.

4.3

Generation by Fuel Type

To better understand the mechanism of generation changes within the PEPCO and BGE
generation footprint, we estimate Equation 1 separately by fuel source (Table 5). In general,
coal-fired power plants have substantial start up and shut down costs, in part because they
must ramp up and down slowly as the coal burning process cannot be switched on or off
instantaneously. For this reason, the most efficient coal-fired plants typically serve base load,
while low efficiency (high cost) boilers are used only as a last resort. Natural gas and oil
fueled plants are more costly to operate due to higher fuel costs, but they can be turned
on and off very quickly to respond to unexpected changes in demand.32 These units are
sometimes called peaking plants. Accordingly, if media coverage of utility press releases
produces unanticipated shifts in energy demand, we expect to see strong impacts on gas and
oil and limited or delayed impacts on coal plants.
Table 5 contains the results of estimating Equation 1 separately for coal, natural gas, and
oil-powered plants. For reference, our baseline generation results from Table 4 are repeated
in the first column. Columns 2-4 contain the estimated impact on each fuel source, and
the estimated impacts line up with these predictions. Natural gas plants respond to the
increased generation on media days by firing at a significantly higher level than days with
press releases that are not picked up, as do oil fired plants. Overall generation (Column 1)
shows significant increases between hours 9 and 15, and early in this window the increases are
met mostly by changes in generation at gas and oil plants (hours 8 through 15 in Columns 3
and 4). By hour 12, small impacts on coal-fired plants are apparent although those increases
are statistically insignificant.
32
See, e.g., Bogorad & Huang (2005). The vast majority of our sample comes before the recent drop in
natural gas prices due to new extraction technologies.

17

Because the marginal production comes primarily from natural gas and oil generating
plants, we expect to see little impact on pollutants emitted at lower levels from these sources
- namely SO2 which is produced in only small quantities in natural gas generation. NOx , on
the other hand, is produced by all fuel sources. Indeed, estimates for γm in Equation 1 where
NOx and SO2 emissions are the dependent variables (not shown) confirm these predictions.33

4.4

Price Effects

In addition to carbon emissions, temporal distortions in energy use following media calls for
conservation are also reflected in real-time prices. We estimate Equation 1 above with the
zonal hourly price data for the PEPCO and BGE zones and report the results in Columns 3
and 4 of Table 4.34 The morning usage spike is reflected in price peaks, beginning at hour 8
and continuing through hour 10. Price increases are apparent throughout the morning hours,
although they become statistically insignificant. Later in the afternoon, as generation begins
to abate, prices fall and, again, this may be the result of unexpected changes in usage. The
estimated price effect becomes negative in both zones in hour 18 as additional generation
brought online to meet the earlier than expected increase in consumption in the morning
hours reduces prices after the peak.

5

Evaluating the Role of Electricity Imports and Exports

Energy supply and demand are necessarily equivalent at any given hour, and the role of the
RTO is to facilitate efficient trades across the region. The estimates of media impacts on
generation in Table 4 are reflective of consumer demand shifts only if “exports” from the
PEPCO and BGE generation footprint are limited. We use the term exports loosely here as
the boilers in our generation sample include those inside the PEPCO and BGE geographic
zones and those on the periphery so that, even in the absence of transmission outside of
the generation footprint, we would always measure positive “net exports” as the difference
between Maryland-wide generation and usage in the PEPCO and BGE zones.
The PEPCO/BGE footprint falls in the eastern corridor from New York through midVirginia, designated by the Department of Energy as the “Mid-Atlantic Critical Congestion
33
34

See detailed results in the Online Appendix.
We cluster errors within days rather than at the boiler level for this specification.

18

Area”, reflecting its high levels of transmission congestion. In addition, PEPCO and BGE
zones, specifically, are the two most highly congested areas in the PJM region, which overall
experiences significant constraints on west-to-east generation transmission.35 Indeed, the
generation congestion credits and load congestion payments paid to BGE and PEPCOarea generators and users were, by far, the highest amongst eighteen PJM zones in 2008,
representing severe limitations on import and export.36
Given these congestion statistics, it is unlikely that inter-regional transmission biases our
results, which are identified off of generation differences on the highest usage days. All the
same, we address the exports issue in two ways. First, we estimate our main results for
regional demand (load) and inter-regional exports. Second, we repeat the analysis in Table
4 for hours in our sample with the highest levels of measured congestion in the region when
imports and exports would have been most unlikely.
Real-time load is available, by hour, for the PEPCO and BGE zones. We sum the load
data over the two zones into a regional load measure to facilitate comparisons with regional
generation and exports results. The estimating equation becomes

−−→
−−→
−−→
Loadth = αh hour + γp P Rt ∗ hour + γm P Rt ∗ M EDIAt ∗ hour + βXth + λ + δ + th

(2)

where t indicates day and h indicates hour. Standard errors are clustered by day. We also
aggregate generation across all power plants in the footprint by hour (Genth ), and estimate
the impact of media coverage on this aggregate generation measure as well as “Net Exports”
(N Xth ), measured as the difference between generation and usage in each hour.
The results are contained in Table 6. Estimates in Columns 1-3 reflect the relationship
between media coverage and generation, load, and net exports, respectively. We expect
results for these variables (measured at the regional level) to be less precisely estimated than
those for generation (measured at the boiler level), but the results remain economically and
statistically significant over the late morning hours. Point estimates for both generation and
load regressions show a run-up in usage across the morning hours which then abate only at
the very end of the day. A significant reduction in usage is apparent in the late evening hours
in Column 2, but over the “superpeak” hours, the total reduction amounts to a miniscule
0.7% and the same reduction is not apparent in highly congested hours. (See Table 7 below.)
35
See U.S. Department of Energy study “National Electric Transmission Congestion Study”, December
2009.
36
Ibid., p.48.

19

Net exports follow a similar pattern as generation, but the values are statistically significant
only at the 2 p.m. hour. Atypical differences between usage and generation on media days
are, then, unlikely contributors to the results documented in Table 4.
As an additional test of the power of interregional exports to drive our results, we limit
the sample to high congestion days when intra-region transmission would have been most
difficult. Congestion is measured as the difference between the price in PEPCO/BGE zones
and the APS zone which serves western Maryland, West Virginia, and eastern Ohio. The
price wedge is indicative of limitations on the ability to move electricity where the demand is
highest. We restrict estimation to hours above the 50th percentile of congestion.37 We then
repeat all analysis for these high-congestion days. Results for both generation and carbon
emissions (Equation 1) are contained in Columns 1-2 of Table 7. The estimated increases
in both generation and carbon emissions are greater under this restriction, and there are no
major changes in our conclusions regarding generation spikes in the morning and reductions
only in the late evening hours. Similarly, Columns 3-5 of Table 7 indicate that the congestion restriction increases the estimated impacts of conservation calls on regional generation
(Genth ) and demand (Loadth ), while the impact on exports (N Xth ) is negligible. Indeed, in
contrast to the small reductions over superpeak indicated in Table 6, the congestion hour
restriction results in no reductions in load over the same hours.
The relationship between media coverage and generation patterns measured in Table 4 is,
then, robust to controls for the possible transport across regional lines and appear to result
from shifts in consumer usage in the local PEPCO and BGE service areas.

6

Robustness Checks and Alternate Explanations

The results above suggest media-driven appeals for conservation lead to increases in energy
generation and carbon emissions in the PEPCO and BGE footprint. Below we implement a
number of robustness checks related to the exogeneity of media days, as well as evaluations
of other possible explanations for the results.
As a first robustness check, we explore whether the intensity of media coverage influences
the temporal pattern of energy demand. Specifically, we explore if the estimated media
37

There are no observations with congestion and media stories or press releases in hour 1. The results
are unchanged using different pricing points and price difference thresholds to define congestions, see the
Online Appendix for details. Hourly congestion prices are published by PJM at the zonal level beginning on
June 1st, 2007. A univariate regression of the PEPCO-APS price spread on the real time congestion price
in PEPCO has an R2 =0.92 from the date that congestion data is published through the end of our sample
period. We take this as evidence that our proxy for congestion serves the intended purpose.

20

effect is greater on days where calls for conservation are picked up by multiple media outlets.
Intuitively, if the observed pattern of usage is driven by a response to media coverage, larger
distortions should be observed on days where multiple outlets publish conservation calls as
it would increase exposure to the underlying message.
To test this hypothesis, we generate a new indicator variable M U LT IMt which equals
one on days where more than one media outlet relayed a conservation call. We then reestimate Equation 1, substituting this new indicator variable for our original indicator of
media coverage, M EDIAt . Note that in doing so, we include in our set of control days those
occasions where only a single media outlet publishes a call for conservation. To the extent
that coverage by a single media outlet is sufficient to distort energy use, the coefficients of
interest (vector γm ) thus provide a lower bound on the effect of increased media coverage on
hour-by-hour energy use.
Estimated values for γm when M U LT IMt is the independent variable are included in
the second column of Table 8 and underscore the assertion that the observed patterns of
usage are driven by a response to media coverage. (The table’s first column is the replicated
baseline from Table 4.) Point estimates are larger across the late morning hours using the
multimedia proxy compared to the baseline results.38
An alternate explanation for the observed patterns of energy use is that media call days
are correlated with other factors that affect energy usage. We cannot rule out this possibility
completely as, given the DA-RT price gap results, this factor is also either presumably
unobserved by day-ahead energy markets or cannot be arbitraged away. Still, we examine
two confounders with a high likelihood of driving media decisions. First, local air quality
and air quality alerts increase the number of individuals who work from home or decide to
stay indoors during normal work hours.39 Because such behavior has little to no impact on
energy usage in the workplace (where usage is impervious to the attendance of workers),
in this case we would expect to see increased energy consumption system-wide over prime
working hours. Although the estimated change in system load is valid under this alternative
explanation, the mechanism is decidedly different if media coverage is simply correlated with
air quality alerts. To assess the validity of such an alternative, we augment our baseline
regression model to include an indicator for days where air quality entered the highest levels
(Code Orange or Code Red) for the Baltimore-DC region as well as the underlying value of
38
The same qualitative pattern of differences arises if we look at the effect of multiple versus any media
coverage on other metrics of interest - real time prices and CO2 emissions. Results available upon request.
39
See Zivin & Neidell (2009) for evidence of behavioral responses to air quality alerts.

21

the air quality index.40 We observe a total of 298 such days in our data. Estimated values
for γm - the hour-by-hour impact of media coverage - under this alternate specification are
included in Column 3 of Table 8. The estimated impact of conservation calls is virtually
unchanged given these additional controls.
A second possible confounder is the presence of other media stories in the days prior to
ones calling for conservation. If media are more likely to cover conservation calls on days
following other media stories related to heat conditions, the estimates in question may be a
response to prior media stories rather than conservation calls per se. We run a media search
similar to the one described above for conservation calls with key words related to heat.41
We then control for the presence of these media stories in day t, day t − 1 and day t − 2.42
Controlling for media stories about heat reduces the magnitude of the increase in generation
over the peak somewhat relative to the baseline as indicated in Column 4 of Table 8. But
the qualitative conclusions are essentially unchanged.
Our next robustness check is designed to control for more complex weather effects based
on PJM’s internal projection tools. To do so, we augment our baseline specification to
include indicator variables for nighttime (hours ending 1 a.m. to 6 a.m.), morning (hours
ending 6 a.m. - noon), afternoon (hours ending noon to 6 p.m.) and evening (hours ending
6 p.m. to midnight) hours that are interacted with measures for cooling degree hours, wind
speed, and weighted lagged cooling degree hours.43 PJM suggests these variables are most
useful in predicting peak daily loads, but we adapt them to our hourly specification as a
robustness check to control for complex weather interactions that could be missed by the
baseline weather specification. Estimates for this model are presented in Column 5 of Table
8 and are similar to those identified in our primary specification.44
Additional evidence that media coverage drives our results comes from a number of days
40

Amongst the set of media articles included in our sample, there are a few that include parallel notification
of “Code Orange” or “Code Red” air quality alerts for the region and calls for caution in outdoor activities
and exercise. Such alerts are targeted at children, the elderly, and those suffering from heart disease or
asthma and other lung diseases. However, two of the calls target the broader population and include appeals
for individuals to “limit driving” or to otherwise avoid public places - including the workplace.
41
We check the same sources for keywords “heat wave”, “high temperatures”, “swelter-”, “record-breaking
temperatures”, “soaring temperatures”, and “excessive heat”, exclusive of news stories also calling for conservation.
42
The results are similar when controlling for these stories in t − 3 and t − 4 as well.
43
“Cooling degree hours” is defined as the difference between the observed hourly temperature and 72
degrees. Lagged cooling hours is defined as 0.75*temph−24 + 0.25*temph−48 .
44
A similar pattern of generation emerges if we restrict our sample to the set of days where the daily high
temperature exceeds 29.5◦ C - the lowest high temperature on a press release day. Results from this model
are included in the Online Appendix.

22

in the sample where media issue a call for conservation that is not representative of an
underlying press release. There are 11 such “rogue” days in our sample. On these dates,
media outlets noted that high temperatures were forecast and urged energy conservation, but
without a nudge from the local utility. If consumers do not distinguish between emergency
calls “sponsored” by local utilities and un-sponsored calls, the impact of these media calls
on consumer behavior should be similar to our baseline estimates. On the other hand, these
calls may not be indicative of broader media coverage, as we have argued for our baseline
results, and the impacts on consumer behavior should be correspondingly smaller. Column
6 of Table 8 contains the estimates for media call days with no corresponding press release.45
These point estimates are muted relative to the baseline results, but the patterns of usage are
similar with higher usage over the mid-day hours and no significant reduction over afternoon
and evening hours.
Finally, to assess the power of repeated media calls for conservation, we compare the
effect of media coverage across days where there were no prior media days (single day events
or first events in a series of events) and those where media releases occur on consecutive
days. 46 Intuitively, one can envision temporal patterns of use in the midst of a prolonged
heat wave that differ substantially from those realized during isolated events caused by
unanticipated/temporary weather shocks. Consumers may initially take care with their
response to conservation calls but “burnout”, i.e., lose interest or motivation, as time goes
on.
The results of estimating Equation 1 for single-day and consecutive media days are presented in Columns 7 and 8 of Table 8. For the consecutive media day results, we drop
single-day media days from the sample, and vice versa, so that identification is identical to
the baseline results. For single day and consecutive day events alike, electricity generation
between mid-morning and mid-afternoon follows a temporal pattern similar to that noted
in the baseline results in Column 1. Stronger load impacts obtain on days with consecutive press releases (Column 6), particularly regarding increased usage in the early morning
45

Including both M EDIA and M EDIA ∗ P R as regressors in Equation 1 does not allow for clean
identification of either if the impact on consumer behavior is the same in both cases. Instead, we augment Equation 1 with an additional term which contains a coefficient on M EDIA − N OP Rt , a value
equal to one when there is a media conservation call with no corresponding press release. With that
control, γm represents the impact of a press release interacted with media days and the coefficient on
M EDIA − N OP R represents the impact of a media day with no associated release. The full equation is
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
−−−→
Yith = αh hour+γp P Rt ∗ hour+γm M EDIA−P Rt ∗ hour+γc M EDIA−N OP Rt ∗ hour+βXth +ηi +λ+δ+it ,
and γc is reported in Column 6.
46
We observe one two-day and one three-day event, indicating 7 media days with no media call immediately
preceding and 3 media calls which are preceded by media calls for the same.

23

and evening, perhaps reflecting burnout. All the same, single-day media events exhibit the
temporal usage pattern evident in our baseline regressions.

7

Conclusion

There is a growing body of literature exploring the effects of targeted messages and similar
non-price interventions on household-level energy use. Taken in its totality, this body of work
underscores the promise of behavioral “nudges” as a means to promote household changes in
energy efficiency. Our study extends this literature by providing the first attempt to measure
consumer response to day-of emergency conservation requests. Our results suggest a perverse
effect. When utility calls for conservation are relayed by the media, we observe significantly
higher generation during the early hours of the day and no compensating reduction over
“superpeak” hours as compared to conservation calls without media coverage. This leads to
an increase in daily production, but no apparent reduction in grid stress.
Our methods also represent an advent in measuring the supply-side impact of demand
management policies in general. The benefit of this approach is that it allows us to not
only estimate the impact of conservation messaging on grid stress, but also to capture the
pecuniary and non-pecuniary effects operating through other channels - prices and CO2
emissions. In this case, we find that the perverse impacts of conservation messaging on
energy consumption spill over into significantly more volatile prices and higher emissions
levels.
Our results provide a word of caution for utilities pursuing real-time demand management. Attempts to alter consumer behavior through public pleas may backfire, particularly
if utility generation strategies fail to respond to consumer use. In our sample, conservation
calls were associated with remarkably increased emissions over the course of the highest use
days. Future work should seek to better understand the household- and commercial-level
decisions leading to these impacts, as well as explore whether optimal generation strategies
over peak periods might serve to mitigate the perverse impacts highlighted within.

24

References
Allcott, H. (2011). Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics,
95 (9-10), 1082–1095.
Ayres, I., Raseman, S., & Shih, A. (2013). Evidence from two large field experiments that
peer comparison feedback can reduce residential energy usage. Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization, 29 (5), 992–1022.
Bogorad, C. S., & Huang, W. S. (2005). Long-term rights for new resources: A crucial
missing ingredient in RTO markets. The Electricity Journal .
Borenstein, S., Bushnell, J., Knittel, C. R., & Wolfram, C. (2008). Inefficiencies and market power in financial arbitrage: A study of california’s electricity markets. Journal of
Industrial Economics, 56 (2), 347–378.
Costa, D. L., & Kahn, M. E. (2013). Energy conservation “nudges” and environmentalist
ideology: Evidence from a randomized residential electricity field experiment. Journal of
the European Economic Association, 11 (3), 680–702.
Davis, L. W., & Kahn, M. E. (2010). International trade in used vehicles: The environmental
consequences of NAFTA. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2 (4), 58–82.
Dolan, P., & Metcalfe, R. (2011). Neighbors, knowledge, and nuggets: Two natural field
experiments on the role of incentives on energy conservation. Working paper, University
of Chicago.
Eisensee, T., & Strömberg, D. (2007). News droughts, news floods, and U.S. disaster relief.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (2), 693–728.
Ferraro, P., Miranda, J.-J., & Price, M. (2011). The persistence of treatment effects with
norm-based policy instruments: Evidence from a randomized environmental policy experiment. The American Economic Review , 101 (3), 318–322.
Ferraro, P., & Price, M. (2013). Using non-pecuniary strategies to influence behavior: Evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics.
Fowlie, M. L. (2009). Incomplete environmental regulation, imperfect competition, and
emissions leakage. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1 (2), 72–112.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint: Using
social norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer
Research, 35 (3), 472–482.
Goulder, L. H., Jacobsen, M. R., & van Benthem, A. A. (2012). Unintended consequences
from nested state and federal regulations: The case of the Pavley greenhouse-gas-per-mile
limits. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 63 (2), 187–207.
25

Goulder, L. H., & Stavins, R. N. (2011). Interactions between state and federal climate
change policies. In The Design and Implementation of US Climate Policy, NBER Chapters, (pp. 109–121). National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Harding, M., & Hsiaw, A. (2012). Goal setting and energy efficiency. Working paper,
Stanford University.
Herter, K., McAuliffe, P., & Rosenfeld, A. (2007). An Exploratory Analysis of California
Residential Customer Response to Critical Peak Pricing of Electricity. Energy, 32 (1),
25–34.
Herter, K., & Wayland, S. (2010). Residential Response to Critical-Peak Pricing of Electricity: California Evidence. Energy, 35 (4), 1561–1567.
Ito, K., Ida, T., & Tanaka, M. (2013). Using dynamic electricity pricing to address energy
crises: Evidence from randomized field experiments. Working paper.
Jessoe, K., & Rapson, D. (2012). Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence from
residential energy use. NBER Working Papers 18344, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Lang, C., & Okwelum, E. (2014). The mitigating effect of strategic behavior on the net
benefits of a direct load control program. Working Paper .
Luyben, P. D. (1982). Prompting thermostat setting behavior: Public response to a Presidential appeal for conservation. Environment and Behavior , 14 , 113–128.
Mansur, E. (2008). Measuring Welfare in Restructured Electricity Markets. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 90 (2), 369–386.
Reiss, P. C., & White, M. W. (2008). What changes energy consumption? Prices and public
pressures. The RAND Journal of Economics, 39 (3), 636–663.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007).
The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological
Science, 18 (5), 429–34.
Zivin, J. G., & Neidell, M. (2009). Days of haze: Environmental information disclosure and
intertemporal avoidance behavior. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
58 , 119–128.
Zivin, J. S. G., Kotchen, M., & Mansur, E. T. (2014). Spatial and temporal heterogeneity
of marginal emissions: Implications for electric cars and other electricity-shifting policies.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Forthcoming.

26

Tables and Figures

27

Figure 1

-200

RT -DA Price Diff ($)
-100
0
100

200

RT-DA Price Differences

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
hour
Media Day

No Media

Note: Differences in the (unconditional) real-time and day-ahead prices on press release
days for which the media does (“Media Day”) and does not (“No Media”) publish the
utility’s press release.

28

29

1
1
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
5

Date

8/8/2001
8/10/2001
7/30/2002
8/1/2006
8/2/2006
8/3/2006
6/9/2008
6/24/2010
7/6/2010
7/7/2010

TOTAL

2

0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
0

Daily Rec.
Capital
Baltimore Annapolis

1

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0

Wash
Times

1

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

AP

4

0
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1

WBAL
TV.com

1

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

NPR

1

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

1

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

Baltimore Washington
Bus. Jour. Bus. Jour.

1
2
2
3
2
1
1
2
2
2

TOTAL

Note: Media stories by date and media outlet. On each date there was a press release from a local utility calling for conservation.
Source: See text.

Wash
Post

Table 1: Media and Press Release Distribution

Table 2: Estimates of γm in Equation (1) for RT-DA Price Differences and Day-Ahead Load
Hour

RT-DA Price

DA Load

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

22.7*
15.8
17.1
23.7**
12.9
4.6
8.8
12.7
14.4
24.3*
39.2***
25.1*
24.2*
-3.8
-9.1
-38.4*
-43.5**
-25.0
-38.9*
-28.5**
-14.2
11.9
-14.3
-22.9

5900.5*
5297.3*
4927.0*
2399.8
1688.2
683.4
678.5
-2634.2**
-2118.2*
-1072.5
-1292.9
-784.0
666.3
-1894.2
359.6
-230.3
420.7
1839.0
1699.4
3846.4
4005.5
4536.3*
2889.0
1287.9

Note: Estimates for γm in Equation (1) with REALT IM EP RICEith − DAY AHEADP RICEith (Column 1) and day-ahead load (Column 2) as the dependent variables. Hour labels are hour-ending so that
hour 1 reflects 12:01 a.m. - 1:00 a.m. * indicates the difference in coefficients is significant at the 10%
level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data described in text.

30

Table 3: Summary Statistics
Full Sample

P R = 1 M EDIA = 1

Press Release Days
Media Days
Multiple Media Days

0.024
0.017
0.012

0.35
0.25

DA Price BGE

53.59
(41.03)
54.32
(42.21)
0.74
(0.13)

115.44
(110.38)
119.03
(115.62)
0.97
(0.03)

151.16
(124.23)
157.78
(135.19)
0.98
(0.02)

73.08
(10.34)
60.53
(9.65)
82.80
(8.44)
82.14
(8.78)
82.01
(8.84)

85.20
(7.74)
70.01
(3.33)
95.94
(3.83)
94.01
(3.75)
91.27
(4.55)

87.12
(7.76)
69.52
(3.46)
98.02
(3.91)
96.84
(3.26)
95.03
(2.28)

1,534,655

33,320

11,678

DA Price PEPCO
Max DA load %max
Temp
Dewpt.
High Temp
High Temp (t-1)
High Temp (t-2)
N

Note: The level of observation is a power generating boiler by hour. Sample means and
standard deviations (in parentheses) are reported for 65 electricity generating boilers
at 16 power plants in Maryland. The full sample consists of 1,230 days between May
and August of 2000-2010. There are 28 press release days and 10 media days in the
sample. 7 of the 10 media days consisted of multiple media events (M U LT IMt = 1).
Source: See text.

31

Figure 2

-10

-5

Unit Load (MW)
0
5

10

15

Generation Residuals

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
hour
Media Day

No Media

Note: Average hourly residuals from a regression including boiler, day of week, hour,
and month-by-year fixed effects, weather, and energy market conditions across all days
in the sample. The “Media Day”/“No Media” lines represent average residuals for
days where the press release was/was not associated with one or more media stories
calling for conservation. The residuals can be interpreted as the idiosyncratic error in
hourly boiler-level generation after controlling for weather, energy market conditions,
and fixed effects.

32

Table 4: Estimates of γm for Generation, CO2 Emissions, and Prices in Equation (1)

Hour

(1)
Genith

(2)
CO2ith

(3)
PthBGE

(4)
PthP EP

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

-1.9
-3.3
-4.3
-1.2
-2.6
-3.5
-0.8
4.2
8.4***
16.8***
16.9***
14.3***
12.0***
10.5***
11.1**
5.1
3.0
1.0
-2.9
-2.1
-0.9
-2.5
-8.3*
-10.9**

-3.9
-4.7
-4.6
-2.0
-3.4
-3.9
-1.8
2.3
5.8**
11.3***
9.8***
9.7***
8.9***
8.3**
10.0***
6.0*
4.9
3.1
-0.8
-0.5
-0.3
-2.3
-7.3*
-9.3**

-5.9
-4.4
-11.8
-11.9**
0.4
-2.2
6.4
16.6**
65.9***
64.4***
80.6*
74.9
97.4
-14.6
104.1
114.8
95.5
-56.4
-12.1
-23.7
3.5
1.7
-11.3*
-7.9

-2.7
0.2
-8.5
-10
2.9
2.0
10.6
11.0
60.4***
54.3***
74.2
62.5
69.3
-19.7
100.9
99.1
87.8
-62.0**
-12.4
-8.3
12.3
8.1
-4.1
-4.1

Total
Peak (8-23)
Super-Peak (15-22)

58.1
86.6
11.8

35.3
68.9
20.1

—
—
—

—
—
—

1534655
Boiler

30631
Zonal

30631
Zonal

N
1534655
Zonal or Boiler Level? Boiler

Note: Estimates for γm in Equation (1) with Genith , CO2ith or Pth as dependent variables. Generation
and CO2 regressions are estimated on a boiler-hour panel. Price regressions are estimated as a time series
using zonal real time price for BGE or PEPCO as the dependent variable. Hour labels are hour-ending
so that hour 1 reflects 12:01 a.m. - 1:00 a.m. * indicates the difference in coefficients is significant at the
10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data described in text.

33

Table 5: Estimates of γm for Generation by Fuel Source

Hour

Baseline

Coal

Gas

Oil

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.9
-3.3
-4.3
-1.2
-2.6
-3.5
-0.8
4.2
8.4***
16.8***
16.9***
14.3***
12.0***
10.5***
11.1**
5.1
3.0
1.0
-2.9
-2.1
-0.9
-2.5
-8.3*
-10.9**

-20.4*
-20.9*
-12.8
-5.3
-13.7
-18.1
-15.1
-2.6
-3.0
1.6
-0.9
7.5
5.8
-0.5
1.6
1.8
-4.8
-3.0
-12.4
-21.1*
-19.4
-21.2
-25.8*
-30.3**

5.3
5.6
2.2
3.8
4.7
6.3
6.7
10.2**
16.6***
24.8***
26.8***
22.2***
18.4***
15.7***
14.4***
7.5
7.0
6.1
4.9
9.4**
12.0**
10.9**
6.0*
6.0***

4.1
1.1
-4.5
-3.0
-1.7
-2.1
1.9
4.2
10.2***
22.4**
23.4***
14.0**
13.0**
16.4***
17.9**
9.1
9.6
3.4
0.02
4.5
4.4
2.1
-5.9
-9.6*

N
1534655
Regional or Boiler level? Boiler

459465
Boiler

447742
Boiler

627448
Boiler

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Note: Estimates for γm in Equation (1) with Genith as the dependent variable. Hour labels are
hour-ending so that hour 1 reflects 12:01 a.m. - 1:00 a.m. * indicates the difference in coefficients is
significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Source: See main text.

34

Table 6: Estimates of γm for Generation, Load and Exports in Equation (2)

Hour

(1)
Genth

(2)
Loadth

(3)
N Xth

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

-111.0
-171.1
-215.3
-62.6
-154.7
-216.5
-90.5
182.1
375.2
762.4***
789.9***
675.5**
560.2
480.0
497.1*
182.9
78.9
-25.1
-201.9
-200.3
-123.1
-196.3
-462.7**
-607.0***

-311.4
-308.2
-313.6
-205.4
-87.7
-53.5
4.8
189.5*
284.5**
505.3***
535.4***
410.6*
281.2
134.6
249.1
37.7
-32.1
-103.2
-171.8
-202.9
-213.3
-226.2*
-226.3
-48.4

200.3
137
98.3
142.8
-67.0
-163.0
-95.3
-7.4
90.7
257.2
254.5
264.8
278.9
345.4*
248.0
145.3
111.0
78.1
-30.2
2.6
90.2
29.9
-236.4
-558.7

Total
Peak (8-23)
Super-Peak (15-22)

1746.1
248.0
12.2

128.7
3374.8
-662.7

1617.0
1922.6
674.9

30631
Regional

30631
Regional

N
30631
Regional or Boiler level? Regional

Note: Estimates for γm in Equation (2) with Genth , Loadth , and N Xth as dependent variables. All
specifications estimated on a time series of regionally aggregated data across PEPCO and BGE zones.
Hour labels are hour-ending so that hour 1 reflects 12:01 a.m. - 1:00 a.m. * indicates the difference in
coefficients is significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data described in text.

35

Table 7: Estimates of γm in Equations (1) and (2) for Congestion Hours Only

Hour

(1)
Genith

(2)
CO2ith

(3)
Genth

(4)
Loadth

(5)
N Xth

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

—
-3.7
-2.5
-2.6
-7.4
-8.0
-1.9
7.2
9.9**
15.7***
16.9***
17.2***
20.1***
17.7***
16.6***
7.7*
5.4
4.6
3.7
4.5
1.7
0.07
-7.5
-13.9*

—
-4.7
-4.4
-3.7
-6.5
-6.3
-2.3
5.1
7.6**
10.7**
10.7***
11.2**
14.3***
13.6***
14.2***
7.9*
7.5*
6.0
6.1
5.8
3.1
1.3
-4.2
-12.4*

—
-160.0
-134.0
-103.0
2.0
24.6
46.5
145.0
375.5**
575.8***
665.4***
614.3***
713.2***
433.5***
415.7***
156.2
101.1
75.2
59.4
21.5
-118.2
-246.0*
-322.2**
-224.1

—
-164.4
-104.2
-119.8
-355.5
-394.7
-104.7
342.1
476.1
709.8***
786.7***
834.2***
936.0***
804.6***
739.2***
318.1*
186.9
156.9
101.3
112.8
2.2
-49.2
-346.7
-687.9**

—
-4.4
29.8
-16.8
-357.5
-419.3
-151.1
197.1
100.6
134.1
121.3
219.9
222.8
371.1**
323.5*
161.9
85.8
81.7
41.9
91.3
120.4
196.7
-24.4
-463.7

Total
Peak (8-23)
Super-Peak (15-22)

101.5
127.6
44.3

80.6
108.5
51.9

3117.4
3441.3
464.9

4179.8
5423.1
1568.2

1062.7
1982.0
1103.2

808875
Boiler

16145
Regional

16145
Regional

16145
Regional

N
808875
Regional or Boiler Level? Boiler

Note: Columns 1 and 2 contain estimates for γm in Equation (1) with Genith and CO2ith as dependent
variables. Both regressions are estimated on a boiler-hour panel. Columns 3-5 contain estimates for γm in
Equation (2) with Genth , Loadth and N Xth as dependent variables. All are estimated on a time-series of
regional-level data. Congestion hours are defined as price difference between PEPCO and APS (in West
Virginia and western Pennsylvania) above the 50th percentile. There are no observations with congestion
and media stories or press releases in hour 1. There are large number of hours at the median. Hour labels
are hour-ending so that hour 1 reflects 12:01 a.m. - 1:00 a.m. * indicates the difference in coefficients is
significant at the 10% level, ** at the 5% level and *** at the 1% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data described in text.

36

37
1534655

N

1534655

-4.4
-6.6
-11.7*
-7.6
-10.0**
-10.5*
-8.3
-2.4
4.6
16.9***
17.4***
16.8***
14.9***
14.0***
15.1***
9.0**
6.7*
3.6
0.7
1.7
1.5
-0.7
-8.2*
-13.2**
1533527

-2.3
-3.7
-4.6
-1.6
-3.0
-3.9
-1.2
3.8
7.9**
16.4***
16.5***
13.9***
11.6***
10.1**
10.6**
4.7
2.7
0.5
-3.3
-2.5
-1.3
-2.9
-8.7*
-11.3**
1493322

-2.6
-4.0
-4.9
-1.9
-3.3
-3.9
-2.1
3.0
6.2**
15.0***
14.0***
11.4***
9.1***
7.3**
6.6*
2.0
0.07
-1.6
-6.3
-4.6
-2.9
-4.1
-9.6**
-12.3**

(4)

Include
Heat
Stories

Note: See notes to Table 4 and specification descriptions in Section 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations from data described in text.

-1.9
-3.3
-4.3
-1.2
-2.6
-3.5
-0.8
4.2
8.4***
16.8***
16.9***
14.3***
12.0***
10.5***
11.1**
5.1
3.0
1.0
-2.9
-2.1
-0.9
-2.5
-8.3*
-10.9**

(3)

(1)

(2)

Baseline M U LT IMt

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

Hour

Include
Air Quality
Alerts

1516686

-2.9
-4.2
-5.2
-2.1
-3.5
-4.1
-2.3
2.9
6.0*
15.0***
13.9***
11.3***
9.1***
7.2**
6.5
1.9
-0.04
-1.7
-6.3
-4.7
-3.1
-4.2
-9.8**
-12.5**

(5)

Lag
Weather

Table 8: Robustness Checks

1546304

3.3
1.6
2.5
2.3
1.0
-2.2
-1.9
-0.7
0.5
4.6
8.1**
8.9**
6.3
2.1
1.7
-3.7
-2.8
0.9
4.8
2.8
2.2
-4.7
-6.8*
-3.4

(6)

Media
Only
Days

1525897

-20.3**
-19.7**
-16.3*
-12.7
-12.8
-12.7
-5.9
7.7
12.7**
21.1***
30.7***
35.0***
35.7***
30.6***
25.3***
18.4**
13.1*
11.6
8.3
7.3
7.5
4.0
-7.5
-18.5**

(7)

Consecutive
M EDIA

1531365

5.0
2.9
1.2
3.2
1.4
0.2
1.4
3.4
7.2**
15.5***
12.3***
7.1***
3.7
3.5
6.2*
0.6
-0.2
-2.5
-5.4*
-5.2
-3.7
-4.6
-8.3*
-7.8*

(8)

Single
Day
M EDIA

