NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF HEALTH INSURANCE EXPANSION ON PHYSICIAN TREATMENT CHOICE:
MEDICARE PART D AND PHYSICIAN PRESCRIBING
Tianyan Hu
Sandra L. Decker
Shin-Yi Chou
Working Paper 20708
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20708
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

We thank Mary E. Deily and participants at the 2012 Eastern Economic Association Annual Meeting,
2012 American Society of Health Economists Conference, and seminars at Harvard University, University
of Pennsylvania, the Johns Hopkins University and the National Center for Health Statistics, CDC.
The findings and conclusions in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Tianyan Hu, Sandra L. Decker, and Shin-Yi Chou. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of Health Insurance Expansion on Physician Treatment Choice: Medicare Part
D and Physician Prescribing
Tianyan Hu, Sandra L. Decker, and Shin-Yi Chou
NBER Working Paper No. 20708
November 2014
JEL No. I13,I18,I31
ABSTRACT
We test the effect of the introduction of Medicare Part D on physician prescribing behavior by using
data on physician visits from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) 2002-2004 and
2006-2009 for patients aged 60-69. We use a combined DD-RD specification that is an improvement
over either the difference-in-difference (DD) or regression discontinuity (RD) designs. Comparing
the discrete jump in outcomes at age 65 before and after 2006, we find a 35% increase in the number
of prescription drugs prescribed or continued per visit and a 55% increase in the number of generic
drugs prescribed or continued, providing evidence of physician response to changes in patient outof-pocket costs.
Tianyan Hu
University of Pennsylvania
423 Guardian Dr
1404 Blockley Hall
Philadelphia,PA 19104
tianyanh@mail.med.upenn.edu
Sandra L. Decker
Distinguished Consultant
National Center for Health Statistics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
3311 Toledo Road (Room 6107)
Hyattsville, MD 20782
esp4@cdc.gov

Shin-Yi Chou
Department of Economics
College of Business and Economics
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015-3117
and NBER
syc2@lehigh.edu

1. Introduction
In the past 50 years, resources devoted to health care have outpaced resources devoted to
many other sectors of the U.S. economy.1 The expansion of the third-party payment system,
which results in higher medical care utilization and may stimulate the development and adoption
of advanced treatment choices, has often been cited as an important driving force behind rising
health expenditures (Weisbrod 1991). Because of asymmetric information between physicians
and patients, physicians serve not only as providers of health care services to patients, but also as
advisors to patients, thus taking on a crucial role in the interplay between health insurance, health
care utilization, and treatment choices (Arrow 1963). Indeed, physician agency is considered to
be a possible explanation for rising health expenditures associated with insurance coverage
(Feldstein 1970).2 Thus, understanding the impact of health insurance on physicians’ treatment
decisions has become critical for identifying the sources of health expenditure growth and for
evaluating a host of health policies that aim to improve the efficiency and efficacy of health care
delivery.
The relationship between a patient’s insurance status and a physician’s treatment decision
can be analyzed using a standard principal-agent framework (Arrow 1963) in which both
principals (patients) and agents (physicians) maximize their expected utility. As agents,
physicians typically are assumed to maximize the combination of income and non-financial
factors, such as utility stemming from adherence to standards of practice and ethics, as well as
concern for patient welfare (Chalkley and Malcomson 1998; Ellis and McGuire 1986). When
insurance coverage becomes available, physicians may recommend more procedures and
services if they take patients’ out-of-pocket costs into consideration (at least partial agency).
Although some literature has shown that physicians consider and incorporate patients’ health
insurance status into their clinical decision making (Wynia et al. 2003; Meyers et al. 2006), other
work (Federman 2004) does not find evidence of this. In fact, there exists little empirical work
quantifying the effect of a patient’s health insurance status on physicians’ treatment decisions.

1

National health expenditure as a share of GDP grew from about 5% in 1960 to about 17% in 2012. (Source:
http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html)
2
“Physician agency” is a collective term referring to the issues related to physicians’ market power, behaviors and
incentives (McGuire 2000).

3

We therefore attempt to contribute to the literature by examining the impact of the adoption of
Medicare Part D on physicians’ prescribing behavior.
The introduction of Medicare Part D provides a good opportunity for studying the impact
of a patient’s health insurance status on physicians’ clinical decisions. First, the primary goal of
Medicare Part D, adopted in January 2006, is to provide drug coverage for Medicare
beneficiaries.3 It does not come with supply-side reforms, such as a change in the payment
system or pay-for-performance, that might restrict or encourage a change in physicians’
treatment patterns. So, our estimates should not be confounded by supply-side incentives.
Second, unlike in some Asian countries (Iizuka 2007; Y.-M. Liu, Yang, and Hsieh 2009), U.S.
physicians only prescribe; they do not dispense drugs. So, although there is evidence that
physicians alter practice patterns in response to financial incentives (Gruber and Owings 1996;
Yip 1998), since U.S. physicians are not compensated (either by an insurance reimbursement
system or by pharmaceutical manufacturers) on the number or type of drugs they prescribe, there
are no obvious pecuniary incentives attributable to Part D for physicians to change prescribing
patterns. Finally, there are typically a number of pharmaceutical options for each therapeutic
condition. The discrete nature of pharmaceutical treatments makes it easier to measure this
aspect of physician treatment compared to others, and makes it possible to measure it beyond a
binary decision.
This paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, unlike previous studies that
examine the effect of insurance on the use of health care services (Card, Dobkin, and Maestas
2009; Anderson, Dobkin, and Gross 2014), which is a combined decision of physician and
patient, we specifically study only physicians’ treatment decisions. Using the National
Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys (NAMCS), a unique nationally-representative survey of
health care use during physician office visits, we study whether physicians changed the quantity
and type of drugs they prescribe after the adoption of Part D.
Second, the institutional and contextual features of Part D and pharmaceutical decisions
allow us to delve more deeply into examining how physicians act as “agents”. Ideally, if
3

Part D has since become the primary source of drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries, covering more than half
of all beneficiaries (57%) in 2006. It decreased the percentage of Medicare beneficiaries with no source of
prescription drug coverage from 27% in 2003 to 10% in 2007 (The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2003; The
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2006; The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2007a), and lowered the fraction
of prescription drug costs that many Medicare beneficiaries had to pay out-of-pocket at the point of service.

4

physicians act as “perfect agents” (Pauly 1980), they should make prescribing decisions
considering out-of-pocket costs to the patient, taking into account the cost-sharing features or
formulary of benefit design (e.g.. patients’ costs are lower if generic drugs are prescribed) of the
patient’s health insurance plan . We estimate how physicians change prescribing patterns for
those aged 65 and over before and after the adoption of Part D, compared to changes for those
under age 65. In a separate dataset which contains information on the utilization of prescription
drugs, we also estimate relative changes in the pattern of use of prescription drugs for those aged
65 and over before and after 2006. Similar magnitudes of the two estimates could indicate that
observed changes in patients’ use of prescription drugs due to changes in cost-sharing may come
more from physician behavior than from patient behavior.
Third, we analyze whether physicians might be “double agents”: agents not only for
patients but also for pharmaceutical companies. Studies show that physicians may change their
prescribing patterns in response to marketing efforts of pharmaceutical companies (Lurie et al.
1990; Engelberg, Parsons, and Tefft 2013; Sacks 2013). In the context of Part D
implementation, pharmaceutical companies may increase their promotional activities (e.g.
detailing, free samples). While historically it has been hard for pharmaceutical companies to
compensate physicians directly for prescribing a particular drug (Stern and Trajtenberg 1998),
physicians’ prescribing decisions may be affected by advertising levels for prescription drugs.
However, since advertising efforts intensified only marginally after the adoption of Part D, we
argue that our empirical strategy described below can difference out the impact from advertising
levels simply by comparing the sample before and after 2006.4 We also perform several
additional tests of whether physicians appear to act particularly in the interest of pharmaceutical
companies, in terms of prescribing newer drugs or more brand-name drugs.
Fourth, we employ a combined difference-in-differences (DD) and regression
discontinuity (RD) estimation strategy (DD-RD hereafter), an improvement over either DD or
RD alone.5 The main idea of the DD-RD specification is to compare the outcome discontinuity at
age 65 before the adoption of Part D to the outcome discontinuity at age 65 after its adoption.
4

Prior work found that advertising of drugs increased only slightly after the introduction of Part D, mostly among
drug classes with less competition (defined by the number of advertised drugs within the drug class prior to Part D
implementation) or among dominant drugs (defined by higher market share of advertising before the implementation
of Part D). (Lakdawalla, Sood, and Gu 2013).
5
We are aware of two working papers that also use similar empirical strategies: Chay, Kim, and Swamina (2010)
and Grembi et al. (2011).

5

Using restricted NAMCS data allowed us to identify the exact age (in days) of a patient at the
time of a physician office visit. The DD-RD specification relaxes the stringent assumptions
underlying the DD and RD methods. Compared to DD, DD-RD allows treatment and control
groups to have different trends in outcomes by including controls for the running variable,
patients' age at the time of visit, as a flexible polynomial function and interacting with the
treatment variable (year 2006 or later). Additionally, we can estimate the effect of Part D by
comparing the effect of turning 65 before and after 2006, since the confounding effect of
Medicare eligibility for most individuals at age 65 that would plague RD estimation can be
differenced out, assuming that the effect of overall Medicare eligibility on the use of medical
care is the same before and after 2006. We perform an extensive list of robustness checks in
order to ensure that all assumptions of the DD-RD specification are met in our sample. In
addition, we use supplementary datasets to examine the impact of Part D on patients’ utilization
of and expenditure on prescription drugs.
Fifth, this paper contributes to a growing literature that evaluates the various effects of
Part D, an important national health program accounting for a substantial fraction of health care
spending.6 Most existing studies focus on the effect of Part D on the use and out-of-pocket cost
of prescription drugs (Lichtenberg and Sun 2007; Yin et al. 2008; Briesacher et al. 2011;
Ketcham and Simon 2008; Engelhardt and Gruber 2011; F. X. Liu et al. 2011; Kaestner and
Khan 2012), the utilization of non-drug health care services (Engelhardt and Gruber 2011; F. X.
Liu et al. 2011; Kaestner and Khan 2012; Zhang et al. 2009; Kaestner, Long, and Alexander
2014), drug prices (M. Duggan and Morton 2010; M. G. Duggan and Morton 2011), and
pharmaceutical companies’ R&D spending (Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013). The effect of Part D
on physician prescribing behaviors has received almost no attention in previous work despite the
fact that is a potential mechanism behind any changes in prescription drug consumption or the
use of other health care services. For this reason, the extent to which physicians tailor their
prescribing to insurance coverage after Part D is a fundamental, policy-relevant question that
merits thorough examination.

6

Part D has shifted prescription drug costs from Medicaid or other private payers to Medicare, and has contributed
to a net increase in federal spending. The Medicare share of total national spending on prescription drugs increased
from 2% in 2005 to 22% in 2006, and the net federal cost of the Part D program is estimated to be $982 billion for
nine years between 2007 and 2016 (The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2007).

6

Finally, this paper adds to a broader literature on physician incentives. A number of
empirical studies have shown that physicians respond to a change in financial incentives by
changing their practice of medicine, including their treatment choice (Gruber and Owings 1996),
hospital referral patterns (Ho and Pakes 2013), or provision of elective procedures and adoption
of technology (Clemens and Gottlieb 2014). In the context of prescription drugs, previous studies
also show that physicians respond to markups of drugs in countries where prescribing and
dispensing drugs are not separate functions (Iizuka 2012; Iizuka 2007; Y.-M. Liu, Yang, and
Hsieh 2009; Lu 2014; Nguyen 2011). However, relatively few empirical studies have
documented the response of physicians to non-pecuniary incentives, in part because of the
difficulty in observing changes in non-pecuniary incentives.7 The Part D setting introduces an
arguably exogenous change that enables us to study the effect of non-financial incentives on
physicians’ behavior.

2. Background on Medicare Part D
Prior to the passage of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization
Act of 2003 (MMA 2003), Medicare had only two fee-for-service components, Part A and Part
B, and one managed care component, Part C. Parts A and B are plans for inpatient and outpatient
care and related medical services, with no comprehensive prescription drug coverage. Prior to
Part D, some Medicare beneficiaries obtained drug coverage through employer-sponsored plans,
Medicare HMO plans, Medigap plans, Medicaid plans, and state Pharmacy Assistance programs,
though some sources of coverage had restrictive terms or high copayments. And in 2003, about
27% of seniors aged 65 and above lacked any source of insurance coverage for prescription
drugs. Because of the lack of drug coverage, many beneficiaries were paying for prescription
drugs out-of-pocket, and out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs were increasing faster than
for other types of health care services. Medicare beneficiaries paid $644 out-of-pocket for
prescription drugs in 2000 on average, rising to $996 in 2003 (The Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation 2003).
7

Some past studies are closely related to the topic we study and have examined whether physicians respond to
changes in patients' cost by adjusting their prescription patterns when there is no financial incentive for them to
change behavior. Lundin (2000) found that physicians were less likely to prescribe trade-name versions of drugs to
patients who have to pay a large sum out-of-pocket. There is also evidence that physicians increase prescription of
a certain drug due to patent expiration (Carrera, Goldman, and Joyce 2013) or when the cost was covered by a third
party (Dalen, Sorisio, and Strom 2010).

7

In order to ensure access to prescription drugs and to limit the financial burden associated
with prescription drug costs, Medicare Part D was created as part of the MMA 2003, and went
into effect on January 1, 2006. Under Part D, eligible persons can participate voluntarily by
enrolling in one of two types of private insurance plans in their area of residence: a Prescription
Drug Plan (PDP) that covers only prescription drugs, or a Medicare Advantage-Prescription
Drug Plan (MA-PD) that covers both medical services and prescription drugs.8
The adoption of Part D affected Medicare beneficiaries in several ways. First, it resulted
in sharp changes in prescription drug coverage for those aged 65 and over after compared to
before 2006. Although it is voluntary for Medicare beneficiaries to enroll in a Part D plan, about
53% of Medicare beneficiaries were enrolled in Part D plans in 2006. Seniors had an incentive
to enroll if they had no plan prior to Part D or if they had a plan whose coverage was not as good
as the coverage offered under Part D. (Beneficiaries could keep their previous plan as long as the
coverage for prescription drugs was at least as comprehensive compared to a standard plan under
Part D, in which case the previous plan is considered creditable.) Only dual-eligible beneficiaries
-- those Medicare beneficiaries who are also Medicaid recipients -- are automatically enrolled in
Part D plans. After the initial enrollment period, the enrollment numbers continued to grow,
reaching around 60% in 2010 (The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation 2010). The percentage of
Medicare beneficiaries without any drug coverage decreased from 19% in 2002 to 10% in June
2006. To avoid the problem of adverse selection, Medicare beneficiaries were charged a
financial penalty if they joined the program after May 15, 2006 unless they were able to
demonstrate that they had access to creditable coverage elsewhere. This rule ensured that
transition into drug coverage plans for seniors happened quickly in 2006.
Part D substantially decreased the out-of-pocket (OOP) costs of prescription drugs for
patients aged 65 and older relative to patients under age 65 after 2006 compared to before 2006
(Lichtenberg and Sun 2007; Yin et al. 2008; Briesacher et al. 2011; Ketcham and Simon 2008;
Engelhardt and Gruber 2011; F. X. Liu et al. 2011; Kaestner and Khan 2012). Medicare
subsidizes the cost of plan coverage for all types of beneficiaries through various types of plan
subsidies, including direct subsidies, individual reinsurance, risk sharing payments, and low8

Beneficiaries enrolled in traditional Medicare (non-managed care) plan usually obtain drug coverage through a
PDP; those enrolled in a managed care plan through a MA organization generally have to obtain drug coverage from
MA-PD plans. In 2006, about 16.5 million people enrolled in stand-alone PDPs, 6 million people enrolled in MAPD plans, and 6.8 million people had other forms of creditable coverage from employer or unions (The Henry J.
Kaiser Family Foundation 2006).

8

income subsidies. These subsidies target costs of prescription drugs at various stages of plan
coverage, or for specific beneficiaries. For example, direct subsidies reimburse plans for the cost
during the initial coverage period; individual reinsurance reimburses plans for the cost during
periods of catastrophic coverage; and risk-sharing payments finance unexpectedly high costs to
help with plans’ potential losses.9 The low income subsidy helps with premium and prescription
drug costs for those who are eligible for Medicaid or those with income under 150% of the
federal poverty line.10 As a result, Medicare subsidizes about 75 percent of the cost of standard
drug coverage on average.
Last but not least, plans often set their own formulary, which is a tiered structure with
different levels of cost sharing across therapeutically similar drugs. Since generic drugs are
bioequivalent to, but much less expensive than, their brand name counterparts, private insurers
administering Part D plans adopt various formulary and benefit designs to steer enrollees toward
less-expensive generic alternatives.11 Plans often place generics on a tier of formulary with the
lowest copayment, preferred brand-name drugs are on a tier with a higher copayment, and nonpreferred brand name drugs are on a tier with the highest copayment.12 Through design of plan
formularies, Part D plans thus encourages the use of generic drugs, in order to help control costs
in the plan and to provide a competitive enough premium to attract potential consumers.

3. Physician Model
In this section, we develop a model of physician treatment decisions during patient visits,
in a fashion similar to the work in Acemoglu & Finkelstein (2008). Our model allows us to study
whether the expansion of drug coverage is theoretically likely to result in a change in physician
prescribing behavior of the provision of other health care services.
A. Set Up of the Model
9

Direct subsidy is a monthly prospective payment paid by CMS, which mainly reimburses the plan for the cost of
initial coverage. Individual reinsurance is provided for a certain percentage of drug spending above enrollees’
catastrophic coverage. Medicare finances some unexpectedly high costs, or achieves unexpectedly high profits in
order to limit plans’ potential losses or gains, which are called risk-sharing payments.
10
Low-income subsidies mean that those who are also eligible for Medicaid or under 135% of the federal poverty
line pay no premium and have no deductible, and those whose income is between 135% and 150% of the federal
poverty line pay a reduced premium and annual deductible. Both groups have a lower copayment for covered drugs
as a result.
11
According to the Congressional Budget Office, generic drugs save consumers an estimated $8 to $10 billion a
year at retail pharmacies.
12
Part D plan formularies are subject to some regulation. For example, they are required to cover all drugs in a
protected drug class and at least two drugs in each therapeutic class.

9

We model the physician-patient relationship as a single period interaction. The patient
visits the doctor's office, and the doctor uses diagnostic skills and information from various
sources about patients' insurance coverage, as well as about drugs from pharmaceutical
companies, to make treatment decisions. Then the doctor writes a prescription.
Assume the physician cares about patients' utility. The physician’s utility function during
this one-time interaction can be written as:
max wif  mF ( Di , Ai , Ti )  k d pd Di  k t pt Ti  C ( Ai ), (1)

Di , Ai ,Ti

where Di represents the number of drug treatments for patient

i , C ( Ai ) is the effort level

physicians make to treat the patient, and Ti is the quantity of other medical care services
performed in the physician's office for patient

i .13 F () is a production function, producing

health from inputs of prescription drugs, other medical care services, and physician effort. We
assume that F () is increasing in all three inputs and is twice continuously differentiable for
positive levels of input. Health enters positively into patients’ utility functions and each unit of
health is worth m. The list price of each unit of prescription drugs and other medical care
services are pd and pt, respectively. Although the generosity of coverage is different, patients
only need to pay a fraction of the list price for both prescription drugs and other medical care
services. The fraction for prescription drugs is kd and for other services is k t .
In Eq. (1), physicians’ effort level is typically not observable to patients. If physicians are
perfect agents, they will not only attend to their patients’ health needs but also tailor treatment
plans to a patient’s financial circumstances. To achieve these goals, physicians will need to
acquire the necessary knowledge or information about relevant insurance policies, formularies,
and drug pharmacology. The optimal level of physician effort occurs when the marginal benefit
of A is equal to zero. Nevertheless, when effort levels are hard to observe, physicians may
instead choose to act as perfect agents along a dimension that is observable to patients. We will
discuss physician effort levels in more detail in Section 3.C.
B. Physician Choice About Drug Prescribing and Other Treatment Decisions

13

In NAMCS, information is also collected on whether some other tests are ordered or provided during a physician
visit including blood pressure check, X-ray, EKG/ECG, Pap test, urinalysis, PSA test, and CBC (complete blood
count).

10

The adoption of Part D lowers the OOP cost of prescription drugs for Medicare patients.
Specifically, the out-of-pocket cost fraction of prescription drugs, kd , decreases. Thus, we can
analyze the effect of the adoption of Part D policy as comparative statics of kd . Given the
objective function Eq. (1), we have the following propositions (proofs are shown in Appendix
B):
PROPOSITION 1: Let Di (kd )and Ti (kd ) be the optimal choices for patient i at the copay kd .
Then

Di (k d )
p d FDD

0.
2
k d
FDD FTT  FDT

PROPOSITION 2: assume F ( Di , Ai , Ti ) is homogeneous of degree   1 in Di and Ti, we get

F ( Di , Ai , Ti )  G( Ai ) ( Di , Ti ) , in which  (,) exhibits constant returns to scale. Let the local
elasticity of substitution between drug and non-drug treatment be  DT . Thus we have

Ti (k d )
1
 0 if and only if
  DT .
k d
1
Proposition 1 implies that when the copay for drug treatment decreases for a certain
patient, physicians increase the quantity of prescription drugs prescribed, that is,

Di (k d )
 0.
k d

However, the quantity of other health care provided could increase, decrease, or stay the same,
depending on the relative size of "decreasing returns" to scale (  ) and the elasticity of
substitution between prescription drugs and other services (  DT ) (Proposition 2). For example, if

 DT  1 , i.e., the two types of treatments are complementary in the health production function,
then the quantity of other services will increase as the copayment for prescription drugs
decreases. If  DT  1 and   1 , then there is enough substitutability between the two services
and the quantity of other services will decrease.
C. Physician Prescription of Generic Drugs
To analyze the effect of Part D on physicians’ prescription of generic drugs, we separate
prescribed drugs in Eq. (1) into two categories – generic and branded drugs-- assuming
physicians prescribe Dgi units of generic drugs and Dbi units of branded drugs. The OOP cost
fraction of the price patients need to pay for generic drugs is kd g and for branded drugs is k db . To

11

simplify exposition without the loss of generality, we leave T out of the equation. Then the
objective function can be written as
max wif  mF ( Dgi , Dbi )  k d g p g Dgi  k db pb Dbi ,

(2)

D gi , Dbi

PROPOSITION 3: Assuming F(Dgi ,Dbi ) to be homothetic in Dgi and Dbi, then the move from
less generous prescription drug coverage to more generous drug coverage may affect the generic'
branded drug ratio. Using Dgi and Dbi
to indicate the number of prescribed generic and branded

'

drugs after the adoption of Part D, we have

Dgi'
D

'
bi

>=<

Dgi
Dbi

if and only if

kd' g
k

'
db

kd g

<=>

kdb

Proposition 3 implies that when the relative generosity of insurance coverage for generic
and branded drugs changes, the ratio of generic drugs and branded name drugs in physicians'
prescriptions will change as well. Specifically, when Part D increases the generosity of coverage
for generic drugs more than for branded drugs-- that is, the OOP cost fraction for generic drugs
decreases more than that for branded drugs,

kd' g
'
kdb

<

kd g
kdb

, the result will be that the prescription of

generic drugs increases more than that of branded drugs, i.e..,

Dgi'
D

'
bi

>

Dgi
Dbi

. (Otherwise, if the

copayment was higher for generic than branded drugs, then the prescription of generic drugs

D gi

would increase less than that for branded drugs

Dbi



D gi
Dbi

.)

D. The Impact of Part D on Physician (Non-Observable) Effort
Previously, we assumed that physicians’ efforts to acquire the necessary knowledge to
make a treatment decision incurred no cost. We relax this assumption here denoting the cost as
, where

is convex and monotonic. Together with equation (1), the optimal prescription

decision and the optimal effort level (denoted as
conditions:

and

) will be characterized by the first order

.

Suppose physicians do not act as perfect agents and maximize their own utility,
where

is patients’ utility, denoted by equation (1). We assume

,

, indicating that

physicians are not purely altruistic. Thus, to make a treatment decision, physicians maximize the

12

objective function:

. The optimal drug prescription D will be

characterized by the same first-order condition as equation (1).14 The optimal effort level
(denoted as
than

) will be characterized by

, because the marginal benefit

. The optimal effort level

is lower

is smaller. That is, when physicians do not act as

perfect agents, effort is less and physicians may not respond to Part D by changing prescription
behavior to better tailor toward patients’ changed OOP costs.

4. Data
Our main analyses use the National Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys (NAMCS) 20022004 and 2006-200915 to estimate the impact of Medicare Part D on physicians' prescribing
patterns. The NAMCS is conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics. It collects data
on a nationally-representative sample of visits to non-federally employed office-based physicians
in the U.S., excluding radiologists, anesthesiologists, and pathologists. To select physicians for
interview, NAMCS uses a multistage probability sample design; this design is described
elsewhere (Bryant and Shimizu 1988). Each physician in the sample is randomly assigned to a
one-week reporting period, and information on a systematic random sample of about 30 visits is
then collected. Physicians and patients may be selected multiple times, but there is no
identification number to link either patients or physicians longitudinally. Each physician is
asked to record information on up to eight drugs (six drugs in 2002) that were ordered, supplied,
administered, or continued during the single visit. Prescription drugs, over-the-counter drugs,
immunizations, allergy shots, anesthetics, chemotherapy, and dietary supplements are included.16
We first examine prescribing patterns as measured by the number of drugs prescribed or
continued during a NAMCS visit. NAMCS has 27,973 visit records for patients aged 60-69 years
old for the sample period 2002-2004 and 2006-2009. We limit the sample to 26,474 visits (9,737
for 2002-2004 and 16,737 for 2006-2009), excluding 1,509 (5.39%) visits for patients who have
missing information on any variable used in the analyses.17 We also consider prescribing patterns

14

The first order condition for D is
, where will cancel out.
We exclude the year 2005 from the main analysis because of the possible existence of anticipatory effects, which
we will explain in detail in Section 6.C..
16
Information on whether drugs associated with a NAMCS visit were “new” or “continued” was collected
beginning in 2005, when approximately 70 percent of drugs were categorized as continued.
17
We impute one variable, percent of revenue from Medicare patients, for 6.29 percent of the sample. Missing
values are imputed using predicted values from a tobit regression as a function of year dummies, physician specialty
15

13

as measured by the number of generic drugs prescribed or continued. We do this by combining
information on drugs prescribed in the NAMCS with information from the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) Orange Book database containing generic status, as well as date of drug
approval.18 Although physicians may sometimes write down the brand name of a drug expecting
that a generic equivalent may be substituted at the pharmacy, we test whether physicians were
more likely to write down the generic rather than the brand name of drugs beginning in 2006 for
those aged 65 and over compared to our control group of individuals under age 65. (If the
physician writes down the brand name of a drug, the pharmacy may substitute the generic,
though the reverse is not usually the case.)
We also use prescription-level data to test whether any increase in prescribing occurs
particularly for new drugs likely to be the most heavily marketed by pharmaceutical companies.
For drugs with different manufacturers, strengths, or packages, we merge the earliest date of
FDA approval for the active ingredient contained in the drug and application type onto the
NAMCS data. 19 We use the earliest date of approval for the active ingredient since we have no
information about drug formulation in the NAMCS. Although some formulation changes may
bring about significant improvements in drug delivery, others may be small changes such as a
change from pill to liquid form. Since previous research finds a strong overall correlation
between initial drug approval (of an active ingredient) and pharmaceutical investment and
advertising (Congressional Budget Office (CBO) 2009; Vakratsas and Ambler 1999; Roth 1996),
we therefore use the earliest date of approval. We use the drug name for merging since there are
no other variables available that identify drugs in both the NAMCS data and the FDA data.

We

exclude over-the counter (OTC) drugs from our analyses using drug information from the
NAMCS. After excluding both OTC and injectable drugs, the merge rate between the NAMCS
and FDA data is 95%. (Most of the non-merged drugs were approved prior to 1982 since the
FDA orange book only contains approval dates for drugs approved since 1982.) (The NAMCS
data contain no information on dosage.) Thus, we examine the effect of the introduction of
dummies, interactions between specialty dummies and the percent of population age 65 years or older, interactions
between specialty dummies and the percent of patients age 65 or older, whether the physician use electronic medical
records. The cutoff value for visit level analyses 0.25 and for drug level analyses is 0.30.
18
The FDA orange book database contains information on the date of FDA approval and application type by drug
name for drugs approved since January 1, 1982. Application type can be NDA or ANDA, which indicate whether it
is a brand-name drug or generic drug, respectively (available from
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm129689.htm).
19
See Appendix A for a description of the process of merging FDA data with the NAMCS data.

14

Medicare Part D on the overall number of drugs prescribed or continued, the number of generic
drugs prescribed or continued, and the age of drugs prescribed or continued. For this last
variable, our prescription-level sample has 54,132 observations for patients aged 60-69.
The NAMCS data also include information on patients' demographic characteristics, such
as gender, race, and diagnosis categories defined by ICD-9 codes, and on physician
characteristics including metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status, whether theirs is a solo
practice or not, their adoption of electronic medical records, specialty categories, and state of
practice. We control for these variables as covariates in our specification. Sample statistics for
our control variables are listed in Table A2.
Although our main dataset is the NAMCS, we also use the 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), a nationally-representative survey of respondents
drawn from the National Health Interview Survey, to examine the impact of Part D on patients’
utilization of and expenditure on prescription drugs. Although patients are required to have a
physician’s prescription before a drug can be dispensed, they typically can decide whether or not
to fill the prescription. To some extent, patients’ compliance may reflect the extent to which their
interests are aligned with physicians’ objective functions (equation 1). Thus, if patients increase
drug utilization after Part D by nearly as much as prescriptions increase, this may suggest that
physician responses are aligned with patients’ preferences (as far as they can detect).
MEPS is a two-year panel with information on the number of prescriptions filled, total
expenditure for prescription drugs, and expenditure for drugs from different sources, such as
self-pay (OOP costs), Medicare, Medicaid, or private sources. For independent variables, we
control for patients’ gender, race/ethnicity, poverty category, census region, MSA status,
education level, marital status, and prior health conditions.20 Sample statistics are reported in
Table A3. After excluding observations with any missing information on the variables we use,
we are left with 276,774 observations for the group of respondents aged 60-69.

5. Empirical Strategy

20

Prior health condition indicates whether the individual has certain types of chronic conditions including asthma,
high blood pressure, angina, heart attack, joint pain, stroke, emphysema, arthritis or other heart disease.

15

We propose an empirical approach that combines DD and RD (we call this specification
DD-RD hereafter) in order to identify the average treatment effect of Medicare Part D,
implemented on January 1, 2006, for individuals aged 65 and over.
The difference-in-difference (DD) approach is a commonly-used strategy to identify
treatment effects. In the context of this paper, we use it to estimate the effect of a certain policy
by exploiting relative changes in prescription drug utilization by patients aged 65 and older (i.e.,
those aged 65-69, the treatment group) who visited physicians’ offices before and after January
1, 2006, compared to those of patients under age 65 (i.e., those aged 60-64, the control group)
who visited physicians’ offices before and after January 1, 2006.
One weakness of the DD approach is that it assumes that trends in prescribing patterns
are the same for both the treatment and control groups prior to policy implementation, so that the
DD estimator identifies only the effect of Part D. However, trends in prescribing patterns are
likely to differ by patient age, which makes them differ for treatment and control groups. 21 In
some past literature, the DD approach took this difference into account by limiting the sample to
a narrow age range, but this does not fully address the issue or verify the validity of the basic
assumptions of the DD model. The validity of the assumption of equal prescription trends for
treatment and control groups prior to policy implementation is even more questionable due to the
possibility of anticipatory effects, as we will discuss in Section 6.C.
A second empirical approach, more popular in recent policy analyses, is the regression
discontinuity (RD) design. Here, the main idea is to compare the change in outcomes for patients
who are just before and just after age 65, using only data from after policy adoption (Card,
Dobkin, and Maestas 2009). For the RD design, the key assumption is that assignment to either
side of the discontinuity threshold is as good as random (Lee and Lemieux 2010). Unfortunately,
as mentioned earlier, there is a confounding policy discontinuity at the age 65 cutoff. Most
individuals become eligible for Part D and for inpatient and outpatient coverage at age 65
because they also become eligible for Medicare Parts A and B. If we adopted the RD
specification to analyze the effect of Part D, then it would violate the RD assumption that
potential outcomes are continuous in the absence of treatment. Thus it would be difficult to

21

We calculate the number of prescription and generic drugs prescribed or continued by physicians by age group
and perform a Wald test to examine whether there is a statistically significant difference between means of outcomes
between pair-wise ages and p-values from results to reject the null hypothesis that means are equal.

16

disentangle the impact of Part D policy from the impact of Medicare eligibility more generally,
due to the confounding effect of Medicare eligibility that occurs for most individuals at age 65.
When we combine the two strategies and use the DD-RD specification, we essentially
estimate the discontinuities in outcomes beginning in 2006 for those aged 65 to 69 as compared
to those aged 60 to 64. The estimation equation is as follows:

Outcomeij   0  1  1(age  65) i   2  1( year  2006) i   3  1(age  65) i  1( year  2006) i
  4 g ( Agei )   5 g ( Daysi )   6 X i   7Y j   8 State i   ij , (5)
where Outcomeij is the outcome (number of drugs prescribed or continued, the number of
generic drugs prescribed or continued, number of brand name drugs prescribed or continued,
etc.) for patient i seen by physician j; 1(age>=65)i is an indicator for whether patient i is aged 65
or older, and the variable 1(year>=2006)i indicates whether the visit takes place on or after
January 1, 2006. The specification includes control variables for patient characteristics, Xi
(gender, race, year the visit took place, seasonal fixed effect, Charlson index22, and dummies for
the major diagnostic category associated with the visit23), physician practice characteristics, Yj
(specialty of the physician24, whether the physician is in a solo practice or uses electronic
medical records, whether the practice is within a metropolitan statistical area, and percentage of
revenue from Medicare patients), and state fixed effects Statej, which control for any timeinvariant characteristics of physician practice patterns in different states. We estimate the
equation using ordinary least squares (OLS).25 All analyses use sample weights, and standard
errors account for the complex design of the NAMCS survey using Stata software version 12
(Stata-Corp, College Station, Texas).
In order to best model physician prescribing patterns by patients’ age, we take advantage
of the exact dates of birth in the NAMCS data. Accordingly, Agei is the number of days between
22

The Charlson index is a numerical score indicating the severity of patient comorbidities. Each condition is
associated with a particular score and the scores for each of three possible diagnoses associated with a NAMCS visit
are totaled to calculate the index. The Charlson comorbidity index has been shown to predict subsequent mortality
(Charlson et al. 1987).
23
Major disease category include infectious and parasitic diseases, neoplasms, endocrine, nutritional and metabolic
diseases, and immunity disorders, mental disorders, congenital anomalies, as well as diseases of the blood and
blood-forming organs, nervous system and sense organs, circulatory system, respiratory system, digestive system,
genitourinary system, skin and subcutaneous tissue, musculoskeletal system and connective tissue. Also symptoms,
signs, and ill-defined conditions.
24
Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, General Surgery, Obstetrics & Gynecology, Orthopedic Surgery, Cardiovascular
Diseases, Dermatology, Urology, Psychiatry, Neurology, Ophthalmology, Otolaryngology, or other specialties
relative to General/Family Practice.
25
We also estimate the model using Generalized Least Square (GLM) regressions. The results are similar to results
we present from OLS regressions.

17

the patient's age at visit and his/her 65th birthday. We include g(Agei),which is a flexible
polynomial function of Agei fully interacted with age 65 and year 2006 dummies. By including
g(Agei), we allow prescribing patterns to take different forms on either side of the age 65 cutoff,
before and after year 2006. Our basic specification uses a cubic form for age in the analysis of
NAMCS data.26 Daysi is the number of days between the visit date and December 31, 2001, the
beginning of our sample period. By using exact dates of visits in the NAMCS data
and including g(Daysi), a flexible polynomial function of Daysi and their interaction terms with
the year 2006 dummy, we can also more precisely model trends in physician prescribing patterns
over time, while still allowing for the discrete change at the time of adoption of the policy.
The identification strategy we present here requires less stringent assumptions than the
RD or the DD specifications. We do not require that the treatment and control groups experience
the same trend in outcomes in the absence of policy adoption, nor do we require that all other
patients and practice characteristics be continuous across the age 65 threshold. The only two
assumptions required by this specification are:


The confounding discontinuities must be time-invariant. This is equivalent to the RD

condition about continuity of potential outcomes; and


The treatment effect and the confounding effect are additive. This is equivalent to the

additivity conditions in the DD specification (Grembi, Nannicini, and Troiano 2011).
Under the identifying assumption that other determinants of prescribing patterns are
continuous at the age 65 cutoff (defined by whether patients are at least at their 65th birthday
when they visit the physician), both before and after year 2006, the coefficient of the interaction
of the age 65 dummy and the year 2006 dummy (β3 in Equation (5)) will be an unbiased DD-RD
estimate of the effect of Part D on outcomes.
The DD-RD design enables us to identify the treatment effect while addressing the
internal validity issue that was discussed for the DD specification. The intuition is that the
confounding policy, which is Medicare program eligibility for most individuals at age 65, is
time-invariant in the sample period. We can estimate this discontinuity prior to the adoption of
Part D, and subtract that effect from the estimated discontinuity after the adoption of Part D. As
26

We decide the order of polynomial for the function of age using two methods. We compare the goodness-of-fit
among specifications with different order of polynomial function according to Lee and Lemieux (2010). We also
adopt a Wald test to examine the joint significance of additional polynomial terms. The results for both tests are
available upon request.

18

long as the discontinuity resulting from the confounding policy is constant, we can address the
confounding issue using the DD-RD specification.
In addition to visit-level regressions, we perform prescription-level regressions to see
whether the age of the active ingredient contained in drugs prescribed or continued by physicians
changed beginning in 2006. The dependent variable is AgeDrugijk (age of the active ingredient
contained in the drug, measured in months between time of visit to the physicians’ office and
date of FDA approval). We include all controls from Equation (5); we also add fixed effects for
primary drug class categories.27
We test the validity of assumptions for the DD-RD specification and the robustness of
results in a number of ways. First, we check the density of the running variable Agei around the
age 65 cutoff, both before and after year 2006, in order to test whether the eligibility criteria is
manipulated around the threshold (McCrary 2008). Second, we estimate specifications using
different age bandwidths and different orders of polynomial functions of age, both with and
without covariates. Third, we implement the DD-RD specification with covariates as outcomes
in order to validate the basic assumption of the DD-RD specification: that all underlying
characteristics are smooth around the age 65 threshold in the absence of the treatment. Fourth,
we implement a placebo DD-RD estimation at an arbitrary cutoff defined as age 64 and above.
6. The Impact of Part D on Physicians’ Prescribing Patterns
A. Graphical Evidence
We first present graphical evidence of the impact of Part D on physician prescribing
behavior, using NAMCS data. Figure 1 plots the mean for the number of prescription drugs
prescribed or continued by physicians by age per quarter, as well as the fitted age profiles from
regressions that include cubic terms in age (in days from/to 65th birthday), and full interactions
with age 65 and year 2006 dummies. There is a small but noticeable decrease in the number of
drugs prescribed or continued when patients turn 65 for the 2002-2004 sample. (A statistical test
of the difference in the jumps at age 65 for the 2006-2009 relative to the 2002-2004 samples in
Figure 1 is contained in the top panel of Table 1 (first column, model without covariates) and
discussed below.) After the adoption of Part D, the average number of drugs prescribed or
27

One issue with the data is that the FDA orange book database assigns the value of “Prior to Jan 1, 1982'' to drugs
approved before 1982. For this reason, we use censored normal regression for the prescription-level analysis with
the outcome of age of drugs prescribed, allowing the censoring value to vary from observation to observation.

19

continued per patient increases from 2.4 prescriptions for patients under 65 to around 2.7
prescriptions when patients turn 65.
Figure 2 shows the mean for the number of generic drugs that physicians prescribe or
continue per quarter by patient age and the fitted age profiles from regressions with a cubic
function of age for each side of the age 65 and the year 2006 cutoffs. There is no discernible
jump in the outcome from below age 65 to above age 65 before policy adoption. The average
number of generic drugs prescribed or continued during patient visits does increase from 0.9
prescriptions to more than 1.2 prescriptions, or roughly a 0.3 prescription increase, after policy
adoption. (A statistical test of the difference in the jumps at age 65 for the 2006-2009 relative to
the 2002-2004 samples in Figure 2 is contained in the top panel of Table 1 (sixth column, model
without covariates) and discussed below.)
B. Regression Results
In the top panel of Table 1, we summarize the regression estimates of the change in the
number of all prescription drugs and generic drugs prescribed or continued.28 The first column is
the DD-RD specification without any covariates, allowing for a cubic functions of age on either
side of the 65 and year 2006 cutoffs. The coefficient on the interaction term between the age 65
dummy and the year 2006 dummy is positive and significant. This indicates that there is a 0.61
prescription increase for patients aged 65 and above relative to patients under age 65 after
adoption of the Part D policy.
Next we separate the 2002-2004 and the 2006-2009 samples and run a conventional RD
regression with each. The results are shown in the second and third columns of the top panel. For
the regression using the sample after 2006, the coefficient of interest is positive and significant,
implying that there is a 0.3 prescription increase for patients aged 65 and above. This increase is
similar in magnitude to that of the discontinuity from Figure 1. For the 2002-2004 sample, the
RD coefficient is negative with a magnitude of 0.29 prescriptions. This implies that before the
adoption of the Part D policy, the number of drugs prescribed or continued at physician visits
decreased discontinuously at age 65. That negative coefficient may reflect the fact that patients
aged 65 and above were likely to lose their prescription drug coverage from employer-sponsored
insurance or other public/private coverage at age 65. Subtracting the estimated effect for the
28

We also performed GLM regression with a log link and Gaussian distribution, as determined by the Park test. The
significance of results from OLS regression still holds and the calculated marginal effects are similar to what we
have from OLS regressions.

20

sample before 2006 from the effect for the sample after 2006, we find a 0.6 prescription change
for the group of patients aged 65 and above relative to patients under age 65 after the adoption of
Part D.
In the fourth column, the estimated DD-RD coefficient is slightly lower after controlling
for covariates than the estimate without controls, but is still significant with a 0.56 prescription
increase. This supports the assumption that there are no other changes occurring at age 65 in
2006 that are confounding our analysis. It also confirms our observation from Figure 1, that
physicians increase their prescriptions (either new or continued) to patients aged 65 and above by
35 percent on average (calculated as 0.5625 divided by 1.5995, the mean for the number of drugs
prescribed or continued for non- patients aged 65 and above before 2006 from Table A1) after
the adoption of Part D, compared to drugs prescribed or continued for patients under age 65. The
coefficient on the interaction term is still significant if we change the order of the polynomial
function of age to a quartic function in column (5). Consistent results across different
specifications imply that the estimated effect is robust to various functional forms for age, i.e.,
that the significance of estimates of the impact of Part D is not an artifact of how we specify the
age control function.
Columns (6) - (10) summarize results for the number of generic drugs prescribed or
continued. In the top panel, the estimated result for the regression with a cubic function of age is
positive and significant, indicating an increase of 0.26 prescriptions on average. This is similar to
the magnitude of the increase shown in Figure 2. We find similar results with regressions using
the 2006-2009 sample, using the DD-RD specification with controls and with higher order
polynomial functions of age. This indicates that after the adoption of Part D, physicians are
likely to increase the number of generic drugs prescribed or continued during visits among
patients aged 65 and above relative to patients under age 65 by 55 percent (calculated as 0.2556
divided by 0.4676, the mean of number of generic drugs prescribed or continued during visits for
patients under age 65 before 2006).
C. Anticipatory Effect
The bottom panel of Table 1 presents regression results for a sample that includes
patients visiting physician offices in 2005. We find that the magnitudes of effects using the DDRD specification, with or without covariates, are all greater than those in the top panel. After
stratifying the sample according to the year 2006 cutoff and running separate regressions on the

21

sample before and after 2006, we find that the estimated effect for the sample before 2006 is
negative and significant for the number of drugs prescribed or continued. Comparing results in
the second column of the bottom panel to those in the top panel, it is apparent that the difference
comes from the decrease in the number of drugs prescribed or continued for patients aged 65 and
above in 2005. It appears that those patients and their physicians anticipated the upcoming Part D
policy and postponed or reduced the number of drugs prescribed or continued until the time that
Part D coverage took effect. After we include the 2005 sample in the regression, we estimate that
Part D results in physicians increasing the number of prescription drugs prescribed or continued
for patients aged 65 and above by 45 percent, a more than 28 percent greater effect than comes
from our previous DD-RD estimation. This effect is similar in size to the anticipatory effect
found in Alpert (2012). There is also evidence that this anticipatory effect exists for the number
of generic drugs prescribed or continued.
D. Validity of Specifications and Robustness Checks
This subsection describes our test of the assumptions of the DD-RD specification, and the
sensitivity analyses we performed in order to check the robustness of our main results. First, we
graphically examined the evidence for sample selection bias in our specification. With the RD
design, sample selection bias is a major threat to identification, because the estimated effect may
reflect the change in the composition of the sample, not the effect of the policy adoption itself. In
our context, if the sample before and after the age 65 cut-off was different before and after 2006,
then our estimates of the DD-RD specification would be biased. In order to validate the null
hypothesis of continuity of the age profile at the age 65 cutoff for the 2002-2004 and the 20062009 samples, Figure 3 shows scatter plots and fitted cubic age polynomial regression results. If
patients were less likely to go to their physicians' office just before they became eligible for Part
D coverage and were more likely to go after they became eligible then our estimates would
suffer from selection bias. Figure 3 instead supports our assumption and shows no sign of such
bias. There is not much difference in visit density at the age 65 cutoff between the 2002-2004
and the 2006-2009 sample. As a matter of fact, patients have little incentive to change their
frequency of visits to their physicians' office, because patients aged 65 and above are usually
eligible for Medicare coverage of physician visits, while patients under age 65 are infrequently
eligible for Medicare coverage of physician visits.

22

Second, we check whether covariates are distributed smoothly across the age 65 cutoffs
for both samples before and after 2006 to further look for selection bias. We estimate a DD-RD
specified model with the covariates as outcome variables. Our results are summarized in Table 2.
All but one variable show no differential jump at the age 65 cutoffs between the two time
periods. The coefficient for the race indicator-- that is, the non-white dummy -- is only
significant at 10%, and excluding this variable does not affect our basic results in the main
analyses.29 These results further validate our assumptions for the DD-RD specification and
reduce the possibility of omitted variable bias.
Next, we test the robustness of our main results by estimating the DD-RD model using
different bandwidths, with and without covariates. The results are summarized in Table 3. We
control for different polynomial functions of age in the samples with different bandwidths. In the
first column, we control for age linearly with a bandwidth of one year on each side of the age 65
cutoff. In the second and third columns, we use quadratic and cubic age functions, with a
bandwidth of two years on each side. The fourth column shows the results with a cubic age
function and a bandwidth of three years. The fifth and sixth columns show the results with
quartic age functions and bandwidths of five and six years on each side of the age 65 cutoff,
respectively. All of the regression coefficients for the number of drugs prescribed or continued
and the number of generic drugs prescribed or continued, with or without covariates, are
significantly positive, with magnitudes similar to those shown in Table 1. We conclude that
adoption of Part D leads to an increase in the number of drugs prescribed or continued during
physician visits for patients beginning at age 65, especially generic drugs.
Finally, we conduct an extensive set of placebo tests for the main analysis sample (age
60-69), and for samples with varying bandwidths, ensure sure that our results represent a causal
relationship rather than spurious correlation between Part D and outcomes. We set age 64 as the
cutoff and estimate the DD-RD specification, with and without covariates, on all samples. Our
results are summarized in Table 4. The results are statistically significant for only three out of 32
specifications, and only at the 10 percent levels. Thus the placebo test suggests that our results
are not due to spurious correlation.
29

In results not included in Table 2, we tested whether there was any confounding issue for all other physician and
patient characteristics, including physician specialties, patients’ major disease categories and seasonal dummies.
None of the coefficients from this set of regressions were significant except for one major disease category:
(diseases of the digestive system). Again, excluding these covariates does not affect our main results.

23

7. Is the Change in Prescriptions in the Best Interest of Patients?
Our basic results suggest that physicians do take patients’ cots into consideration and do
respond to non-pecuniary incentives by increasing the number of drugs prescribed or continued
during physician visits. In this section, we describe a series of supplementary analyses we
conduct in order to evaluate other changes in physician practice patterns in physician offices and
possible mechanisms for the documented increase in the number of drugs prescribed or
continued.
A. Other Practice Pattern Changes
What effect does Part D have on practice patterns in office settings, other than
prescription drug prescribing? We use the DD-RD specification again with cubic and quartic
functions of age. Results are summarized in Table 5; those with a cubic polynomial of age are in
the top panel, and those with a quartic polynomial of age are in the bottom panel.
First, we examine the effect of Part D on the number of tests 30conducted in the
physicians' office (column 1) and patients' time spent with their doctor (column 2). These
outcomes may be complementary measures of treatment intensity during a doctor’s visit. We
find no significant effects of Part D on these two outcomes with either cubic or quartic
polynomials in age as controls. This indicates that physicians do not change treatment patterns
for their patients 65 and above in these other ways when their patients are more likely to have
drug coverage. These results imply that laboratory tests or patients’ time spent with their doctor
are neither complements nor substitutes for drug treatments (Proposition 2).
B. Perfect Agent for Patients or Pharmaceutical Companies?
So far, we have used the increase in drugs prescribed or continued during physician visits
as evidence that physicians act as patients’ agents. However, if Medicare Part D increases
pharmaceutical advertising (Lakdawalla, Sood, and Gu 2013), then it is possible that the increase
in drugs prescribed or continued comes from the fact that physicians are acting in the interest of
pharmaceutical companies. We cannot directly test the mechanism that drives physicians’
behaviors; nevertheless, we provide several pieces of evidence suggesting that physicians change

30

We compute the number of tests by counting how many test among those recorded in NAMCS data the patients
took. The list of test recorded in NAMCS is blood pressure check, X-ray, EKG/ECG, Pap test, urinalysis, PSA test,
and CBC (complete blood count).

24

their behavior more to do with the change in costs for patients than with the behavior of
pharmaceutical companies.
First, we link NAMCS and US FDA Orange Book data to analyze the effect of Part D on
the age of active ingredients of drugs prescribed or continued during physician visits. We find no
significant results for this outcome, with either cubic or quartic polynomials in age as controls
(column 3, Table 5). This suggests that physicians did not prescribe (or continue) newer (or
older) drugs after the implementation of Part D. Nor do we find a significant impact of Part D on
the number of brand-name drugs prescribed or continued during physician visits (column 4,
Table 5). If physicians act more in the interests of pharmaceutical companies than patients, then
we would likely expect an increase in the number of new drugs or brand-name drugs prescribed
or continued during physician visits. However, our results do not support that hypothesis.
Second, we use the 2002-2004 and 2006-2009 MEPS to examine the impact of Part D on
patients’ utilization of and expenditure on prescription drugs, again using the DD-RD design.
Although we don’t have specific date of birth and date of interview in the MEPS data, we are
still able to control for a polynomial function of age in years at the time of interview. Results are
reported in Table 6. These results are consistent for all outcomes, controlling for either a linear
or quadratic function of age. The number of prescription drugs increases by a statistically
significant 8.3 to 11.8 prescriptions per year on average. This means that patients increase their
use of prescription drugs by 39-55 percent when they turn age 65 after the adoption of Part D as
compared to before its adoption. Total expenditures on prescription drugs per individual per year
and expenditures on prescription drugs from Medicare sources also increase at the age 65 cutoff
after 2006, although the coefficients for the former outcome are not precisely estimated. OOP
cost and the sign and magnitude of estimated effects are consistent with those in previous
literature.31 However, our effects on these outcomes are not significant.32 Also, we find that Part

31

Lichtenberg and Sun (2007) found that in 2006, Medicare Part D reduced OOP daily cost of therapy by 18.4
percent and increased number of days of therapy by about 12.8 percent compared to that for users under the age of
65. Yin et al. (2008) find a 5.9% increase in monthly average drug utilization and a 13.1% decrease in monthly OOP
cost after the penalty free period (i.e., after June 2006) using those aged 60-63 as the reference group. Ketcham and
Simon (2008) estimate that days’ supply and number of individual prescriptions filled increase by 8.1% and 4.8%
respectively, and OOP costs fall by 17.2% for the always eligible group (over 66 as of 2007) as compared to those
who are always ineligible for Medicare (58-64 as of 2007). Engelhardt and Gruber (2011) find that Part D has a
relatively small impact on OOP spending, and F. X. Liu et al. (2011)find that Part D is associated with a $179.86
reduction in OOP cost and an increase of 2.05 prescriptions per patient year. Kaestner and Khan (2012) found that
getting drug coverage is associated with an approximately 70% increase in the use of prescription drugs for the
general population of those aged65 to 85 years old, and a 60% increase in the use of prescription drugs for those

25

D is associated with decreases in expenditures on prescription drugs from Medicaid and private
sources. Overall, our results suggest that patients did increase drug utilization after Part D.
Together, these results suggest that the introduction of Part D increased the number of
drugs prescribed by physicians due to changes in patient OOP costs, and not most or mostly for
drugs that are likely to be most profitable for pharmaceutical companies.

8. Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we examine the impact of insurance expansion on a specific physician
behavior, prescribing drugs to patients. To exploit the considerable change in coverage of
prescription drugs that resulted from the adoption of Medicare Part D, we compare physicians'
prescribing patterns for those who were eligible for Part D after 2006 to those who were not.
Our results are consistent with physician consideration of patients’ interests since we find that
they increased the number of drugs prescribed or continued during physician visits. Specifically,
for each patient’s visit to a physician’s office, we estimate a 35% increase in the number of drugs
prescribed or continued and a 55% increase in the number of generic drugs prescribed or
continued following the implementation of Medicare Part D. We use a DD-RD specification to
identify the effect of Part D on physician prescribing behavior, a robust identification strategy
with the identifying assumption that other determinants of prescribing patterns are continuous at
the age 65 cutoff before and after 2006, i.e., that other determinants of prescribing patterns do
not change precisely at age 65 and precisely in 2006 for reasons other than the introduction of
Medicare Part D. We also perform an extensive list of robustness checks to assure that all
assumptions of the DD-RD specification are met in our sample. Together those results suggest
that physicians take patients’ costs into consideration by increasing the number of generic drugs
prescribed or continued during physician visits.
We also study whether physicians anticipated the upcoming drug coverage provided by
Part D and thus deferred drug prescription until the time of its adoption, a possibility suggested
by past literature. Specifically, we compare the estimated effect of Part D on prescription
with chronic conditions. Briesacher et al. (2011) simulated post-Part D outcomes using time-series regressions with
a first-order autoregressive correlation structure and pre-Part D data, and compared those with observed results.
They concluded that average prescription fills per person increased significantly by 1.8 fills in 2006 and 3.4 fills in
2007, compared to a 0.9 fill increase per year before Part D. They also found that average OOP drug costs decreased
significantly in both 2006 and 2007, by $143 and $148 per year respectively.
32
The insignificance of our results for some outcomes in the MEPS could result partly from insufficient information
in the public use version of the MEPS data to precisely estimate age profiles and time trends of outcomes.

26

decisions for the sample period with and without the year 2005. Results with, compared to
without, 2005 data suggest that ignoring the deferment of some prescriptions in 2005 would
result in a 28% overestimation of the Part D effect. This is consistent with the magnitude of the
estimated anticipatory effect in Alpert (2012), and provides additional evidence that physicians
consider patients' cost when prescribing drugs.
To address the issue that physicians may be affected by marketing efforts from
pharmaceutical companies, we perform several additional analyses. First, we link the NAMCS
and US FDA Orange Book data in order to analyze the effect of Part D on the age of active
ingredients in drugs prescribed or continued during physician visits and whether drugs prescribed
or continued are generic or brand name drugs. If physicians act primarily in the interest of
pharmaceutical companies, then they might change their practice patterns based on new
development of molecules and the advertising level for branded drugs. However, we find that
physicians are no more likely to prescribe (or continue) newer drugs after Part D compared to
before, nor are they more likely to increase prescriptions for brand-name drugs. We also use the
MEPS to examine the impact of Part D on patients’ utilization of and expenditure on prescription
drugs. Although physicians have the authority to prescribe drugs, they do not have the authority
to force patients to comply. Patients’ compliance reflects their own interests or preferences; they
decide whether to comply or not. If patients increase their drug utilization after Part D by nearly
as much as the increase in the number of prescriptions, it suggests that physicians’ responses to it
are broadly aligned with their patients’ interests as far as they can detect. Indeed, we find that
utilization of prescription drugs per person per year rose by 39% after Part D, which is close to
what we observe in the NAMCS data.33
However, there are caveats to our findings. We estimated the average effect of the
adoption of Part D. Because around two-thirds of Medicare beneficiaries had access to drug
coverage before 2006, the marginal effect of Part D on those who did not have prescription drug
coverage before 2006 could be greater than what we estimated in this paper. Second, we
estimate the increase in the propensity of physicians to write down the generic rather than the
brand name of drugs after compared to before 2006 for those aged 65-69 compared to those aged
33

The measure for the utilization of prescription drugs is aggregated to the patient-year level, which is different from
the patient-visit level data that are available in NAMCS data for the utilization of prescription drugs. The difference
between the estimate from NAMCS and MEPS may be due in part to the fact that different drugs require different
day supply amounts and rates of refill.

27

60-64. The actual number of prescription fills for generic drugs is likely to be higher than our
estimates for both those aged 65-69 and those aged 60-64 since substitution from brand name to
generic equivalents often occurs at the pharmacy. Although this substitution may be expected by
the physician, a change in the propensity of physicians to write down the generic rather than the
brand name of a drug for those aged 65-69 compared to those aged 60-64 in 2006 should reflect
effects of the introduction of Part D unless there was a change in incentives for those under age
65 that happened at the same time as Part D was introduced though unrelated to Part D. (The
introduction of Part D could lead to spillover effects causing physicians to change their
prescribing patterns for patients with insurance sources other than Medicare. We do not
distinguish in this paper between main versus spillover effects of the introduction of Part D.)
Finally, although we find an increase in the number of drugs prescribed or continued during
physician visits for those aged 65-69 after 2006 relative to a control group of patients aged 6064, we do not distinguish whether the increase is in new prescriptions written or in increased
continuation or renewal of prescriptions. These points may suggest possible directions for future
research.

28

Reference:
Acemoglu, Daron, and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “Input and Technology Choices in Regulated
Industries: Evidence from the Health Care Sector.” Journal of Political Economy 116 (5):
837–80.
Alpert, Abby. 2012. “The Anticipatory Effects of Medicare Part D on Drug Utilization.”
Working Paper, April.
Anderson, Michael L., Carlos Dobkin, and Tal Gross. 2014. “The Effect of Health Insurance on
Emergency Department Visits: Evidence from an Age-Based Eligibility Threshold.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 96 (1): 189–95.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care.” The
American Economic Review 53 (5): 941–73.
Blume-Kohout, Margaret E, and Neeraj Sood. 2013. “Market Size and Innovation: Effects of
Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Research and Development.” Journal of Public
Economics 97 (January): 327–36.
Briesacher, Becky A, Yanfang Zhao, Jeanne M Madden, Fang Zhang, Alyce S Adams, Jennifer
Tjia, Dennis Ross-Degnan, Jerry H Gurwitz, and Stephen B Soumerai. 2011. “Medicare
Part D and Changes in Prescription Drug Use and Cost Burden: National Estimates for the
Medicare Population, 2000 to 2007.” Medical Care 49 (9): 834–41.
Bryant, E. Earl, and Iris. Shimizu. 1988. “Sample Design, Sampling Variance, and Estimation
Procedure for the National Abulatory Medical Care Survey.” Vital and Health Statistics.
Series 2, Data Evaluation and Methods Research 108: 1–39.
Card, David, Carlos Dobkin, and Nicole Maestas. 2009. “Does Medicare Save Lives?” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2): 597–636.
Carrera, Mariana, Dana Goldman, and Geoffrey Joyce. 2013. “Heterogeneity in Cost-Sharing
and Cost-Sensitivity, and the Role of the Prescribing Physician.” NBER Working Paper
Series, no. 19186 (June).
Chalkley, Martin, and James M. Malcomson. 1998. “Contracting for Health Services When
Patient Demand Does Not Reflect Quality.” Journal of Health Economics 17 (1): 1–19.
Charlson, Mary E., Peter Pompei, Kathy L. Ales, and C.Ronald MacKenzie. 1987. “A New
Method of Classifying Prognostic Comorbidity in Longitudinal Studies: Development and
Validation.” Journal of Chronic Diseases 40 (5): 373–83.
Chay, Kenneth Y., Daeho Kim, and Shailender Swamina. 2010. “Medicare, Hospital Utilization
and Mortality: Evidence from the Program’s Origins.” Working Paper.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect
Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review 104 (4): 1320–49.
Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2009. Promotional Spending for Prescription Drugs.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/12-02-drugpromo_brief.pdf.
Dalen, Dag Morten, Enrico Sorisio, and Steinar Strom. 2010. “Choosing Among Competing
Blockbusters: Does the Identity of the Third-Party Payer Matter for Prescribing Doctors?”
Working Paper, October.
Duggan, Mark G, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2011. “The Medium-Term Impact of Medicare Part D
on Pharmaceutical Prices.” American Economic Review 101 (3): 387–92.
Duggan, Mark, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2010. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on
Pharmaceutical Prices and Utilization.” American Economic Review 100 (1): 590–607.

29

Ellis, Randall P., and Thomas G. McGuire. 1986. “Provider Behavior under Prospective
Reimbursement.” Journal of Health Economics 5 (2): 129–51.
Engelberg, Joseph, Christopher A. Parsons, and Nathan Tefft. 2013. “First, Do No Harm:
Financial Conflicts in Medicine.” Working Paper, January.
Engelhardt, Gary V, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. “Medicare Part D and the Financial Protection
of the Elderly.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (4): 77–102.
Federman, Alex D. 2004. “Don’t Ask, Don't Tell: The Status of Doctor-Patient Communication
about Health Care Costs.” Archives of Internal Medicine 164 (16): 1723–24.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1970. “The Rising Price of Physicians’ Services.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics 52 (2): 121–33.
Grembi, Veronica, Tommaso Nannicini, and Ugo Troiano. 2011. “Do Fiscal Rules Matter? A
Difference-in-Discontinuities Design.” Working Paper, February.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Maria Owings. 1996. “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean
Section Delivery.” The Rand Journal of Economics 27 (1): 99–123.
Ho, Kate, and Ariel Pakes. 2013. “Hospital Choices, Hospital Prices and Financial Incentives to
Physicians.” NBER Working Paper Series, no. 19333 (August).
Iizuka, Toshiaki. 2007. “Experts’ Agency Problems: Evidence from the Prescription Drug
Market in Japan.” The Rand Journal of Economics 38 (3): 844–62.
———. 2012. “Physician Agency and Adoption of Generic Pharmaceuticals.” American
Economic Review 102 (6): 2826–58.
Kaestner, Robert, and Nasreen Khan. 2012. “Medicare Part D and Its Effect on the Use of
Prescription Drugs and Use of Other Health Care Services of the Elderly.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 31 (2): 253–79.
Kaestner, Robert, Cuiping Long, and G. Caleb Alexander. 2014. “Effects of Prescription Drug
Insurance on Hospitalization and Mortality: Evidence from Medicare Part D.” NBER
Working Paper Series, no. 19948 (February).
Ketcham, Jonathan D, and Kosali I Simon. 2008. “Medicare Part D’s Effects on Elderly Patients'
Drug Costs and Utilization.” The American Journal of Managed Care 14 (11 Suppl): SP14–
22.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Neeraj Sood, and Qian Gu. 2013. “Pharmaceutical Advertising and
Medicare Part D.” Journal of Health Economics 32 (6): 1356–67.
Lee, David S, and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2): 281–355.
Lichtenberg, Frank R, and Shawn X Sun. 2007. “The Impact of Medicare Part D on Prescription
Drug Use By the Elderly.” Health Affairs (Project Hope) 26 (6): 1735–44.
Liu, Frank Xiaoqing, G Caleb Alexander, Stephanie Y Crawford, A Simon Pickard, Donald
Hedeker, and Surrey M Walton. 2011. “The Impact of Medicare Part D on Out-of-Pocket
Costs for Prescription Drugs, Medication Utilization, Health Resource Utilization, and
Preference-Based Health Utility Utility.” Health Services Research 46 (4): 1104–23.
Liu, Ya-Ming, Yea-Huei Kao Yang, and Chee-Ruey Hsieh. 2009. “Financial Incentives and
Physicians’ Prescription Decisions on the Choice between Brand-Name and Generic Drugs:
Evidence from Taiwan.” Journal of Health Economics 28 (2): 341–49.
Lu, Fangwen. 2014. “Insurance Coverage and Agency Problems in Doctor Prescriptions:
Evidence from a Field Experiment in China.” Journal of Health Economics 106 (January):
156–67.

30

Lundin, Douglas. 2000. “Moral Hazard in Physician Prescription Behavior.” Journal of Health
Economics 19 (5): 639–62.
Lurie, N, E C Rich, D E Simpson, J Meyer, D L Schiedermayer, J L Goodman, and W P
McKinney. 1990. “Pharmaceutical Representatives in Academic Medical Centers:
Interaction with Faculty and Housestaff.” Journal of General Internal Medicine 5 (3): 240–
43.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
Design: A Density Test.” Journal of Econometrics 142 (2). Elsevier: 698–714.
McGuire, Thomas G. 2000. “Physician Agency.” Handbook of Health Economics 1: 461–536.
Meyers, David S, Ranit Mishori, Jessica McCann, Jose Delgado, Ann S O’Malley, and Ed Fryer.
2006. “Primary Care Physicians’ Perceptions of the Effect of Insurance Status on Clinical
Decision Making.” Annals of Family Medicine 4 (5): 399–402.
Nguyen, Ha. 2011. “The Principal-Agent Problems in Health Care: Evidence from Prescribing
Patterns of Private Providers in Vietnam.” Health Policy and Planning 26 (suppl_1): i53–
62.
Pauly, Mark. 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops: Economic Models of Physician Behavior.
NBER Books. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Roth, Martin S. 1996. “Patterns in Direct-to-Consumer Prescription Durg Print Advertising and
Their Public Policy Implications.” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing 15 (1): 63–75.
Sacks, Daniel W. 2013. “Physician Agency , Compliance , and Patient Welfare : Evidence from
Anti-Cholesterol Drugs.” Working Paper.
Stern, Scott, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1998. “Empirical Implications of Physician Authority in
Pharmaceutical Decisionmaking.” NBER Working Paper Series, no. 6851 (December).
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2003. The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Fact
Sheet.
———. 2006. The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Fact Sheet.
———. 2007a. The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Fact Sheet.
———. 2007b. Medicare Spending and Financing Fact Sheet.
———. 2010. The Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Fact Sheet.
Vakratsas, Demetrios, and Tim Ambler. 1999. “How Advertising Works: What Do We Really
Know?” Journal of Marketing 63 (1): 26–43.
Weisbrod, Burton A. 1991. “The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay on Technological
Change, Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment.” Journal of Economic
Literature 29 (2): 523–52.
Wynia, Matthew K, Jonathan B VanGeest, Deborah S Cummins, and Ira B Wilson. 2003. “Do
Physicians Not Offer Useful Services Because of Coverage Restrictions?” Health Affairs
(Project Hope) 22 (4): 190–97.
Yin, Wesley, Anirban Basu, James X Zhang, Atonu Rabbani, David O Meltzer, and G Caleb
Alexander. 2008. “The Effect of the Medicare Part D Prescription Benefit on Drug
Utilization and Expenditures.” Annals of Internal Medicine 148 (3): 169–77.
Yip, Winnie C. 1998. “Physician Response to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume
of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgeries in the Medicare and Private Sectors.”
Journal of Health Economics 17 (6): 675–99.
Zhang, Yuting, Julie M Donohue, Judith R Lave, Gerald O’Donnell, and Joseph P Newhouse.
2009. “The Effect of Medicare Part D on Drug and Medical Spending.” The New England
Journal of Medicine 361 (1): 52–61.

31

Figure 1: Number of Prescription Drugs Prescribed of Continued During a Physician Visit,
NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009

Note: Samples are based on data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (20022004 and 2005-2009). The estimated discontinuities (and standard errors) at age 65 and the fitted
lines are from a regression with a cubic polynomial in age fully interacted with a dummy for age
greater than or equal to 65 and a dummy for year in or after 2006. Points represent means for
people in each age cell (measured in quarters).

32

Figure 2: Number of Generic Drugs Prescribed or Continued During a Physician Visit,
NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009

Note: Samples are based on data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (20022004 and 2005-2009). The estimated discontinuities (and standard errors) at age 65 and the fitted
lines are from a regression with a cubic polynomial in age fully interacted with a dummy for age
greater than or equal to 65 and a dummy for year in or after 2006. Points represent means for
people in each age cell (measured in quarters).

33

Figure 3: Distribution of Patient Age at Physician Visits,
NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009

Note: Samples are based on data from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (20022004 and 2005-2009). The estimated discontinuities (and standard errors) at age 65 and the fitted
lines are from a regression with a cubic polynomial in age fully interacted with a dummy for age
greater than or equal to 65 and a dummy for year in or after 2006. Points represent means for
people in each age cell (measured in quarters).

34

Panel A: sample without 2005
Age 65 * Year 2006
Covariates
Order of Polynomial
R-squared
Observations
Panel B: sample with 2005
Age 65 * Year 2006

Table 1: Regression Results for Prescribing Patterns, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Number of Drugs Prescribed or Continued
Number of Generic Drugs Prescribed or Continued
DD-RD
Before 2006
After 2006
DD-RD
DD-RD
DD-RD Before 2006 After 2006
DD-RD
DD-RD
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
0.606*
(0.310)
No
3
0.041
26,474

-0.286
(0.226)
Yes
3
0.187
9,737

0.292*
(0.155)
Yes
3
0.189
16,737

0.563**
(0.267)
Yes
3
0.204
26,474

0.621**
(0.310)
Yes
4
0.204
26,474

0.260*
(0.137)
No
3
0.054
26,474

0.025
(0.099)
Yes
3
0.123
9,737

0.265***
(0.086)
Yes
3
0.136
16,737

0.256**
(0.127)
Yes
3
0.161
26,474

0.318**
(0.155)
Yes
4
0.161
26,474

0.770***
(0.285)
No
3
0.035
29,775

-0.397**
(0.188)
Yes
3
0.190
13,038

0.292*
(0.155)
Yes
3
0.189
16,737

0.715***
(0.253)
Yes
3
0.203
29,775

0.628**
(0.274)
Yes
4
0.204
29,775

0.465***
(0.139)
No
3
0.050
29,775

-0.134
(0.097)
Yes
3
0.124
13,038

0.265***
(0.086)
Yes
3
0.136
16,737

0.425***
(0.130)
Yes
3
0.158
29,775

0.423***
(0.162)
Yes
4
0.158
29,775

Covariates
Order of Polynomial
R-squared
Observations
Note:
1. Control variables for all regressions include a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control of age in days and full interaction with the
age 65 dummy and year2006 dummy.
2.Additionally, specifications with covariates include patient sex, race, Charlson index dummies, disease category by primary diagnosis codes, visit quarter,
physician specialty type, whether it is a solo practice or not, electronic medical records utilization (yes or no), metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status and
dummy for revenue from Medicare patients above median of the sample.
3. ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

35

Table 2: Robustness Checks, DD-RD Estimates for Covariates, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Female
Nonwhite
Charlson Index=1
Charlson Index=2
MSA Status
Solo Practice
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

EMR
(7)

Age 65 * Year 2006

0.049
(0.073)

-0.073*
(0.042)

0.042
(0.034)

0.005
(0.035)

0.037
(0.045)

-0.051
(0.065)

0.078
(0.066)

Order of Polynomial
R-squared
Observations

3
0.002
26,474

3
0.002
26,474

3
0.003
26,474

3
0.001
26,474

3
0.004
26,474

3
0.005
26,474

3
0.075
26,474

Note:
1. Control variables include a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control for age in days and full interaction with the age 65
dummy and year2006 dummy. EMR indicates electronic medical record use.
2. In results not included here, we also test whether there is any confounding other physician and patient characteristics, including physician specialty,
patient major disease categories, and seasonal dummies.
3. ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

36

Table 3: Robustness Checks, DD-RD Estimates for Different Bandwidths and Specifications, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Age 63-66

Age 62-67

Age 61-68

Age 59-70

Age 58-71

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.500*

0.508*

0.694*

0.683**

0.840**

0.594*

(0.269)

(0.293)

(0.390)

(0.325)

(0.358)

(0.317)

R-squared
Panel B: with controls

0.045

0.041

0.042

0.042

0.041

0.042

Age 65 * Year 2006

0.460*

0.512**

0.583*

0.664**

0.784**

0.587**

(0.235)

(0.257)

(0.336)

(0.284)

(0.309)

(0.277)

0.216

0.210

0.211

0.207

0.201

0.198

1

2

3

3

4

4

0.251**

0.252*

0.340*

0.350**

0.327**

0.261*

(0.125)

(0.133)

(0.182)

(0.150)

(0.159)

(0.136)

0.053

0.052

0.053

0.055

0.055

0.058

0.241**

0.254**

0.295*

0.345**

0.313**

0.266**

(0.112)

(0.125)

(0.174)

(0.140)

(0.148)

(0.129)

0.165

0.163

0.164

0.164

0.158

0.158

1

2

3

3

4

4

Number of Drugs Prescribed or Continued
Panel A: without controls
Age 65 * Year 2006

R-squared
Order of Polynomial
Number of Generic Drugs Prescribed or Continued
Panel A: without controls
Age 65 * Year 2006
R-squared
Panel B: with controls
Age 65 * Year 2006
R-squared
Order of Polynomial

Observation
10,538
15,772
15,772
21,072
31,898
37,400
Note:
1. We include in all regressions a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control for age in days and full
interaction with the age 65 dummy and year2006 dummy. Additionally, in panel B for both outcomes, we adjust for patient
sex, race, Charlson index dummies, disease category by primary diagnosis codes, visit quarter, physician specialty type,
whether it is a solo practice or not, electronic medical records utilization, metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status and
dummy for revenue from Medicare patients above median.
2. ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

37

Table 4: Robustness Checks, DD-RD Estimates for Number of Drugs Prescribed or Continued During Physician Visits With Placebo Cut-off,
NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Age 63-66

Age 62-67

Age 61-68

Age 60-69

Age 59-70

Age 58-71

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.141

-0.418

-0.310

-0.541

-0.302

-0.719*

-0.341

-0.550

(0.301)

(0.344)

(0.406)

(0.363)

(0.332)

(0.393)

(0.373)

(0.349)

Number of Drugs Prescribed or Continued
Age 64 * Year 2006
R-squared
Age 64 * Year 2006
R-squared
Order of Polynomial
Number of Generic Drugs Prescribed or Continued
Age 64 * Year 2006
R-squared
Age 64 * Year 2006
R-squared
Order of Polynomial
Observation

0.043

0.041

0.042

0.041

0.040

0.041

0.041

0.042

-0.233

-0.440

-0.407

-0.536

-0.423

-0.665*

-0.450

-0.609*

(0.272)

(0.321)

(0.382)

(0.346)

(0.314)

(0.376)

(0.358)

(0.329)

0.216

0.210

0.210

0.207

0.204

0.204

0.201

0.198

1

2

3

3

3

4

4

4

-0.064

-0.163

-0.054

-0.150

-0.159

-0.170

-0.156

-0.209

(0.146)

(0.167)

(0.213)

(0.189)

(0.157)

(0.203)

(0.181)

(0.168)

0.052

0.052

0.053

0.055

0.054

0.054

0.055

0.058

-0.084

-0.149

-0.082

-0.133

-0.187

-0.130

-0.166

-0.220

(0.139)

(0.162)

(0.206)

(0.183)

(0.154)

(0.202)

(0.178)

(0.164)

0.164

0.163

0.164

0.164

0.161

0.161

0.158

0.158

1

2

3

3

3

4

4

4

10,538

15,772

15,772

21,072

26,474

26,474

31,898

37,400

Note:
1. Control variables for regressions include a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control for age in days and full interaction with
the age 65 dummy and year2006 dummy, patient sex, race, Charlson index dummies, disease category by primary diagnosis codes, visit quarter,
physician specialty type, whether it is a solo practice or not, electronic medical records utilization, metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status and
dummy for revenue from Medicare patients above median.
2. ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

38

Table 5: Regression Results for Other Practice Patterns, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Age of Active
Number of Brand
Number of Tests
Time Spent
Ingredients
Name Drugs
(1)
(2)
(4)
(3)
Age 65 * Year 2006
Order of Polynomial
R-squared
Observations
Age 65 * Year 2006
Order of Polynomial
R-squared
Observations

-0.052
(0.123)
3
0.322
26,474

2.892
(1.788)
3
0.070
26,474

4.861
(9.654)
3
N/A
54,132

0.307
(0.226)
3
0.135
26,474

0.006
(0.150)
4
0.322
26,474

4.332
(2.748)
4
0.071
26,474

-9.639
(11.519)
4
N/A
54,132

0.302
(0.272)
4
0.136
26,474

Note:
1. Control variables for regressions include a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control for age in days and full interaction with the
age 65 dummy and year2006 dummy, patient sex, race, Charlson index dummies, disease category by primary diagnosis codes, visit quarter, physician
specialty type, whether it is a solo practice or not, electronic medical records utilization, metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status and dummy for
revenue from Medicare patients above median.
2. The R-squared statistics is not available for regressions with the dependent variable consisting of the age of active ingredients because these are censored
regressions; the date of approval for drugs in the Orange Book database is only available after 1982.
3. ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

39

Table 6: Regression Results for Utilization of and Expenditure on Prescription Drugs, MEPS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
OOP cost per
Rx Expense from
Rx Expense from
Number of Rx Drugs
Exp for Rx Drugs
prescription
Medicare Sources
Medicaid Sources
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Age 65 * Year 2006

Rx Expense from
Private Sources
(6)

8.289*

727.553

-0.835

986.473***

-66.023

-438.286

(4.700)

(500.927)

(6.005)

(289.892)

(79.854)

(284.976)

Order of Polynomial

1

1

1

1

1

1

R-squared

0.281

0.153

0.025

0.115

0.087

0.077

Observations

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

11.879**

893.210

-3.491

874.434***

-70.948

-274.355

(5.200)

(556.599)

(6.741)

(311.782)

(109.848)

(320.956)

Order of Polynomial

2

2

2

2

2

2

R-squared

0.281

0.153

0.026

0.115

0.087

0.078

Observations

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

16,931

Age 65 * Year 2006

Note:
1 Control variables for regressions include a dummy for year 2006 or later, age 65 or over, a polynomial control for age in days and full interaction with the age
65 dummy and year2006 dummy, patient sex, race, poverty categories, census region dummies, education level categorical dummies, marital status dummies,
prior medical conditions and metropolitan statistical area (MSA) status.
2 ***Significant at the 1% level (two-tail test); ** Significant at the 5% level (two-tail test); * Significant at the 10% level (two-tail test).

40

Appendix A: Description of the data-merging procedure
The FDA drug approval database was retrieved from:
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm129689.htm (August, 2011).
Three zipped ASCII files were downloaded from the website. The one under the name
products.txt was the one containing information about ingredient, dosage form, trader name,
approval date and type (whether a prescription drug or not). We transferred the data into Stata
format using StatTransfer. We cleaned the data to calculate the approval date for each drug,
counting drugs with different manufacturers or strengths or packages as the same drug.
The NAMCS data has variables called MED1-MED8 (up to MED6 if before 2003). These
variables are coded using a different coding system beginning in 2006, but with the SAS
program (DRUGCHAR_MULTUM_`year'.sas) provided available from NCHS, one can update
the coding for variables from NAMCS 2002-2005 so that they are coded as are the variables for
2006 and forward. We then identify the drug trade name using appendix B (drug entry codes and
names in numeric order) from the FDA site. We imported data into Stata and merged this list
with NAMCS data.
This resulted in the drug trade names appearing in both the FDA and NAMCS datasets,
so we could then merge the FDA approval date with the NAMCS data using the first word of the
drug name. (Most of the drugs can be identified with the first word in its name). The merge
rate for drugs prescribed in the NAMCS drug sample was 95% with this method.34

Appendix B: Proofs for Propositions in Section 2
The utility function for an individual patient can be written as:

max wif  mF ( Di , Ai , Ti ) k d p d Di  k t pt Ti , ( A1)

Di , Ai ,Ti

The partial derivatives are FD , FT and the second derivatives are FDD, FTT and FDT .
We will also assume F(Di ,Ti ) is homothetic or homogeneous in Di and Ti. And the health
production function satisfies the Inada conditions. That is
34

We also tried to merge the FDA data with the NAMCS analytic sample using the whole string in the drug name
field. The merge rate was about 80%.

41

and
lim FD ( Di , Ti )  lim FT ( Di , Ti )  0, ( A3)

Di 

Ti 

PROPOSITION 1: Let Di (kd )and Ti (kd ) be the optimal choices for patient i at the copay kd .
Then

Di (k d )
p d FDD

0.
2
k d
FDD FTT  FDT
PROPOSITION 2: assume F ( Di , Ai , Ti ) is homogeneous of degree   1 in Di and Ti, we get

F ( Di , Ai , Ti )  G( Ai ) ( Di , Ti ) , in which  (,) exhibits constant returns to scale. Let the local
elasticity of substitution between drug and non-drug treatment be  DT . Thus we have

Ti (k d )
1
 0 if and only if
  DT .
k d
1
Proof:
The first order conditions of this maximization problem are:

mFD ( Di , Ai , Ti )  k d pd  0
and

mFT ( Di , Ai , Ti )  k t pt  0
for prescription drug and other medical care services.

42

The first order conditions are necessary and sufficient for the maximization of patients' utility
function. Taking the total differential of the two first order conditions with respect to Di, Ti and

kd , we have:
 FDD

 FTD

FDT  dD   p d 
    dk d
FTT  dT   0 

Appling Cramer's rule, we get

Di (k d )
p d FDD

. The second order condition for
2
k d
FDD FTT  FDT

maximization of the patient’s utility function ensures that FDD FTT
of

F ensures that FDD < 0. Thus

We also get

2
FDT
 0 while the concavity

Di (k d )
 0.
k d

T (k )
 pd FDT
Ti (kd )

after applying Cramer's rule. Thus, i d will be
2
k d
FDD FTT  FDT
kd

positive if FDT < 0, and it will negative it FDT > 0.
Assuming F(Di ,Ai ,Ti ) is homogenous of degree   1 in Di and Ti (

F ( Di , Ai , Ti )  G( Ai ) ( Di , Ti ) ) we have
FDT  G( Ai ) ( Di , Ti ) 2 ((  1) DT   DT  )

The definition for the local elasticity of substitution indicates  DT 

 (,) exhibits constant returns to scale, we derive

 DT 

 DT
 DT 
43

d ln( D / T )
. Because
d ln( FD / FT )

The above two equations imply that FDT  0 if and only if
if

1
  DT and FDT < 0 if and only
1

1
  DT . Thus we can derive equation (13).
1

PROPOSITION 3: Assume F(Dgi ,Dbi ) is homothetic in Dgi and Dbi, then the move from less
generous prescription drug coverage to more generous drug coverage may affect the generic'
'
branded drug ratio. Using Dgi
and Dbi
to indicate the number of prescribed generic and branded

drugs after the adoption of Part D, we have

Dgi'
Dbi'

>=<

Dgi
Dbi

,(A4) if and only if

kd' g
'
kdb

<=>

kd g
kdb

,(A5)

Proof:
The first order conditions for this maximization problem are:

mFDgi ( Dgi , Dbi )  k d g p g  0, ( A6)
and
mFDbi ( Dgi , Dbi )  k db pb  0, ( A7)

for generic and branded prescription drugs.

Taking the ratio of (A6) to (A7) we have:

FDgi (Dgi ,Dbi )
FDbi (Dgi ,Dbi )

=

kd g pg
kd b pb

,(A8)

44

Applying the same procedure to derive the equation for the number of prescription drugs after
the adoption of Part D, we have:

FD ' (Dgi' ,Dbi' )
gi

FD ' (D ,D )
bi

'
gi

'
bi

=

kd ' pg
g

kd ' pb

,(A9)

b

Further taking the ratio of (A9) to (A8), we obtain

FD ( D gi , Dbi ) / FD ( D gi , Dbi )
gi

bi

FDgi ( D gi , Dbi ) / FDbi ( D gi , Dbi )



kd / kd
g

b

k d g / k db

, ( A10)

When F(Dgi ,Dbi ) is homothetic in Dgi and Dbi, the left side of equation (A10) is a decreasing
function of

Dgi' /Dbi'
Dgi /Dbi

. Then we can establish the relationship between equation (A4) and equation

(A5).

45

Appendix Tables

Table A1: Summary of Utilization and Expenditure, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009

Number of Rx Drugs
Number of Generic Drugs
Any Rx Drugs
Number of Brand Name Drugs
Number of OTC Drugs
Number of Drugs
Number of Diagnostic Tests
Time Spent with MD
Age of Active Ingredient
Sample size

Before 2006
Below 65
Above 65
1.600
1.742
(0.049)
(0.060)
0.468
0.555
(0.025)
(0.028)
0.596
0.620
(0.012)
(0.014)
1.132
1.187
(0.038)
(0.044)
0.317
0.352
(0.017)
(0.019)
1.988
2.158
(0.060)
(0.071)
0.973
0.991
(0.026)
(0.034)
19.085
18.201
(0.394)
(0.347)
163.2512
164.3038
(1.646)
(1.614)
4,857
4,880

After 2006
Below 65
Above 65
2.498
2.689
(0.067)
(0.073)
1.007
1.106
(0.034)
(0.034)
0.737
0.744
(0.010)
(0.010)
1.491
1.583
(0.047)
(0.051)
0.425
0.420
(0.017)
(0.017)
3.014
3.212
(0.078)
(0.084)
1.095
1.076
(0.020)
(0.022)
20.464
20.314
(0.285)
(0.587)
209.0620
205.9645
(1.377)
(1.171)
8,589
8,148

Note:
1. The outcome "Age of Active Ingredient" is measured in months. The sample size is different from other outcomes
because we use a prescription level sample. The sample size is 6,657, 7,317, 20,090 and 20,068, respectively, for samples
under age 65 and before 2006, at least age 65 and before 2006, under age 65 and after 2006 as well as above age 65 and
after 2006.
2. All means and standard deviations are weighted statistics.
3. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

46

Table A2: Summary Statistics for Independent Variables, NAMCS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009

Patient Characteristics
1(Age=65)
Age
Female
Nonwhite
Charlson Index=1
Charlson Index=2
Infectious and Parasitic Diseases
Neoplasms
Endocrine, Nutritional and Metabolic Diseases, and Immunity Disorders
Diseases of The Blood and Blood-Forming Organs
Mental Disorders
Diseases of The Nervous System and Sense Organs
Diseases of The Circulatory System
Diseases of The Respiratory System
Diseases of The Digestive System
Diseases of The Genitourinary System
Diseases of The Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
Diseases of The Musculoskeletal System and Connective Tissue
Congenital Anomalies
Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-Defined Conditions
Visit Quarter==2
Visit Quarter==3
Visit Quarter==4
Physician Practice Characteristics
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)
Solo Practice
Electronic Medical Record
Internal Medicine
Pediatrics
General Surgery
Obstetrics & Gynecology
Orthopedic Surgery
Cardiovascular Diseases
Dermatology
Urology
Psychiatry
Neurology
Ophthalmology
Otolaryngology
Other specialties
Oncologists
Mid-level provider
Dummy (above median of prmcare=1)*

Mean

Std. Dev.

0.498
64.411
0.561
0.137
0.068
0.056
0.054
0.098
0.008
0.030
0.097
0.146
0.079
0.041
0.047
0.043
0.107
0.002
0.068
0.131
0.280
0.242
0.237

(0.005)
(0.027)
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.000)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.009)
(0.008)

0.857
0.341
0.331
0.216
0.005
0.027

(0.032)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.009)
(0.001)
(0.002)

0.028
0.065
0.054
0.039
0.036
0.020
0.014
0.089
0.018
0.161
0.008
0.002
0.688

(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.008)
(0.001)
(0.000)
(0.011)

Sample Size
26,474
Note:
1. “prmcare” stands for percent of revenue from Medicare patients. Missing values are imputed using predicted values from
a tobit regression as a function of year dummies, physician specialty dummies, interactions between specialty dummies and
the percent of population age 65 years or older, interactions between specialty dummies and the percent of patients age 65 or
older, whether the physician use electronic medical records. The cutoff value for visit level analyses 0.25 and for drug level
analyses is 0.30.
2. All means and standard deviations are weighted statistics.
3. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

47

Table A3: Summary Statistics for Independent Variables, MEPS 2002-2004 and 2006-2009
Mean

Std. Dev.

Female

0.525

(0.004)

Black

0.095

(0.004)

Other Race

0.055

(0.004)

Hispanic

0.072

(0.004)

Poverty Category: Near Poor (100% To Less Than 125%)

0.041

(0.002)

Poverty Category: Low Income (125% To Less Than 200%)

0.120

(0.004)

Poverty Category: Middle Income (200% To Less Than 400%)

0.273

(0.006)

Poverty Category: High Income (Greater Than Or Equal To 400%)

0.480

(0.007)

Census Region: Midwest

0.220

(0.009)

Census Region: South

0.379

(0.010)

Census Region: West

0.207

(0.008)

Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)

0.791

(0.011)

Education Level: High School

0.493

(0.007)

Education Level: Bachelor Degree

0.155

(0.005)

Education Level: Post Degree

0.120

(0.005)

Education Level: Other Degree

0.070

(0.004)

Marital Status: Widowed

0.104

(0.004)

Marital Status: Divorced

0.161

(0.004)

Marital Status: Separated

0.017

(0.001)

Marital Status: Never Married

0.046

(0.002)

Prior Condition: Asthma

0.096

(0.003)

Prior Condition: High Blood Pressure

0.542

(0.006)

Prior Condition: Angina

0.053

(0.002)

Prior Condition: Heart Attack

0.072

(0.003)

Prior Condition: Joint Pain

0.519

(0.006)

Prior Condition: Stroke

0.056

(0.003)

Prior Condition: Emphysema

0.044

(0.002)

Prior Condition: Arthritis

0.444

(0.006)

Prior Condition: Other Heart Conditions

0.136

(0.004)

Observations
Note:
1. All means and standard deviations are weighted statistics.
2. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

48

276,774

