                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    PUBLIC SCHOOL CHOICE:
                                    AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

                                           Levon Barseghyan
                                             Damon Clark
                                             Stephen Coate

                                         Working Paper 20701
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20701


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Jean-Paul Carvalho, Jon Hamilton, Sergios Skaperdas,
Steve Slutsky, David Sappington and various seminar participants. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Levon Barseghyan, Damon Clark, and Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public School Choice: An Economic Analysis
Levon Barseghyan, Damon Clark, and Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 20701
November 2014
JEL No. D02,H4,I2

                                             ABSTRACT

Public school choice programs give households a free choice of public school and provide schools
incentives to compete for students. Proponents of these programs argue that by the usual market logic,
choice and competition will improve the quality of the education that schools provide. Critics counter
that the usual market logic does not translate easily to schools, since households’ perceptions of school
quality depend not only on the efforts of school personnel but also on the composition of the student
body (i.e., households have peer preferences). This paper advances this debate by developing and analyzing
an economic model of public school choice. To capture the pro-choice argument, the model assumes
that a neighborhood enrollment policy that provides schools with no incentives to exert effort is replaced
by a prototypical public school choice policy in which households have a free choice of school and
schools have incentives to compete for students. To capture the anti-choice argument the model assumes
that households have peer preferences. The analysis of the equilibrium of this model generates three
findings that highlight potential limitations of choice programs.


Levon Barseghyan                                    Stephen Coate
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Cornell University                                  Cornell University
456 Uris Hall                                       Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853                                    Ithaca, NY 14853-7601
lb247@cornell.edu                                   and NBER
                                                    sc163@cornell.edu
Damon Clark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
and NBER
clarkd1@uci.edu
1      Introduction

Advocates of market-based school reform argue that when parents can choose schools, and when schools
compete for students, then by the usual market logic, the forces of choice and competition will improve the
quality of the education that schools provide.1 This argument can be traced to Friedman (1953), and it has
underpinned market-based school reforms - widely known as “school choice” policies - in countries around the
world. Some choice policies enhance schooling options outside of the public sector, notably charter schools
and private school vouchers. In most countries, including the US, the more common choice policy is public
school choice. A variety of programs fall under the public school choice umbrella. The common theme is that
parents are given more choice over the public school attended (e.g., by removing residency requirements) and
schools are given incentives to compete for these students (e.g., by tying school funding to the number of
students enrolled).2
     Critics argue that public school choice programs will not be the panacea their advocates suggest. In
the critics’ view, “the economic model of markets does not translate easily into the provision of elementary
and secondary education” (Ladd (2002), p.4). One issue is that school quality is multi-dimensional, such
that parents’ school preferences depend not only on school productivity but also on factors outside of a
school’s control (e.g., the neighborhood surrounding the school). As Rothstein (2006) notes, “Any factor
that leads parents to choose any but the most eﬀective available schools will tend to dilute the incentives for
eﬃcient management that choice might otherwise create.” (p.1333).3 A potentially deeper problem is that a
school’s peer composition constitutes one such factor (i.e., households have preferences over their children’s
peers). According to Ladd (2002), peer preferences mean that choice will exacerbate educational inequality,
as more-advantaged households choose schools that enroll more-advantaged students. She also claims that
peer preferences will blunt the incentive eﬀects of choice, since both successful and unsuccessful schools will
have limited incentives to improve quality. The concern for successful schools is that quality improvements
will adversely aﬀect the school’s socioeconomic composition; the concern for unsuccessful schools is that
despite quality improvements, they will be unable to attract parents.4 She concludes that “any productivity
    1 Bythe “usual market logic”, we mean the idea that if consumers can choose, firms have to compete for their business and
will therefore take actions to make their products more attractive to consumers. In simple price setting models, this involves
setting lower prices. But more generally, such actions can involve improving products via greater attention to detail and eﬀorts
to innovate.
   2 Programs diﬀer by the level at which they operate and the regulations that apply if schools are over-subscribed. Programs

include the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) provisions that give choice to students in “failing” schools, the choice programs
operated by some US school districts (e.g., Charlotte-Mecklenberg) that use lotteries to assign places in over-subscribed schools,
the national programs that use distance to assign places in over-subscribed schools (e.g., the UK system described by Chubb and
Moe (1992)) and the national programs that allow over-subscribed schools to select students (e.g., the New Zealand program
analyzed by Ladd and Fiske (2000)).
   3 Hastings et al. (2006) estimate households’ school preferences in a public school choice setting and show that preferences

over schools’ racial mix weaken demand-side pressure.
   4 She claims that “successful schools will be reluctant to expand if doing so requires lowering the average socioeconomic
benefits are most likely to emerge when competition among schools occurs on a level playing field” (p. 11).
Echoing this concern, Rothstein (2006) concludes that “It...seems unlikely that choice programs can produce
substantial market pressure...without careful attention in their design to the role of peer groups in parental
choices” (p.1348).
    The purpose of this paper is to develop and analyze an economic model of public school choice. Thus
far, both sides of this debate have based their arguments on informal reasoning. By modeling choice more
formally, we aim to shed new light on this issue. Our model features one community divided into two equal-
sized neighborhoods, each containing one school. Households diﬀer by their socio-economic status and one
neighborhood contains more advantaged students than the other. The model is dynamic and the two schools
are infinitely-lived; a new cohort of students is enrolled in every period. Before choice, students attend their
neighborhood school. After choice, households can enroll their students in either school, but face a cost
of attending the non-neighborhood school. There are no capacity constraints and schools must admit any
student that wishes to enroll. It follows that households will choose the non-neighborhood school if the gain
in expected school quality exceeds the cost. We assume that expected quality is the quality observed in the
previous period, so that households are backward-looking. We assume that quality depends on the eﬀorts of
school personnel and on the composition of the students enrolled, so that households have peer preferences.
Schools obtain utility from the revenue that comes with enrolling more students. It follows that schools can
increase revenue in the next period by exerting costly eﬀort (and thereby increasing quality) in the current
period. We study the Markov Perfect Equilibrium of this game. In particular, we derive the conditions that
characterize the equilibrium and solve these conditions numerically.
    The model incorporates peer preferences and thereby captures the concerns of choice critics. But it should
also capture the full force of the pro-choice argument. First, our assumptions ensure that schools face no
incentives to exert eﬀort pre-choice. Second, our assumptions introduce a prototypical choice policy that is
not compromised by capacity constraints or other limits on parents’ ability to choose and schools’ incentives
to compete. Although no choice programs have all of these features, they generate arguably the best case
for choice. As such, it is not surprising that in the special case of our model in which households do not
have peer preferences, choice improves the quality of both schools and the welfare of all households. More
surprising is that in the general case in which households have peer preferences, our analysis yields three
findings that highlight potential limitations of choice programs.
    Our first finding concerns the eﬀects of choice on school quality. In particular, we show that choice is
associated with a type of equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ: in settings in which choice generates large increases
level of their students” (p.7), and that, since “no...educational strategy can make a school with a large proportion of disadvan-
taged...students look eﬀective” (p.7), these schools “have diﬃculty competing for students” (p.8).


                                                               2
in average school quality, it increases the gap between the quality of the advantaged and the disadvantaged
school. This is because schools have no incentives to exert eﬀort pre-choice and because post-choice incentives
are driven by the fight for marginal students - those close to indiﬀerent between the two schools. If these
marginal students have higher socio-economic status than average (e.g., because advantaged students are
more mobile), schools will fight harder for these students (because they will help schools to increase future
enrollment) and hence choice will generate strong eﬀort incentives. Since average eﬀort is the sole determinant
of average quality in our model (because composition eﬀects wash out in the aggregate), it follows that choice
will drive large increases in average school quality. But choice will also increase the gap between the quality
of the advantaged and the disadvantaged schools in this setting, since the mobile advantaged students will
leave the less mobile disadvantaged students behind. In settings in which choice will not increase the quality
gap between schools (those in which the marginal students have lower socio-economic status than average),
it will provide weaker eﬀort incentives and will drive smaller increases in average school quality.
   Our second finding is that choice can reduce household welfare. This is because the fight for marginal
students is a fair one (i.e., the two schools face approximately the same incentives), such that the two schools
exert similar levels of eﬀort post-choice. This implies that in equilibrium, choice is driven by the preference
for better peer groups. Peer-driven choice is optimal from the household’s perspective but wasteful from the
perspective of society, since choice is costly and one household’s peer gain is another’s peer loss. The waste
from peer-driven choice can overwhelm the benefits stemming from increased school quality. This negative
welfare conclusion is significant because, while the policy debate and the education literature do not consider
welfare, from an economic perspective, it should be the ultimate concern.
   Our third finding concerns policies commonly proposed to enhance choice. Choice advocates often ac-
knowledge that choice could exacerbate inequality but claim that this problem can be solved by policies that
help disadvantaged students to exercise choice (e.g., transport cost subsidies). We extend our model to ana-
lyze choice accompanied by this type of policy and show that it has unintended consequences. In particular,
it runs afoul of the equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ and weakens the eﬀort incentives provided by choice. We show
that policy-makers can do better with a two-pronged approach that combines policies that help disadvan-
taged students to exercise choice with subsidies for schools to enroll disadvantaged students. Even when
accompanied by this two-pronged policy however, choice still runs up against the equity-eﬃciency tradeoﬀ
and can still reduce welfare.
   The paper builds on three strands of empirical literature. The first includes studies of how households
choose schools in public school choice systems (e.g., Hastings et al. (2006); Burgess et al. (2014)). The main
message to emerge from these studies is consistent with our framework: parents weigh the costs of exercising


                                                       3
choice against the benefits of higher school quality.5 The second includes evaluations of the impacts of
public school choice on various measures of school quality (e.g., Ladd and Fiske (2000); Lavy (2010)). The
evidence (discussed in more detail below) is mixed. This is consistent with the eﬃciency-equity trade-oﬀ
that we identify, since this implies that choice eﬀects will be setting-specific. The third concerns how the
eﬀects of public school choice are shaped by peer preferences. Although this has not been analyzed formally,
Ladd (2002) invokes peer preferences to explain the apparently disappointing eﬀects of public school choice
in New Zealand. Similarly, Hsieh and Urquiola (2006) suggest that peer preferences might account for the
disappointing eﬀects of a large-scale private school voucher reform in Chile. Rothstein (2006) devises a test
of whether parents choose among US school districts (i.e., Tiebout choice) on the basis of their eﬀectiveness.
He finds that they do not, and argues that the results are consistent with parents choosing districts on the
basis of student composition.
    To our knowledge, Epple and Romano (2003) is the only previous theoretical analysis of public school
choice. They analyze the equity implications of public school choice in a model in which parents choose
schools, choose neighborhoods and vote on taxes, and in which schools are passive. This complements Epple
and Romano (1998), which analyzed how peer preferences shape the equity eﬀects of private school vouchers
in a model that features passive public schools and private schools that act as profit-maximizing clubs
(Scotchmer (1985)). To focus more clearly on school behavior and the eﬃciency eﬀects of choice, we model
the behavior of schools, but abstract from the neighborhood and taxation choices of households. McMillan
(2005) models school behavior but considers competition between a single public school (or district) and a
competitive private school sector and does not consider peer preferences.6 MacLeod and Urquiola (2013)
consider a specific source of peer preference - labor market signaling. In their model, which is focused at the
college level, choice drives non-productive colleges from the market, but only provides strong incentives for
student eﬀort when colleges enroll students of mixed ability. Otherwise, wages will depend on the signal sent
by college attended, and there are lower returns to student eﬀort. Like other analyses of choice at the K-12
level, we abstract from student behavior.
    Our model is related to models in the industrial organization literature that deal with switching costs
and network eﬀects (Farrell and Klemperer (2007)). Whereas we consider the impacts of peer preferences,
   5 In these studies, costs are typically measured by the distance from home to school, while quality is typically measured by

school-average test scores. In our setup, costs can include psychic as well as transport costs, while school quality is simply the
utility associated with attending a particular school.
   6 Instead, he considers how the public school responds to voucher-driven changes in the private school options. He shows that

when private school vouchers become more generous, public school eﬀort can fall. The intuition is that a private school voucher
can make the outside private school option especially attractive for higher-income students, thereby increasing the eﬀort cost of
keeping these students in the public school. As such, the public school can find it profitable to cater to higher-income students
before but not after the private school vouchers become more generous. Manski (1992) simulates a model similar to that studied
by McMillan but which does feature peer preferences. These are not the main focus of his paper however and so he does not
examine how they shape outcomes.



                                                                4
papers in that literature consider the implications of size preferences (i.e., how do two firms compete when
consumers’ choices depend on each firm’s market share). The idea is that consumers want to buy (e.g.,
telecommunications) products with larger market shares so that they can, for example, share the same
network as friends and colleagues. An obvious and important diﬀerence is that there is no price-setting in
our model. Hence while this literature finds that these size-dependent preferences can generate “fat cat”
eﬀects that soften competition between firms and increase price-cost mark-ups, it does not necessarily follow
that peer preferences will blunt the incentive eﬀects of public school choice.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the model. Section 3 defines, character-
izes, and solves for equilibrium under choice. Section 4, the heart of the paper, explores how choice impacts
school quality and household welfare. Section 5 examines policies that might improve outcomes under choice.
Section 6 discusses our findings and Section 7 concludes.



2      The model

The model features a single community with a population of households of size 1. The community is divided
into two neighborhoods,  and , each containing 12 of the population. There are two schools serving the
community, one in each neighborhood. The school in neighborhood  ∈ { } is referred to as school .
The time horizon is infinite with periods indexed by  = 1  ∞.
     Households diﬀer in their socio-economic status. There are two types: rich () and poor (). The aggregate
fraction of rich households in the community is  and the fraction in neighborhood  is . The parameter
 is greater than 12, implying that  is the richer neighborhood. The parameter  measures community
heterogeneity with  equal to 12 representing maximal heterogeneity. The parameter  represents the degree
of neighborhood inequality with higher values of  representing greater inequality.7
     In each period, each household has a child which it must send to one of the two schools.8 Households care
about school quality (as they perceive it) but incur a cost if using the school not in their neighborhood. This
cost captures the additional transaction costs arising from using the non-neighborhood school.9 The cost is
denoted  and varies across the households. In our base specification, for both rich and poor households,
costs are uniformly distributed on the interval [0 ], so that the fraction of households with cost less than or
equal to  ∈ [0 ] is . Later in the paper, we will allow costs to diﬀer across income groups.
    7 Sinceeach neighborhood contains half the population,  must be less than 12.
    8 One could imagine a world with turnover in which new households with children enter the community each period or a more
static setting in which fixed households have a sequence of children to educate.
   9 These include any additional time taken to travel to school, additional expenses arising from higher transport costs, psychic

costs resulting from loss of community, etc.




                                                                5
   Letting  denote the quality of school , a household living in neighborhood  with cost  obtains a
period payoﬀ  from using school  and a payoﬀ  −  from using school . Similarly, a household living
in neighborhood  with cost  obtains a period payoﬀ  from using school  and a payoﬀ  −  from using
school . The quality of school  in period  depends on the eﬀort it exerts in period  and on the fraction
of its children from rich households. Thus,


                                                       =  +                                       (1)


where  is school ’s eﬀort in period   is the fraction of its students from rich households, and  is a
parameter measuring the importance of peer composition.
   The district provides schools with a per-student payment that exceeds the costs that an additional student
creates. We normalize the per student surplus to one, so that school  0  payoﬀ from period  is given by


                                                         − 2 2                                      (2)


where  denotes enrollment and  is a parameter measuring the marginal cost of eﬀort. Schools discount
future payoﬀs at rate .


2.1       Choice

We are interested in how school choice impacts school quality and household welfare. To create a simple
benchmark for comparison, we suppose that before the choice policy is introduced, households must enroll
their children in their neighborhood school. With the choice policy in place, households can choose either
school in the community, irrespective of the neighborhood in which they live.10
   Before choice, each school’s enrollment consists of the students in its neighborhood and thus is fixed at
12. Since enrollment is fixed and eﬀort is costly, schools exert zero eﬀort. Each school’s quality is therefore
determined by the fraction of its students who are from rich households (see (1)). Thus, in each period
school ’s quality is 2 and school ’s is 2(1 − ). It follows that a household living in neighborhood
 obtains a payoﬀ 2 from enrolling their child in school  and a household living in neighborhood 
obtains a payoﬀ 2(1 − ) from enrolling their child in school .
   Under choice, households have to select their school at the beginning of each period. They cannot know
what school quality will be since it depends on schools’ eﬀort choices during the period. We assume that
households have myopic expectations, believing that school ’s quality in period  will equal its quality in
 1 0 We   ignore capacity constraints, assuming that both schools can accommodate additional students.


                                                               6
period  − 1.11 It follows that a household living in neighborhood  with cost  will choose school  in period
 if −1 is at least as big as −1 − and school  otherwise. Similarly, a household living in neighborhood
 with cost  will choose school  in period  if −1 is at least as big as −1 −  and school  otherwise.
    Letting ∆−1 = −1 − −1 denote school ’s period  − 1 quality diﬀerential, it follows that under
choice, enrollment in school  in period  is given by12

                                                                        ∆−1
                                                                   1+     
                                                  (∆−1 ) =                                                               (3)
                                                                        2

Enrollment in school  is given by 1 − (∆−1 ). Rich enrollment in school  in period  is

                                             ⎧ ³                   ´
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎨   + (1 − ) ∆−1
                                                                     if ∆−1 ≥ 0
                                (∆−1 ) =       ³           ´                                                            (4)
                                             ⎪
                                             ⎩           ∆
                                                  1 + −1       if ∆−1  0


Given this notation, the fraction of rich children in school  in period ,  (∆−1 ), equals  (∆−1 )(∆−1 )
and the fraction in school ,  (∆−1 ), is ( −  (∆−1 ))  (1 − (∆−1 )). It follows that the quality
diﬀerential in period  is
                                     ∆ =  −  +  ( (∆−1 ) −  (∆−1 ))                                        (5)

    It will be convenient to let ∆ denote the expected quality diﬀerential at the beginning of a period (i.e.,
the quality diﬀerential realized in the previous period) and ∆(∆) denote the peer diﬀerential between the
two schools under choice in that period; i.e.,  (∆) −  (∆). It is straightforward to show that

                                                       ⎧
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎨    2(2−1)
                                                              +∆          if ∆ ≥ 0
                                          ∆(∆) =                                                                          (6)
                                                       ⎪
                                                       ⎩   2(2−1)
                                                                        if ∆  0
                                                             −∆


This function, which plays a key role in the analysis, is graphed in Figure 1 for our benchmark parameter
values (  ) = (1 05 075).
    The peer diﬀerential is increasing at an increasing rate for negative values of ∆ and decreasing at a
decreasing rate for positive values. To understand its behavior, note that when ∆ equals 0, all students
attend their neighborhood school and thus the peer diﬀerential just equals the diﬀerence between the fraction
of rich in each neighborhood (i.e., 2(2 − 1) = 05). As ∆ increases from 0, all students from neighborhood
  1 1 Concretely, one might imagine households visiting and researching schools in the period before they enroll each child.

Eﬀectively, what we are assuming is that households believe that whatever quality they encounter is predictive of what their
child would experience if enrolled. Introspection convinced us that this was the natural assumption to make. Initial expectations
in period 1 (i.e., 0 and 0 ) are taken to be the school qualities prevailing before choice.
  1 2 This expression assumes that ∆
                                       −1 ∈ [− ].




                                                               7
              0.5


             0.45


              0.4


             0.35


              0.3


             0.25


              0.2


             0.15


              0.1


             0.05


               0
               −1     −0.8    −0.6    −0.4    −0.2      0      0.2    0.4     0.6     0.8      1
                                                       Δq



                                         Figure 1: Peer diﬀerential


 are enrolled in school  and additional enrolling students come from neighborhood . Given that neigh-
borhood  is the disadvantaged neighborhood, this reduces the peer diﬀerential between the two schools.
As ∆ approaches , more and more students from neighborhood  enroll in school  and the fraction rich
approaches that in the whole community. Meanwhile, the fraction rich in school  remains constant at the
fraction in neighborhood . Thus, the diﬀerence approaches (2 − 1) = 025.


2.2    Discussion of the model

In developing a model in which to analyze public school choice, we faced several modeling choices. To help
readers understand the choices made, we briefly discuss the main ones here.
   A first question was how to model the basic forces driving outcomes under choice; that is, the fundamental
incentives facing households and schools. With respect to households, it seemed natural to assume that
households must incur costs when choosing their non-neighborhood school and that these costs would vary
across households. This is consistent with Epple and Romano (2003) and the empirical literature on how
households choose schools (Hastings et al. (2006), Burgess et al. (2014)). It also seemed sensible to abstract



                                                      8
from households’ choice of neighborhood and of school financing because this would substantially complicate
an already sophisticated model.
    With respect to schools, it seemed clear we needed schools to value enrollment since, without this, choice
would not be eﬀective. To get enrollment to matter, we assume that funding depends on enrollment and the
additional funds provided exceed the costs of higher enrollment.13 We have in mind that surplus funds can be
used to provide things that school personnel value. Examples might include bonus payments, ancillary staﬀ,
professional development courses, field trips, classroom equipment, sports programs, musical activities and
so on. McMillan (2005) and Manski (1992) make similar assumptions when analyzing public school responses
to private school vouchers. Similarly, it seemed clear that we should ignore school capacity constraints and
the possibility that school personnel are intrinsically motivated to provide quality. These assumptions, along
with the assumption that the cost to households of exercising choice are not too large, generate the best-case
scenario for choice.
    A second question was how to model household heterogeneity and households’ preferences over schools.
We see several advantages to our assumption that there are two types of households and that school quality,
as seen by households, is just an additive function of school eﬀort and the fraction of high types enrolled.
First, the two-types assumption yields a simple representation of community heterogeneity and neighborhood
inequality. Second, assuming that eﬀort and composition are separable and that composition is “linear-in-
means” ensures that average school quality is invariant to the distribution of students across schools and
just equals the enrollment-weighted average of the eﬀort exerted by the two schools. Although more flexible
specifications may be seen as superior, it is not obvious how eﬀort and composition interact in the production
of school quality. Nor is it obvious that quality is a non-linear function of average composition, or that there
is a more natural measure of composition than the average type. Similarly, we see our assumption that all
households share the same view of school quality as reasonable because it is tractable and there is no clear-cut
evidence on preference heterogeneity.14
    It should be stressed that we are modelling school quality as perceived by households not school quality as
measured by test scores (although in many studies school quality as measured by test scores is also assumed
to depend additively on school eﬀort and student composition). Even if there are no peer eﬀects in the
production of test scores (see Angrist (2013) for a recent review of the evidence) there are many channels
through which student composition could aﬀect perceived quality. In particular, there may be peer eﬀects in
   1 3 An alternative mechanism would be that the salaries of school personnel are tied to enrollment, as they are in some settings

(e.g., the UK).
   1 4 Burgess et al. (2014) do not find strong preference diﬀerences by socio-economic status in the UK. Hastings et al. (2006)

find stronger preference diﬀerences by socio-economic status in the US, in addition to preferences over more than one dimension
of household type (income and race).




                                                                9
the production of other outcomes that households care about (e.g., other measures of academic achievement,
safety, future labor market networks, social networks and so on). The bottom line is that households will
only be indiﬀerent to composition if they value a set of school outcomes that they believe to be unaﬀected
by composition. This is not supported by the evidence on how households choose schools.15
    A third question was whether to employ a static or a dynamic framework. To study the same forces
in a static model, we would have to assume that schools commit up front to providing particular levels of
eﬀort and that parents make their enrollment decisions anticipating those of other parents. This is possible,
but we find it more natural to assume that parents are backwards-looking in their evaluation of schools
and that schools adjust eﬀort on a period-by-period basis anticipating its impact on future enrollment. An
intermediate set-up would be a partially-dynamic model in which schools make a one-time and permanent
eﬀort choice in the first period and backwards-looking households make enrollment decisions period-by-period
in response. This would be more analytically tractable than our fully-dynamic model. However, we felt that
the one time eﬀort choice assumption was suﬃciently unnatural that we would, in any case, have to check
that any conclusions emerging from the partially-dynamic model were robust to relaxing it. This suggested
that we might as well tackle the fully-dynamic model from the outset.



3     Equilibrium under choice

Choice creates a dynamic game between the two schools. The state variable in this game is the expected
quality diﬀerential ∆ which determines each school’s enrollment. If the schools make eﬀort choices (   )
this period, the expected quality diﬀerential in the next period ∆ 0 will equal  −  + ∆(∆) which is
the realized quality diﬀerential this period (see (5)). We will look for a Markov Perfect Equilibrium of this
game. In such an equilibrium, schools’ strategies depend only upon the state variable ∆. Let  (∆) denote
school ’s value function and  (∆) denote school ’s strategy. Then, the two schools’ strategies satisfy the
requirements that

                                        ½                                           ¾
                                                  2
                       (∆) = arg max (∆) −      +  ( −  (∆) + ∆(∆))                                         (7)
                                                 2
  1 5 Mizala et al. (2007) exploit quasi-random variation in the school value-added information (an approximation to school eﬀort)

observed by Chilean parents. They find that parents do not respond to better value-added performance, an apparent rejection of
the hypothesis that parents care only about value added. Three further pieces of evidence also point away from this hypothesis.
First, Hastings et al. (2006) find that test scores do a much better job of predicting preferences than do value-added scores.
Second, in a study of school choice in Chicago, Cullen et al. (2006) find that school popularity (measured by applications or
the probability that an oﬀer is taken up) is strongly correlated with school test scores but at best weakly correlated with school
value added. Third, the above-mentioned Rothstein (2006) study finds no evidence to suggest that parents residing in high-
choice areas engage in more “eﬀectiveness sorting”. As Rothstein (2006) argues, this is consistent with them having stronger
preferences for student composition than for school value added. Finally, to us at least, anecdotal evidence and introspection
casts doubt on the proposition that parents would be indiﬀerent between two schools that exerted the same level of eﬀort but
enrolled diﬀerent types of students.


                                                               10
and that
                                   ½                                               ¾
                                                 2
                  (∆) = arg max 1 − (∆) −      +  ( (∆) −  + ∆(∆))                          (8)
                                                2

Moreover, the two schools’ value functions must satisfy the equations

                                             (∆)2
                       (∆) = (∆) −             +  ( (∆) −  (∆) + ∆(∆))                     (9)
                                                2

and
                                              (∆)2
                  (∆) = 1 − (∆) −               +  ( (∆) −  (∆) + ∆(∆))                   (10)
                                                 2

An equilibrium consists of value functions  (∆) and  (∆) and strategies  (∆) and  (∆) satisfying
these four equations.


3.1    Equilibrium characterization

Assuming that the value functions are diﬀerentiable, the first order conditions for the two schools’ eﬀort
choices imply that:
                                                             (∆ 0 )
                                              (∆) =                                                    (11)
                                                              ∆ 0

and that
                                                              (∆ 0 )
                                             (∆) = −                                                   (12)
                                                               ∆ 0

Equation (11) says that for school , the marginal cost of eﬀort (which is  (∆)) is equal to the marginal
benefit (which is  (∆ 0 )∆ 0 ). This marginal benefit represents the impact of a higher expected quality
diﬀerential next period. Equation (12) says that for school , the marginal cost of eﬀort (which is  (∆))
is equal to the marginal benefit (which is − (∆ 0 )∆ 0 ). The marginal benefit is that stemming from
a lower expected quality diﬀerential next period.
   To interpret the first order conditions, more information on the derivative of the value functions is required.
Applying the Envelope Theorem to equation (9) and assuming that the equilibrium strategies are diﬀerentiable
at ∆, we have that for school :

                       (∆)   (∆)     (∆ 0 ) ∆(∆)      (∆ 0 )  (∆)
                               =        +                    −                                           (13)
                        ∆       ∆        ∆ 0       ∆         ∆ 0       ∆

Equation (13) reveals that a marginal increase in the expected quality diﬀerential has three eﬀects on school
’s payoﬀ. The first is to increase its enrollment, an eﬀect which is always beneficial. The second is to



                                                       11
change the peer diﬀerential. This eﬀect influences school ’s payoﬀ via its impact on next period’s expected
quality diﬀerential. Figure 1 tells us that under the base cost specification, the change in the peer diﬀerential
will be negative if ∆ is positive and positive if ∆ is negative. A negative change will reduce next period’s
expected quality diﬀerential and thereby reduce school ’s payoﬀ, while a positive change will raise it. The
third eﬀect is to change school ’s eﬀort, an eﬀect that also impacts payoﬀs through its impact on next
period’s expected quality diﬀerential. The direction of change in school ’s eﬀort depends on equilibrium
behavior and is unclear a priori. A reduction will increase next period’s expected quality diﬀerential and
thereby increase school ’s payoﬀ, while an increase will reduce it.
   For school , applying the Envelope Theorem to equation (10), we have that

                       (∆)   (∆)     (∆ 0 ) ∆(∆)      (∆ 0 )  (∆)
                  −            =        −                    −                                           (14)
                        ∆       ∆        ∆ 0       ∆         ∆ 0       ∆

This tells us that a marginal decrease in the expected quality diﬀerential has three eﬀects on school ’s
payoﬀ. The first is to increase its enrollment. The second is to change the peer diﬀerential. Again, under the
base cost specification, this change will be positive if ∆ is positive and negative if ∆ is negative. A positive
change will increase next period’s expected quality diﬀerential and thereby reduce school ’s payoﬀ, while
a negative change will raise it. The third eﬀect is to change school ’s eﬀort. An increase will raise next
period’s expected quality diﬀerential and thereby reduce school ’s payoﬀ, while a decrease will increase it.
   Combining these expressions for the value function derivatives with the first order conditions, we can
write (11) and (12) as

                                     ∙                                              ¸
                                    (∆ 0 )          0    ∆(∆ 0 )  (∆ 0 )
                        (∆) =            +  (∆ )(           −            )                        (15)
                                     ∆ 0                    ∆ 0      ∆ 0

and
                                     ∙                                              ¸
                                    (∆ 0 )          0    ∆(∆ 0 )  (∆ 0 )
                        (∆) =            +  (∆ )(           +            )                        (16)
                                     ∆ 0                    ∆ 0      ∆ 0

Moreover, we have that next period’s quality diﬀerential is given by


                                     ∆ 0 =  (∆) −  (∆) + ∆(∆)                                     (17)


These are the three equations that characterize the equilibrium eﬀort levels.
   It is clear from these three conditions that equilibrium eﬀort levels must in general depend on the state
∆. If they were constant, then  (∆ 0 )∆ 0 and  (∆ 0 )∆ 0 would equal zero, and the eﬀort levels



                                                       12
would be equal (i.e.,  =  ). But then the common eﬀort level would depend on ∆(∆(∆))∆ 0
which depends on ∆ - a contradiction. The only exception to this is when peer preferences are irrelevant,
as happens when there are no peer preferences ( = 0) or there is no neighborhood inequality ( = 12). In
this case, there exists an equilibrium under choice in which the two schools’ eﬀort levels are always 2.
In this equilibrium, the steady state quality diﬀerential will be zero.
   It is also apparent from (15) and (16) that the two schools must in general choose diﬀerent eﬀort levels
in equilibrium. If  (∆) =  (∆), then  (∆ 0 )∆ 0 would equal  (∆ 0 )∆ 0 . But the derivative
of the other school’s eﬀort enters with a diﬀerent sign in each first order condition which is inconsistent with
the hypothesis of symmetric eﬀort levels.
   Finally, note that the only place that ∆ enters these equations is through the peer diﬀerential term
∆(∆) in (17). Intuitively, this period’s expected quality diﬀerential ∆ determines this period’s peer
diﬀerential which, along with the two schools’ eﬀort levels, determines next period’s expected quality diﬀer-
ential ∆ 0 . Observe from Figure 1 that the peer diﬀerential is symmetric in the sense that for any ∆ in
the interval [− ], ∆(∆) equals ∆(−∆). It follows that, assuming there is a unique equilibrium, the
equilibrium eﬀort levels for each school  will be such that for any ∆ in the interval [− ],  (∆) equals
 (−∆).
   Beyond these three points, (15) and (16) do not reveal much about the nature of schools’ equilibrium
eﬀort levels. The conditions are complex because each school’s first order condition includes the derivative
of its rival’s future strategy. This complexity makes it hard to develop analytical results. Thus, we will solve
for equilibrium numerically.


3.2    Steady states

The evolution of the quality diﬀerential in equilibrium is described by the diﬀerence equation (17). A quality
diﬀerential ∆ is thus a steady state if


                                   ∆ =  (∆ ) −  (∆ ) + ∆(∆ )                                (18)


Assuming that the system converges to a unique steady state, we will use steady state outcomes to assess
system performance. To simplify notation, we will let  and  denote the steady state eﬀort levels
 (∆ ) and  (∆ ).




                                                       13
3.3         Solving for equilibrium

The solution procedure is as follows. As noted earlier, the equilibrium eﬀort levels for each school  will be
such that for any ∆ in the interval [− ],  (∆) equals  (−∆). Thus, we just need to solve for the strate-
gies on the interval [0 ]. We first conjecture (i) that the strategies are continuous on [0 ] and diﬀerentiable
everywhere on (0 ), (ii) that the equilibrium converges to a steady state in which the quality diﬀerential
lies in the interval (0 ), and (iii) that equilibrium strategies are such that ∆ 0 belongs to the interval (0 )
for all ∆ in the interval [0 ]. We then substitute equation (17) into the two first order conditions (15) and
(16) and note that this yields a pair of diﬀerential equations in the unknown eﬀort functions  (∆) and
 (∆) defined on the compact interval [0 ]. To solve this pair of equations, we approximate the equilibrium
eﬀort functions with higher order Chebyshev polynomials. To find the coeﬃcients for these polynomials we
use both Galerkin and collocation methods16 and confirm that the solutions under both methods coincide.
Given these solutions, we verify our assumptions (ii) and (iii) ex post (i.e., that the equilibrium converges to
a steady state in which the quality diﬀerential lies in (0 ) and that ∆ 0 belongs to (0 ) for all ∆ in the
interval [0 ]).
    This procedure provides us with conjectured equilibrium strategies on the interval [0 ]. We then use
the symmetry property to deduce the strategies on the interval [− 0]. Given the symmetry property of the
strategies and the fact that for any ∆ in the interval [− 0], ∆(∆) equals ∆(−∆), the ∆ 0 associated
with any ∆ in the interval [− 0] just equals that associated with −∆. Accordingly, ∆ 0 belongs to (0 )
and the equilibrium converges to a steady state in which the quality diﬀerential lies in (0 ). Finally, given
the strategies, we construct the value functions to verify that (7) and (8) are concave problems and, hence,
solving (15) and (16) indeed amounts to solving (7) and (8) for all ∆ ∈ [− ]


3.4         Equilibrium for a benchmark case

To illustrate the workings of the model, we now solve for the equilibrium for a benchmark parameterization
which assumes that the parameters (     ) equal (1 05 075 075 10 095). The choice of 095 for
the discount rate  is standard. The choices of 05 for the degree of community heterogeneity  and 075 for
the degree of neighborhood inequality  have no particular significance and we will discuss the implications
of diﬀerent choices below. The choice of 075 for the importance of peer composition  is just a starting point
and we will discuss the implications of varying it extensively. The remaining parameters, which are the upper
bound of the cost distribution  and the school eﬀort cost parameter  will be held constant throughout the
  1 6 See   Judd (1992).




                                                        14
                                                             Effort Levels
              0.041
                                                                                                      School A
               0.04                                                                                   School B
              0.039

              0.038

              0.037
                  −1     −0.8     −0.6      −0.4     −0.2           0         0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8          1

                                                            Value Functions
                14

                12

                10

                 8

                 6
                 −1      −0.8     −0.6      −0.4     −0.2           0         0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8          1

                                                                 Δ q,
                 1

                0.5

                 0
                                                                                                        Δ q,
               −0.5
                                                                                                        45o line
                −1
                 −1      −0.8     −0.6      −0.4     −0.2         0           0.2   0.4     0.6       0.8          1
                                                                 Δq



                                      Figure 2: Solution for the benchmark case


analysis.17
    Figure 2 describes the equilibrium solution. The top panel graphs the eﬀort levels of the two schools as a
function of the quality diﬀerential. Three points are noteworthy. First, while the equilibrium eﬀort levels do
not vary greatly, they are smaller the higher is the absolute value of the expected quality diﬀerential. Second,
while the two schools’ eﬀort levels are similar, for any given quality diﬀerential, school  exerts marginally
more eﬀort than school . Third, the two schools’ eﬀort levels are symmetric around ∆ = 0.
    The second panel of Figure 2 describes the value functions of the two schools. As expected, school ’s
value function is increasing in the quality diﬀerential and school ’s is decreasing. While certainly not
concave, the value functions are close to linear. When the convex cost of eﬀort is factored in, this means that
the optimization problems described in (7) and (8) are concave problems. This implies that the solutions to
the first order conditions (11) and (12) are optimal eﬀort levels.
    The bottom panel describes the dynamic evolution of the system, graphing how next period’s quality dif-
  1 7 The choice of  is a normalization and, once the results are understood, it will be obvious how varying  will impact the
equilibrium.




                                                               15
                                                    Quality of School A
            0.56

            0.54

            0.52

             0.5
                   0    1        2         3       4        5         6   7       8       9       10

                                                    Quality of School B
            0.26

            0.24

            0.22

             0.2

            0.18
                   0    1        2         3       4        5         6   7       8       9       10

                                                           Δq

            0.36
            0.34
            0.32
             0.3
            0.28
                   0    1        2         3       4        5         6   7       8       9       10
                                                       Time period



                                     Figure 3: Dynamics for the benchmark case


ferential depends on this period’s (i.e., equation (17)). Notice that whatever this period’s quality diﬀerential,
next period’s will always be positive. This is because the peer diﬀerential is always positive (see Figure 1)
and, in addition, school  exerts slightly more eﬀort. As the top panel reveals, the diﬀerence in the two
schools’ eﬀort levels is approximately constant over the entire range of quality diﬀerentials. As a consequence,
the shape of the function describing next period’s quality diﬀerential reflects the shape of the peer diﬀerential
illustrated in Figure 1. The symmetry properties of the two schools’ eﬀort levels and the peer diﬀerential
imply that ∆ 0 is symmetric around ∆ = 0. This implies that the dynamic evolution of the system starting
from initial condition ∆ is exactly the same as that starting from initial condition −∆.
   The steady state quality diﬀerential can be found where the function in the bottom panel intersects the
45 degree line. It is clear that there is a unique steady state and that the system converges monotoni-
cally to it for any given initial condition. The steady state quality diﬀerential and associated eﬀort levels
(∆     ) turn out to equal (02907 00392 0039).
   Figure 3 illustrates the dynamic evolution of quality in the two schools starting from the initial condition
associated with no choice. Immediately after choice is introduced, quality in school  increases. Thereafter,

                                                          16
it varies suﬃciently little that it appears flat. This reflects two considerations. First, since equal proportions
of rich and poor households are attracted to school , the fraction of rich children in school  is constant.
Second, since the variation in ∆ is small along the transition path (as illustrated in the bottom panel),
equilibrium eﬀort provided by school  is relatively constant. Even though school  exerts slightly more
eﬀort in steady state, quality in school  falls. That is because the fraction of rich students falls as students
from the disadvantaged neighborhood enroll. In the first period, quality falls by more than the steady state
amount because myopic households overestimate the quality diﬀerential between the two schools and too
many switch in. In the second period, households overreact to the fall in the quality diﬀerential and too few
switch in. This adjustment process continues until about the fifth period, when the steady state is reached.
As illustrated in the bottom panel, the quality diﬀerential is reduced relative to the pre-choice situation but
still remains substantial.
   To gain some intuition for the equilibrium eﬀort levels described in the top panel of Figure 2, suppose that
∆(∆) were piecewise linear rather than the curvy shape illustrated in Figure 1.18 Then, conditions (15),
(16), and (17) suggest the existence of an equilibrium with the following constant and symmetric equilibrium
eﬀort level
                                                      ∙             ¸
                                                            1
                                            ∗ =                                                                    (19)
                                                   2 1 − ∆

where ∆ is the constant negative slope of the peer diﬀerential on the interval [0 ]. This candidate
equilibrium eﬀort level is increasing in the enrollment return to eﬀort (12), decreasing in the cost of eﬀort
(), and decreasing in the absolute value of the composition return to eﬀort ∆.
   The nonlinearity of the peer diﬀerential accounts for the diﬀerence between this constant-symmetric eﬀort
solution and the equilibrium eﬀort levels described in the top panel of Figure 2. In particular, equilibrium
eﬀort is decreasing in 4 on the interval [0 ] because next period’s quality diﬀerential 4 0 is decreasing in
4 and because the composition return to eﬀort is larger when 4 0 is smaller (i.e., the absolute value of
(4 0 )∆ is larger as illustrated in Figure 1).19 Because equilibrium eﬀort is decreasing in 4, eﬀort
increases by school  (which increase next period’s quality diﬀerential) elicit a weaker rival reaction than
eﬀort increases by school  (which reduce next period’s quality diﬀerential). This explains why school 
exerts slightly more eﬀort than school . Since this a second-order phenomenon relative to the other forces
shaping eﬀort incentives (enrollment eﬀects, eﬀort costs and the first derivative of the composition return), it
is not surprising that the equilibrium eﬀort described in the top panel of Figure 2 is approximately constant
and symmetric.20 This is true in every case that we consider in the paper and it underpins many of our
 1 8 Imagine  in Figure 1, two line segments connecting (−1 025) to (0 05) and (0 05) to (1 025).
 1 9 The first part follows provided eﬀort levels are not “too asymmetric”.
 2 0 Plugging in our benchmark parameters and assuming that 44 = −05 (which is the slope of the line segment joining




                                                           17
findings.
    Finally, note that this symmetry property explains why a substantial quality diﬀerential remains under
choice. Because the disadvantaged school is located in the disadvantaged neighborhood and can never turn
local students away, it can only neutralize its peer disadvantage by providing considerably more eﬀort than
the advantaged school. Such an asymmetry of eﬀort choices is not compatible with the near-symmetry of
eﬀort incentives facing the two schools. These incentives imply that the disadvantaged school remains lower
quality in equilibrium.


3.5     Equilibrium with cost diﬀerences between income groups

As noted in the introduction, it is often argued that more advantaged households are better able to take
advantage of choice. In our model, the way to capture this is to assume that rich households face a more
favorable cost distribution. The simplest and most tractable way of introducing asymmetries between the
groups’ cost distributions is to assume that some fraction of each group of households ( and  respectively)
are “immobile”. Intuitively, these households are those who will never choose the non-neighborhood school
(e.g., because they are unaware of their options, or have prohibitively high costs). By assuming that 
exceeds  , we can examine how equilibrium changes when the rich are more mobile than the poor.
    This extension complicates the equations of the model but in a way that is straightforward to analyze.
Enrollment in school  is now given by
                              ⎧
                              ⎪
                              ⎨   1       ∆
                                  2   +       [(1 −  )(1 − ) + (1 −  ) (12 − (1 − ))] if ∆ ≥ 0
                  (∆) =                                                                                             (20)
                              ⎪
                              ⎩            1
                                               +   ∆
                                                        [(1 −  ) + (1 −  ) (12 − )]           if ∆  0
                                           2        



Note that in contrast to (3) this function is not diﬀerentiable at ∆ = 0. Rich enrollment in school  is now
given by                                    ⎧ ³                        ´
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎨   + ∆ (1 −  )(1 − )
                                                                        if ∆ ≥ 0
                                   (∆) =        ³                 ´                                                 (21)
                                            ⎪
                                            ⎩    1 + ∆ (1 −  )     if ∆  0

and the peer diﬀerential is given by
                                                   ⎧
                                                   ⎪
                                                   ⎨     (+ ∆
                                                                (1− )(1−)−(∆))
                                                              (∆)(1−(∆))           if ∆ ≥ 0
                                  ∆(∆) =                                                                            (22)
                                                   ⎪      ((1+ ∆ (1− ))−(∆))
                                                   ⎩                                   if ∆  0
                                                              (∆)(1−(∆))



Equilibrium is defined in the same way and equations (15), (16), and (17) still characterize the equilibrium
(0 05) to (1 025)), we obtain ∗ = 004.



                                                                     18
                        −3                                      Effort Levels
                     x 10
               6.6

              6.58

              6.56

              6.54                                                                                          School A
                                                                                                            School B
              6.52
                 −1          −0.8   −0.6      −0.4      −0.2         0           0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8           1

                                                               Value Functions
               11

              10.5

               10

               9.5

                 9
                 −1          −0.8   −0.6      −0.4      −0.2         0           0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8           1

                                                                    Δ q,
                 1

               0.5

                 0
                                                                                                              Δ q,
              −0.5
                                                                                                              45o line
               −1
                −1           −0.8   −0.6      −0.4      −0.2         0           0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8           1
                                                                    Δq



                                      Figure 4: Solution for the assymetric cost case


eﬀort levels. The diﬀerence is that the enrollment and peer diﬀerential functions are now given by (20) and
(22).
    To illustrate the implications of rich households being better able to exercise choice, we consider the case in
which all the poor and half of the rich are immobile (i.e., (   ) = (1 05)).21 The remaining parameters are
as for the benchmark case. Figure 4 describes the equilibrium solution. The most striking diﬀerence between
this and Figure 2 lies in the top panel which describes the equilibrium eﬀort levels. These are increasing in
the quality diﬀerential 4 when this is positive as opposed to decreasing in the basic model. Moreover, they
   2 1 The solution procedure is slightly more complicated because the equilibrium eﬀort levels are no longer symmetric around

∆ = 0. We deal with this by first constructing the equilibrium strategies on the interval [0 ] and then using these to construct
the strategies on the interval [− 0]. It should be noted that equilibrium will not exist for all possible choices of  and  . This
is because there may exist ∆ such that the ∆ 0 associated with any candidate equilibrium equals 0. But at that point the
functions (∆ 0 ) and ∆(∆ 0 ) are not diﬀerentiable and thus the first order conditions (15) and (16) are not well-defined. This
problem can be circumvented by assuming that  and  are such that for all ∆ it is the case that ∆(∆) is positive. Then,
provided that the eﬀort levels of the two schools are similar in the candidate equilibrium, (17) implies that ∆ 0 is always positive.
Intuitively, this assumption means that whatever the expected quality diﬀerence between the two schools, after households have
made their choices, school  still has better peers. It rules out, for example, a situation in which all the rich are mobile and all
the poor immobile (i.e., (   ) = (1 0)). In this case, if ∆ = −, all the rich would attend school  and only neighborhood
’s poor families would use school . Clearly, then, ∆(−) would be significantly negative. By continuity, with only a small
diﬀerence between the two schools’ eﬀort levels, there would exist some ∆ ∈ (− 0) at which ∆ 0 as described by (17) would
equal 0 and the problem would arise.



                                                                   19
are no longer symmetric around ∆ = 0. Underlying this finding is the fact that the peer diﬀerential in this
case is increasing when 4 is positive as opposed to decreasing in the basic model. However, when 4 is
negative, the peer diﬀerential is increasing as in the basic model.22 Intuitively, because only rich households
in neighborhood  are mobile, a higher quality diﬀerential attracts more rich families and therefore increases
the fraction of rich children in school . Because the composition return is positive, schools have stronger
incentives to exert eﬀort. It is also the case that the eﬀort levels of the two schools are even closer than in
the baseline model and it is school  that puts in marginally more eﬀort.23
    A further diﬀerence is evident in the bottom panel which describes the dynamics of the equilibrium.
In particular, next period’s quality diﬀerential is now increasing in the current period’s when the latter is
positive. Again, since the two school’s exert almost identical levels of eﬀort, next period’s quality diﬀerential
is just the peer diﬀerential (see (17)). As just discussed, the peer diﬀerential is increasing in the quality
diﬀerential in this case. The change in shape results in the steady state quality diﬀerential being higher than
in the basic model. The steady state quality diﬀerential and associated eﬀort levels (4     ) equal
(0415 0006565 0006567). Eﬀort levels are lower despite the positive eﬀect of the quality diﬀerential on the
peer diﬀerential because so many households are immobile and hence the overall response of enrollment to
the quality diﬀerential is lower. This underscores the point that the strength of any school eﬀort response
resulting from choice should be judged relative to the pool of mobile households.



4      The impact of choice

We are now ready to study the impact of introducing choice. We study its impacts on school quality and
household welfare. The policy debate and the empirical literature have focused on the quality impacts of
choice, both in the aggregate and across schools and communities. The focus on household welfare is more in
the spirit of traditional public economics.24 Measures of household welfare include the additional costs that
households incur when they choose their non-neighborhood school, which we view as a legitimate part of the
social calculus.
    We begin by defining the precise quantities of interest. Recall that without choice, school ’s quality in
  2 2 The  shape of the peer diﬀerential can be verified by plotting the function described in (22) with (   ) = (1 05).
  2 3 Again,  the non-linearity in the peer diﬀerential accounts for the diﬀerence between these equilibrium eﬀort levels and the
constant symmetric eﬀort level. Equilibrium eﬀort levels are slightly increasing in 4 because the composition return to eﬀort
is positive and because the peer diﬀerential function is concave. This means that the composition return is largest when 40 is
small (i.e., when 4 is large). School  exerts more eﬀort because an increase in school ’s quality (which reduces the quality
diﬀerential) elicits a weaker reaction from its rival.
   2 4 This said, we do not consider school payoﬀs in our welfare measure. This is because we see the policy problem to which

choice is one possible answer as improving school performance for given levels of educational spending. Eliciting more eﬀort
from school personnel is not considered a social loss. In addition, our model of schools’ payoﬀs is too reduced form to permit a
satisfactory accounting of the surplus accruing to school personnel and stakeholders.



                                                               20
each period is 2 and school ’s is 2(1 − ). Let (∆     ) be the steady state associated with
the equilibrium under choice and assume that ∆ is positive. Using (1), the changes in the two schools’
qualities are
                                                               µ                  ¶
                                                                    (∆ )
                                               =  +                   − 2                         (23)
                                                                   (∆ )

and
                                                         µ                            ¶
                                                              −  (∆ )
                                         =  +                       − 2(1 − )                     (24)
                                                             1 − (∆ )

The enrollment-weighted average change in school quality, which we denote by , is25


                                             = (∆ ) + (1 − (∆ ))                             (25)


The expression in (25) is so simple because changes in school qualities resulting from student composition
are zero sum and hence wash out of the analysis.
    Turning to welfare, three variables are of particular interest: the steady state average change in per period
welfare of households in the two neighborhoods, which we denote  and  , and the average change in
per-period welfare, which we denote by  . The per period welfare change from choice for households in
neighborhood  is just
                                                            =                                        (26)

This reflects the fact that, since ∆ is positive, all households in neighborhood  continue to send their
children to school  and hence the only impact on their welfare is how the quality of their school changes.
Households in neighborhood  are more complicated because some switch to school  and some do not. The
non-switchers obtain a per period welfare change of  . Those who do switch obtain a per period welfare
change of  + 2(2 − 1) − . Averaging over switchers and non-switchers, we obtain

                           h                  ³R                                               ´i
                                                 ∆                                  ∆
            (1 − 2(1 − ))   + (1 −  ) 0  ( + 2(2 − 1) − ) 
                                                                             + (1 −    ) 
       =              h                 ³R                                               ´i              (27)
                                               ∆                               ∆
              +2(1 − )   + (1 −  ) 0 ( + 2(2 − 1) − )  + (1 −  )


Using (26) and (27), it is straightforward to show that the average welfare gain is

                                                                    1 ∆
                                                 =  − ((∆ ) − )                                     (28)
                                                                    2 2
  2 5 The   enrollment weighted average change in school quality is defined to be
                                                                          1
                                   = (∆ ) + (1 − (∆ ))  −     (2 + 2(1 − )) 
                                                                          2
where  is the steady state quality of school  under choice.


                                                                 21
This shows that the average welfare gain from choice depends on the diﬀerence between two terms. The first
term is the change in school average quality, which we know is just the change in school average eﬀort. The
second term represents the additional costs incurred by households in neighborhood  who use school . For
choice to generate positive average welfare gains, increases in average quality must outweigh the additional
costs incurred by switching households.
    We are interested in the sign and magnitude of the six variables defined in (23)-(28) and in how they
change with the importance of peer preferences and the mobility of the two groups. With respect to the
former, we vary the parameter  from 0 to 15. With respect to the latter, we consider two scenarios: the
benchmark case from the basic model in which all households are mobile ((   ) = (0 0)) and the asymmetric
case in which only the rich are mobile ((   ) = (1 05)). Figure 5 presents our findings. Each of the six
panels describes the level of one of the six variables as a function of  which is measured on the horizontal
axis. The solid line in each panel describes what happens when all households are mobile, while the dashed
line deals with the case in which only rich households are mobile. The parameters underlying the figure are
those from the benchmark case.


4.1     School Quality

Our findings concerning the impacts of choice on average school quality are summarized in:

Finding 1 i) Choice increases average school quality. When all households are mobile, stronger peer pref-
erences reduce the gain in average school quality. When only rich households are mobile, stronger peer
preferences increase the gain in average school quality.

The first part of this finding is unsurprising: average school quality depends solely on average school eﬀort and
schools exert zero eﬀort without choice. The second part is more interesting and the intuition is as follows.
When all households are mobile, there is a negative “composition return” to higher eﬀort. In other words, all
else equal, school  is reluctant to exert eﬀort because this would decrease the peer diﬀerential between the two
schools; school  is reluctant to exert eﬀort because this would increase the peer diﬀerential between the two
schools. When peer preferences are stronger, the composition return is larger, hence stronger peer preferences
reduce eﬀort incentives and lessen the increase in average school quality. When only rich households are
mobile, the composition return is positive and stronger peer preferences increase eﬀort incentives and generate
larger increases in average school quality.26
   2 6 Because eﬀort levels depend on the quality diﬀerential, there is a second mechanism contributing to this finding. To see

this, note that stronger peer preferences magnify the natural advantage of school  and induce some peer-driven choice. In the
first case, this reduces the quality diﬀerential hence increases school eﬀort (because eﬀort is decreasing in the quality diﬀerential
- see the top panel of Figure 2). In the second case, this increases the quality diﬀerential hence increases school eﬀort (because
eﬀort is increasing the quality diﬀerential - see the top panel of Figure 4).


                                                                 22
        Change in Average School Quality                          Aggregate Welfare Change

                                                       0.04                             Benchmark
 0.04                                                                                   Asymmetric
                                                       0.03

 0.03                                                  0.02

                                                       0.01
 0.02
                                                         0

 0.01                                                 −0.01

                                                      −0.02
   0
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1                1.5



         Change in Quality of School A                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood A



   0                                                     0


−0.05                                                 −0.05


 −0.1                                                  −0.1


−0.15                                                 −0.15


 −0.2                                                  −0.2
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1                1.5



         Change in Quality of School B                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood B
                                                       0.15


   0                                                    0.1


                                                       0.05
−0.05

                                                         0

 −0.1
                                                      −0.05


               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1                1.5
                       α                                                     α



                                  Figure 5: Impact of choice




                                                 23
    Turning to the impact of choice on the two schools qualities, our findings are summarized in:

Finding 1 ii) In the advantaged school, when all households are mobile, choice increases quality when
peer preferences are weak but reduces it once peer preferences exceed a critical level. Moreover, stronger
peer preferences increase the reduction. When only rich households are mobile, choice increases quality and
stronger peer preferences increase this quality gain.
Finding 1 iii) In the disadvantaged school, when all households are mobile, choice increases quality but
stronger peer preferences reduce this quality gain. When only rich households are mobile, choice increases
quality when peer preferences are weak but reduces it once peer preferences exceed a critical level. Moreover,
stronger peer preferences increase the reduction.

Irrespective of which households are mobile, weak peer preferences mean that few households in the disadvan-
taged neighborhoods exercise choice. It follows that in both schools, choice increases eﬀort without changing
school peer groups. As such, choice increases quality in both schools. This is what we would expect to see in
a model in which parents did not have peer preferences.
    When peer preferences are stronger, households in the disadvantaged neighborhood exercise choice. When
all households are mobile, household switching decreases peer quality in school  and leaves it unchanged
in school . Hence for school , stronger peer preferences reduce the quality gain (because they reduce the
eﬀort increase) but the quality gain remains positive. For school , stronger peer preferences generate a large
reduction in the quality gain (because they reduce eﬀort and peer quality) and the quality gain is negative
for peer preferences above some critical level. When only the rich are mobile, household switching increases
peer quality in school  and decreases it in school . For school , this increases its peer advantage and
hence its quality advantage. For school , the costs of worse peer quality can exceed the benefits of higher
eﬀort, resulting in a decrease in quality.
    Findings 1i, 1ii and 1iii suggest that when households have strong peer preferences, the eﬀects of choice
exhibit an interesting type of equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ: when introduced into an environment in which rich
and poor households are equally likely to take advantage of it, choice will generate modest incentives to
provide eﬀort but will decrease the peer quality diﬀerence between the advantaged and disadvantaged school;
when introduced into an environment in which rich households are more likely to take advantage of it, choice
will provide stronger eﬀort incentives, but will increase the peer quality diﬀerence between the advantaged
and disadvantaged school.27
  2 7 Panel A of Figure 5 suggests that when all households are mobile, choice impacts on average quality are larger than when

only rich households are mobile. Although this appears to contradict the equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ described in the text, it is
a consequence of the fact that when all households are mobile, there are four times as many mobile students as when only rich
households are mobile. As such, eﬀort eﬀects on enrollment are four times as large. A proper comparison of the two cases must
hold constant the number of mobile households. We make this comparison in Section 6. As seen from panel A of Figure 6, when


                                                             24
4.2     Household Welfare

Our findings concerning average household welfare are summarized in:

Finding 2 i) Choice increases average welfare when peer preferences are weak and decreases average welfare
when peer preferences are strong. The decrease in average welfare associated with stronger peer preferences
is greater when all households are mobile than when only rich households are mobile.

To gain intuition for this finding, recall that the average welfare gain from choice is just the diﬀerence between
the average quality gain and the costs incurred by the switching households (equation (28)). In the context of
Finding 1i, we explained how peer preferences and mobility considerations impact the average quality gain.
Thus, we just need to understand the switching costs.
    When peer preferences are weak, school ’s natural peer advantage has little attraction. As a result, few
households will exercise choice and hence these costs will be low. When peer preferences are stronger, school
’s peer advantage will drive more households to exercise choice. These switching households obviously
benefit from their decision, but their benefit comes at the expense of households in the advantaged school
and thus there is no aggregate gain. Welfare is reduced by the costs that these households incur and, for
high enough peer preferences, these costs overwhelm the benefits of higher average quality. The decrease in
average welfare associated with stronger peer preferences is greater when all households are mobile because
in this case average quality is also dropping.
    Turning to the impact on welfare in the two neighborhoods, our findings are summarized in:

Finding 2 ii) In the advantaged neighborhood, when all households are mobile, choice increases welfare
when peer preferences are weak, but reduces it once peer preferences exceed a critical level. When only rich
households are mobile, choice increases welfare and stronger peer preferences increase this welfare gain.
Finding 2 iii) In the disadvantaged neighborhood, when all households are mobile, choice increases welfare
and stronger peer preferences increase this welfare gain. When only rich households are mobile, choice
increases welfare when peer preferences are weak but reduces it once peer preferences exceed a critical level.

Since no households in neighborhood  exercise choice, the change in welfare in neighborhood  equals
the change in quality in school . Thus, the intuition underlying the welfare change in the advantaged
neighborhood is just that used to explain the quality change.
    For neighborhood , when all households are mobile, stronger peer preferences increase the welfare gain
enjoyed by neighborhood  despite decreasing the quality of school . This is because the benefits enjoyed
the mobile households include a larger fraction of rich students, choice impacts on average school quality are greater. As seen in
panels B and C, this case also results in an increase in quality in school A and a decrease in quality in school B. This illustrates
the trade-oﬀ described in the text.


                                                                25
by those households who switch to school  outweigh the costs (of lower school quality) experienced by
those do not. The benefits enjoyed by switching households also explains why, when only rich households are
mobile, the neighborhood  welfare reduction associated with stronger peer preferences is milder than the
school  quality reduction.


4.3     The Role of Neighborhood Inequality

We have derived all these findings under the assumption that the fraction of rich in the community  is equal
to 05 and the fraction of rich in the advantaged neighborhood  is equal to 075. It is worth discussing
briefly how changing these values alters the impact of choice.
   When all households are mobile, raising the fraction of rich in the community or the fraction of rich
in the advantaged neighborhood has exactly the same implications for the impact of choice as increasing
the strength of peer preferences. In other words, the impact of changing  or  is isomorphic to changing
. To see this, note that the equations characterizing the equilibrium (15), (16), and (17) depend on the
peer diﬀerential (6) and its derivative multiplied by , along with the derivative of the enrollment function
(3). The enrollment function does not depend on  and , while ∆(∆) just depends on the product
(2 − 1). It follows that the equilibrium under choice and hence the steady state (∆     ) just
depends on (2 − 1). From (25) and (28), this implies that the average change in school quality  and the
average change in household welfare  just depends on (2 − 1). Moreover, using this information along
with (23), (24), (26), and (27), it is easy to verify that the other four variables only depend on the product
(2 − 1). This is the peer preference multiplied by the diﬀerence between the fraction of rich students in
schools  and  in the pre-choice period. As such, it measures the advantage enjoyed by school  in the
competition for students. It is interesting that in the baseline model in which all households are mobile, this
is a suﬃcient statistic for the behavior of the model.
   When only rich households are mobile, the equivalence between changing  or  and changing  no longer
holds. To see this, note that the enrollment function depends on  and  and changing each of the three
parameters has very diﬀerent implications for ∆(∆). Thus, to understand the implications of changing 
or , further analysis is required.28 This analysis reveals that an increase in  (i.e., a decrease in the fraction
of the rich households that live in neighborhood ) leads to a reduction in all six variables. An increase in
 (i.e., an increase in the fraction of rich students in the community) has more complex eﬀects, including
increasing average quality and decreasing average welfare. None of these eﬀects are especially informative
however, since in the scenario where only rich households are mobile, changes to these parameters will
 2 8 This   analysis is available from the authors upon request.



                                                                   26
change the number of mobile households in neighborhood . The resulting eﬀort implications are somewhat
mechanical, but will drive most of the eﬀects of changing these parameters. The contrast between the model
in which all households are mobile and the model in which only rich households are mobile is much better
suited to the analysis of peer preferences.



5     Enhancing school choice

As noted in the Introduction, proponents of public school choice often claim that the equity eﬀects of choice
can be improved by policies that help disadvantaged students to exercise choice. In this Section, we consider
choice combined with this policy. We also study choice combined with another policy that emerges naturally
from our model: subsidizing schools for enrolling disadvantaged students. Since we show that first policy
can weaken eﬀort incentives, while the second can strengthen then, we then consider choice combined with
a mix of these policies. Throughout, we take a balanced budget approach, requiring that the resources used
to implement these policies come from within the school system.


5.1    Helping poor students to exercise choice

To permit a balanced budget analysis of policies that help poor students to exercise choice, we suppose that
the school district has a fixed budget available for actions that encourage households in the disadvantaged
neighborhood to take advantage of choice. In particular, we assume that these policies reduce the fractions
of rich and poor students ( and  ) that are immobile. The idea is that immobility is driven by high costs
or ignorance of the choice program and is therefore responsive to policies such as subsidies and outreach.
We further assume that by targeting its budget appropriately, the district can influence the extent of the
reductions in  and  . For example, outreach targeted at the less-advantaged part of the neighborhood will
cause a bigger reduction in  than  .
    Formally, we assume that the combinations of  and  that the district can achieve with its budget
satisfy an equation of the form
                                       1                            
                                      ( − (1 − )) + (1 − ) =                                         (29)
                                       2                            2

The parameter  measures the fraction of households in the disadvantaged neighborhood that are immobile.
This will depend on the size of the district’s subsidy and outreach budget and is thus exogenous for our
purposes. Targeting more of the budget to helping poor students exercise choice will result in a decrease in 
and a compensating increase in  to maintain (29). A key attraction of this formulation is that when we vary
(   ) in this way, we do not change the “direct” enrollment eﬀect of a change in the quality diﬀerential. This

                                                        27
can be seen from equation (20). The implicit assumption underlying this formulation is that a redistribution
of outreach spending between rich and poor households will not change the overall fraction in neighborhood
 that are immobile. Thus, the relationship between outreach dollars and immobility is linear.
   We can now examine the implications of targeting resources to help poor students exercise choice. Given
(29), such policies are equivalent to an increase in  and a compensating decrease in  . To illustrate the eﬀect
of such a policy, we assume that the district’s budget is such that 50% of the households in neighborhood 
are immobile after its outreach eﬀorts (i.e.,  = 05). In addition, we assume that under the initial allocation
of the budget, each group is equally mobile so that  =  = 05. We then consider a retargeting policy that
increases  to 06 and reduces  to 04666. All other parameters are set at their benchmark levels.
   Figure 6 illustrates the eﬀects of this policy. Again, the six panels describe the level of the six variables
identified in Section 4 as a function of . The solid line in each panel describes what happens when  =
 = 05 and the dashed line deals with the case in which (   ) is equal to (06 04666). The policy reduces
average school quality and quality in school  but increases quality in school . This reflects the fact that
both schools put in lower eﬀort under the policy because a higher fraction of the marginal students are
poor. Those households from neighborhood  switching into school  now contain a higher fraction of poor
students which hurts school ’s peer quality and helps school ’s. Mitigating the impact on school  is
the fact that there are fewer households switching in because the quality diﬀerential between the schools is
smaller. The policy has very little eﬀect on aggregate welfare but does lead to a small increase for high peer
preferences (i.e., decreases the average welfare loss). This reflects the fact that less switching is occurring.
Welfare for the disadvantaged neighborhood is increased. We summarize these findings as:

Finding 3 i) Relative to a situation in which rich and poor students are equally mobile, targeting resources
to help poor rather than rich students exercise choice decreases average school quality and quality in the
advantaged school, but increases quality in the disadvantaged school. When peer preferences are strong, the
policy increases the welfare gain from choice in the disadvantaged neighborhood, decreases the welfare gain
from choice in the advantaged neighborhood and decreases the average welfare loss from choice.


5.2    Incentivizing schools to enroll poor students

In light of the drawbacks of policies to help poor students to exercise choice, it is natural to instead work
on the supply side by encouraging schools to enroll poor students. The basic model assumes that the school
district allocates surplus to schools according to the formula of 1 unit per enrolled student. Suppose instead
that it provides a surplus of   1 per enrolled poor student and   1 per enrolled rich student. Maintaining



                                                        28
        Change in Average School Quality                          Aggregate Welfare Change

                                                       0.02                             ir = ip
 0.02                                                                                   Higher ir
                                                       0.01
0.015

                                                         0
 0.01

                                                      −0.01
0.005

                                                      −0.02
   0
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5



         Change in Quality of School A                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood A


   0                                                     0



−0.05                                                 −0.05



 −0.1                                                  −0.1



−0.15                                                 −0.15
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5



         Change in Quality of School B                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood B
                                                       0.12
0.045


 0.04                                                   0.1


0.035                                                  0.08


 0.03                                                  0.06

0.025
                                                       0.04

 0.02
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5
                       α                                                     α



                       Figure 6: Helping the poor excercise choice




                                                 29
budget balance by holding constant the expenditure at 1 unit per student requires that


                                                 (1 − ) +  = 1                                            (30)


This equation implies that  equals (1 − (1 − ) )  and that the diﬀerence  −  equals (1 −  ) .
Ruling out negative surplus, the relevant range of  is therefore [1 1 (1 − )]. Setting  = 1 yields the
benchmark case.
   Under this policy, for any  in the range [1 1 (1 − )], the two schools’ strategies satisfy the requirements
that

                          ½                                                                ¾
                                                (∆)    2
         (∆) = arg max  (∆) + (1 −  )         −   +  ( −  (∆) + ∆(∆))                     (31)
                                                        2

and that

                  ½                             µ            ¶                                     ¾
                                                      (∆)      2
 (∆) = arg max  (1 −  − (∆)) + (1 −  ) 1 −           −   +  ( (∆) −  + ∆(∆)) 
                                                                2
                                                                                                (32)
Following the same steps as before, we can write the first order conditions describing the equilibrium eﬀort
levels as:
                                  ∙                                                           ¸
                                            (1 −  )              0     ∆     
                       (∆) =         +                 +  (∆   )(       −       )                   (33)
                                      ∆ 0            ∆ 0                 ∆ 0   ∆ 0

and
                                  ∙                                                        ¸
                                            (1 −  )             0    ∆     
                       (∆) =         +                 +  (∆ )(       +       )                     (34)
                                      ∆ 0            ∆ 0               ∆ 0   ∆ 0

   The only diﬀerence between (33) and (34) and (15) and (16), is that the value of a change in enrollment
is more complicated. This is the only place where the policy parameter  enters directly. Notice that when
∆ is positive, then given the generalized cost structure introduced in Section 3.5, the enrollment value of a
marginal increase in the quality diﬀerence is

            (1 −  )                                                          (1 −  )
          +                 =    [(1 −  )(1 − ) + (1 −  ) (12 − (1 − ))] +           (1 −  )(1 − ) (35)
      ∆ 0            ∆ 0                                                           

Note that this is increasing in  if


                                  − 12 +  (1 − )(1 − )   (12 − (1 − ))                              (36)




                                                          30
Since  exceeds 12, this condition will be satisfied unless the fraction of immobile poor significantly exceeds
the fraction of immobile rich. Assuming inequality (36) is satisfied, the maximum incentive for schools is
obtained by setting  equal to its maximum level 1 (1 − ).
    Figure 7 depicts the benefits of setting  equal to its maximum level as opposed to its benchmark level
when all households are mobile.29 The solid line in each panel describes what happens when  is equal to
its benchmark value (1) and the dashed line deals with the case in which  is equal to its maximum value
(2). The important point to note is that in all dimensions, the policy improves outcomes under choice. The
reason is simple: the policy raises schools’ equilibrium eﬀort levels as they have greater incentive to compete
for the marginal students in the disadvantaged neighborhood. It is still the case, however, that for suﬃciently
strong peer preferences, the aggregate welfare change under choice is negative. Moreover, quality in school
 and welfare in neighborhood  is harmed by choice. We record this finding as:

Finding 3 ii) When all households are mobile, then relative to the benchmark policy, a choice policy that
provides schools with the maximal incentive to enroll poor students increases quality in both schools and
welfare in both neighborhoods. However, when peer preferences are suﬃciently strong, choice still reduces
average welfare, welfare in the advantaged neighborhood and quality in the advantaged school.


5.3     Combining the two policies

What would happen if we combined the two policies just analyzed? Figure 8 illustrates the eﬀects of a
policy which simultaneously increases  to 06, reduces  to 04666, and raises  to 2. Because this policy
improves schools’ eﬀort incentives, it it seen to generate more desirable outcomes than a policy that only
helps poor students to exercise choice. Moreover, when compared with a policy that only incentivizes schools
to enroll poor students, it improves school quality and household welfare in the disadvantaged neighborhood.
Nonetheless, even under this two-pronged policy, when peer preferences are suﬃciently strong, average welfare
gains remain negative. Again, this is because the two schools always exert similar levels of eﬀort, so that
choice is driven by peer diﬀerentials and hence is socially wasteful.



6     Discussion

We believe that the three findings discussed above have interesting implications for the choice debate. This
Section summarizes the findings and discusses these implications.
  2 9 It goes without saying that if only rich households are mobile, paying schools for only enrolling poor students will completely

backfire and provide no incentives for schools to exert eﬀort.




                                                                 31
        Change in Average School Quality                          Aggregate Welfare Change
 0.07
                                                                                        Benchmark
                                                       0.06
0.065                                                                                   bp = 2

 0.06                                                  0.04

0.055
                                                       0.02
 0.05

0.045                                                    0

 0.04
                                                      −0.02
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5



         Change in Quality of School A                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood A

 0.05                                                  0.05

   0                                                     0

−0.05                                                 −0.05

 −0.1                                                  −0.1

−0.15                                                 −0.15

 −0.2                                                  −0.2
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5



         Change in Quality of School B                        Welfare Change for Neighborhood B
 0.07

0.065
                                                       0.15
 0.06

0.055

 0.05                                                   0.1

0.045

 0.04
                                                       0.05
               0.5            1            1.5                        0.5           1               1.5
                       α                                                     α



                 Figure 7: Incentivizing schools to enroll poor students




                                                 32
6.1     The eﬀects of public school choice on school quality exhibit a type of equity-
        eﬃciency trade-oﬀ

When parents have strong peer preferences, the eﬀects of choice on quality will exhibit a type of equity-
eﬃciency trade-oﬀ. This trade-oﬀ stems from the dependence of eﬀort incentives on the composition of the
marginal students most likely to exercise choice. If the marginal students are richer than average (i.e., richer
students are more mobile), schools will face strong incentives to recruit them and hence choice will have large
impacts on average school quality. But choice will increase the gap between quality in the advantaged and
the disadvantaged school, since the mobile rich students will leave the immobile poor students behind.
    This trade-oﬀ implies that if public school choice is intended to impact school quality, then strong peer
preferences maybe problematic for choice. Choice can increase average school quality by providing schools
with strong incentives to compete for (advantaged) students. Alternatively, choice can reduce the gap between
the quality of advantaged and disadvantaged schools by providing disadvantaged students with access to
“good” schools. But choice may struggle to do both.
    An implication of this trade-oﬀ is that the eﬀects of public school choice will be setting-specific. This
is consistent with results of choice evaluations, some of which conclude that choice improves measures of
average school quality (e.g., the Lavy (2010) evaluation of an Israeli public school choice reform) and some
of which conclude that it does not (e.g., the Ladd and Fiske (2000) evaluation of New Zealand public
choice school reforms).30 One explanation for the conflicting findings that is consistent with our model is
that the households that exercised choice in New Zealand were less advantaged than those that exercised
choice in Israel, so that New Zealand schools had weaker incentives to recruit them. Lavy (2010) is concerned
exclusively with choice impacts on average outcomes and hence it is diﬃcult to evaluate this possibility, but it
is consistent with the Ladd and Fiske account of the New Zealand reforms. First, as our model would predict,
Ladd and Fiske (2001) use school enrollment and composition data to show that post-choice, households
gravitated from low- to high-quality schools (whether quality is measured by composition or achievement).
Second, and also as our model would predict, Ladd and Fiske (2001) argue that when choosing schools,
parents used “the mix of students in a school as a proxy for school quality” (p.49). Ladd’s interpretation is
that: “(S)uccessful schools in urban areas had no desire to expand their enrollment. To the contrary, they
did everything they could to maintain the mix of students that made them attractive to parents and students
  3 0 Ladd and Fiske (2003) find no statistically significant correlations between the principal reports of the impact of choice on

learning outcomes and principal reports of the level of local competition. Lavy (2010) evaluates an Israeli public school choice
reform implemented in a single school district in Tel Aviv. He finds that relative to non-reforming control districts, a district
that implemented a public school choice program enjoyed significant school productivity gains as measured by dropout rates,
test scores and behavioral outcomes. Evidence from the UK is also mixed. Gibbons et al. (2008) exploit across-region variation
in choice and find that choice is associated with few productivity gains. Bradley and Taylor (2002) find stronger productivity
gains using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence approach.



                                                                33
in the first place..(S)chools with large concentrations of disadvantaged students have diﬃculty competing for
students” (Ladd (2003); p.70). Although the New Zealand reform deviated somewhat from the assumptions
underlying our model, and although it is not clear whether the students that exercised choice decreased
the peer quality diﬀerential (a condition for the composition return to be negative in our model), these
mechanisms bear a striking resemblance to those at work in our model.31


6.2     Public school choice can reduce average household welfare

When parents have strong preferences and when schools compete on an uneven playing field, choice may
reduce welfare. How is this possible given that choice increases average school quality? The answer is that
since the two schools exert similar levels of eﬀort, the school quality diﬀerences that cause households to
exercise choice will be driven purely by peer diﬀerences. But peer-driven choice is wasteful, because choice is
costly and peer quality is a zero-sum construct, such that one household’s peer gain is another’s peer loss.32
For the parameters that we consider, choice always reduces welfare when peer preferences are suﬃciently
strong (i.e., the welfare cost of wasteful choice outweighs the welfare benefit of higher eﬀort). Notably, this
is true even when only rich students are mobile so that stronger peer preferences increase schools’ incentive
to exert eﬀort.
    The underlying problem is that while choice is socially wasteful, the threat of choice is socially beneficial
(since it elicits socially beneficial eﬀort). When households have weak peer preferences, households threaten
schools with choice, but do not exercise choice in equilibrium. That is because both schools exert similar
levels of eﬀort and hence provide similar levels of quality from the perspective of these peer-blind households.
But when households have strong peer preferences, they threaten schools with choice and exercise choice in
equilibrium.
    One implication of this finding is that empirical evaluations of the impacts of choice on indicators of
average school quality (e.g., test scores (Lavy (2010)) or the quality of teaching and learning (Ladd and Fiske
(2003))) do not measure the full welfare eﬀects of choice. That is because they exclude the costs incurred
by households that exercise choice. These costs are as much a part of the welfare calculus as would be the
costs of hiring superstar CEOs to run public schools. Hence even if choice increases average school quality
as proxied by these measures, an economist should not recommend the policy if it reduces average welfare.
  3 1 One important diﬀerence is that many schools in New Zealand appear to have been capacity constrained. Note that in our

model, the successful schools would like to expand enrollment and the unsuccessful schools would have no diﬃcult competing
for marginal students. However, both schools would have limited incentives to exert eﬀort because of the negative composition
returns that they faced.
  3 2 Put diﬀerently, we would like to subject schools to the threat of choice but would like to prevent households from actually

exercising choice. The two goals are obviously incompatible.




                                                               34
6.3     Policies designed to enhance public school choice

As a result of the equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ that we have identified, policies that seek to improve the equity
eﬀects of choice by ensuring that choice can be exercised by disadvantaged households (e.g., by subsidizing
the transport costs of poor students) will blunt schools’ eﬀort incentives and lessen the impact of choice on
average school quality. This is important, since discussion of policies designed to improve outcomes under
choice typically focuses on these types of policies. For example, in their “Proposal for Reform”, Chubb and
Moe (1990) argued for the creation of “Choice Oﬃces” that will organize transportation “(F)or students
that need it...especially the poor and those located in rural areas” (p.221) and provide “Parent Information
Centers” to handle the applications process and provide information, advice and assistance to parents.33 Our
analysis implies that this type of activity could lessen the eﬀects of choice on average school quality.
   More constructively, our findings suggest that when parents have strong peer preferences, outcomes under
choice can be improved by a policy not usually considered in school choice discussions: incentivizing schools
for enrolling poor students. This policy seems especially promising because it is a version of the “weighted-
student financing” (WSF) that already exists in many settings. Under these formulae, schools receive funds
in proportion to the number of students taught with adjustments made for student composition. Some WSF
formulas are fairly involved; some are more straightforward. In the UK for example, the school funding
formula includes a “pupil premium” which attaches additional funds to each of a school’s students eligible
for a free school meal. The policy that we have in mind would compensate schools for the additional costs
associated with educating disadvantaged students (as at present) and provide an additional premium to
incentivize them to exert the eﬀort necessary to attract less-advantaged students.
   Of course schools cannot attract less-advantaged students if it is costly for those students to move.
That is why our analysis found that a two-pronged approach oﬀers the best hope for achieving desirable
outcomes under choice. First, policies that help poor students to exercise choice, with a view to ensuring
that the disadvantaged school and the disadvantaged households are not left behind. Second, policies that
reward schools for enrolling poor students, thereby ensuring the largest possible eﬃciency gains from choice.
Importantly though, even when accompanied by this two-pronged policy, choice can reduce welfare when
peer preferences are suﬃciently strong.
  3 3 Chubb and Moe (1990) note that their preferred policy would allow students to use vouchers at approved private schools,

but stress that choice and competition among public schools would also be desirable.




                                                             35
7     Conclusion

To this point the choice debate has been characterized by largely informal arguments concerning whether
or not market analysis can be applied to schools. Our aim was to shed light on this debate by providing a
formal analysis of choice. To that end this paper has presented an economic model of household and school
interaction in a system of public school choice and used it to assess the impact of choice on school quality and
household welfare. The model assumed that households have peer preferences but was otherwise designed to
capture the full force of the pro-choice argument.
    With this in mind, it is perhaps surprising that our analysis ends up highlighting potential limitations
of choice programs. In particular, while our model shows that choice will increase average school quality, it
reveals two important caveats. First, when peer preferences are strong, choice could reduce average household
welfare. Second, there will be a type of equity-eﬃciency trade-oﬀ associated with these eﬀects on average
quality: when peer preferences are strong, either the eﬀects will be weak or the eﬀects will be strong but will
also be accompanied by an increase in the gap between quality in advantaged and disadvantaged schools.
Choice advocates’ typical response to this equity problem - the promotion of policies that help disadvantaged
students to exercise choice - will have unintended consequences. Specifically, these policies will blunt schools’
incentives to exert eﬀort and thereby dampen choice’s impact on average school quality. We show that some
of these eﬀects can be mitigated by also incentivizing schools to enroll disadvantaged students, but we show
that choice can reduce welfare even under this two-pronged policy.
    Of course our analysis is limited in many important ways. First, in focusing on public school choice, we
have ignored other types of school choice, notably choice of school district (i.e., Tiebout choice) and choice
policies designed to enhance options outside of the public sector (e.g., charter schools and private school
vouchers). It seems reasonable to expect that peer preferences will shape the eﬀects of these other types
of choice, but the institutional environments are suﬃciently diﬀerent that new modeling is required.34 The
careful study of these other types of choice is an important topic for future work. Second, to shed light on the
main forces driving outcomes under choice, we have made many strong assumptions (as discussed in Section
2.2). As a result, our model is too stylized to determine whether, given existing peer preferences, specific
public school programs would improve on existing outcomes. Nonetheless, we hope that our paper lays some
of the foundations necessary to answer this question.
  3 4 For example, a model of Tiebout choice must consider how districts make tax and spending decisions. An analysis of private

school vouchers must consider how private schools admit students (e.g., whether or not they can turn voucher students away).




                                                              36
References

Angrist, J. (2013). The perils of peer eﬀects. Working Paper 19774, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bradley, S. and Taylor, J. (2002). The eﬀect of the quasi-market on the eﬃciency-equity trade-oﬀ in the
  secondary sector. Bulletin of Economic Research, 54(3):295—314.

Burgess, S., Greaves, E., Vignoles, A., and Wilson, D. (2014). What parents want: School preferences and
  school choice. Economic Journal, Forthcoming.

Chubb, J. and Moe, T. (1990). Politics, Markets, and America’s Schools. Brookings Institution Press.

Chubb, J. and Moe, T. (1992). A Lesson in School Reform from Great Britain. Brookings Institution Press.

Cullen, J., Jacob, B., and Levitt, S. (2006). The eﬀect of school choice on participants: Evidence from
  randomized lotteries. Econometrica, 74(5):1191—1230.

Epple, D. and Romano, R. (1998). Competition between private and public schools, vouchers, and peer-group
  eﬀects. American Economic Review, 88(1):33—62.

Epple, D. and Romano, R. (2003). Neighborhood schools, choice and the distribution of educational benefits.
  In Hoxby, C. M., editor, The Economics of School Choice, chapter 7, pages 227—286. University of Chicago
  Press.

Farrell, J. and Klemperer, P. (2007). Coordination and lock-in: Competition with switching costs and network
  eﬀects. In Armstrong, M. and Porter, R., editors, The Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3,
  chapter 31, pages 1967—2072. Elsevier.

Friedman, M. (1953). Essays in Positive Economics. Chicago University Press.

Gibbons, S., Machin, S., and Silva, O. (2008). Choice, competition, and pupil achievement. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 6(4):912—947.

Hastings, J., Kane, T., and Staiger, D. (2006). Preferences and heterogeneous treatment eﬀects in a public
  school choice lottery. NBER Working Papers 12145, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Urquiola, M. (2006). The eﬀects of generalized school choice on achievement and stratifica-
  tion: Evidence from chile’s voucher program. Journal of Public Economics, 90(8-9):1477—1503.

Judd, K. (1992). Projection methods for solving aggregate growth models. Journal of Economic Theory,
  58(2):410—452.

                                                    37
Ladd, H. (2002). Market-Based Reforms in Education. Economic Policy Institiute, Washington, D.C.

Ladd, H. (2003). Comment on Caroline M. Hoxby: School choice and school competition: Evidence from the
  United States. Swedish Economic Policy Review, 10:67—76.

Ladd, H. and Fiske, E. (2000). When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale. Brookings Institution Press.

Ladd, H. and Fiske, E. (2001). The uneven playing field of school choice: Evidence from New Zealand. Jour-
  nal of Policy Analysis and Management, 20(1):43—64.

Ladd, H. and Fiske, E. (2003). Does competition improve teaching and learning: Evidence from New Zealand.
  Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(1):97—112.

Lavy, V. (2010). Eﬀects of free choice among public schools. Review of Economic Studies, 77(3):1164—1191.

MacLeod, B. and Urquiola, M. (2013). Anti-lemons: Reputation and educational quality. Mimeo, version
  March 13, 2013.

Manski, C. (1992). Educational choice (vouchers) and social mobility. Economics of Education Review,
  11(4):351—369.

McMillan, R. (2005). Competition, incentives, and public school productivity. Journal of Public Economics,
  89:1131—1154.

Mizala, A., Romaguera, P., and Urquiola, M. (2007). Socioeconomic status or noise? Tradeoﬀs in the gene-
  ration of school quality information. Journal of Development Economics, 84(1):61—75.

Rothstein, J. (2006). Good principals or good peers? Parental valuation of school characteristics, Tiebout
  equilibrium, and the incentive eﬀects of competition among jurisdictions. American Economic Review,
  96(4):1333—1350.

Scotchmer, S. (1985). Profit-maximizing clubs. Journal of Public Economics, 27(1):25—45.




                                                    38
