                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FINANCING SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE:
      AN EXPERIMENT WITH AGENT-INTERMEDIATED MICROLOANS IN INDIA

                                           Pushkar Maitra
                                            Sandip Mitra
                                          Dilip Mookherjee
                                           Alberto Motta
                                           Sujata Visaria

                                        Working Paper 20709
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20709


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014


Funding was provided by the Australian Agency for International Development, the International Growth
Centre, United States Agency for International Development and the Hong Kong Research Grants
Council. We are grateful to Shree Sanchari for implementing the lending schemes. Clarence Lee, Daijing
Lv, Foez Mojumder, Moumita Poddar and Nina Yeung provided exceptional research assistance and
Elizabeth Kwok provided excellent administrative support. Boston University Masters students Torry
Ah-Tye, Ou Bai, Juan Blanco, Chantel Pfeiffer and Stefan Winata conducted useful analysis and provided
insights from a field study of relations between agents and borrowers in the study. We thank Xavier
Gine, Albert Park, Russell Toth, Bruce Wydick and a large number of seminar and conference participants
for helpful comments on previous and related versions. Internal review board clearance was received
from Monash University, Boston University and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
The authors are responsible for all errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Pushkar Maitra, Sandip Mitra, Dilip Mookherjee, Alberto Motta, and Sujata Visaria. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financing Smallholder Agriculture: An Experiment with Agent-Intermediated Microloans
in India
Pushkar Maitra, Sandip Mitra, Dilip Mookherjee, Alberto Motta, and Sujata Visaria
NBER Working Paper No. 20709
November 2014
JEL No. O16,O17,Q14

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent evaluations of traditional microfinance loans have found no significant impacts on borrower
incomes or productive activities. We examine whether this can be remedied by (a) modifying loan
features to facilitate financing of working capital needs of farmers, and (b) delegating selection of
borrowers for individual liability loans to local trader-lender agents incentivized by repayment-based
commissions. We conduct a field experiment in West Bengal where this design (called TRAIL) was
offered in randomly selected villages. In remaining villages a more traditional design (called GBL)
was offered, wherein five-member groups applied for joint liability loans with terms otherwise similar
to TRAIL loans. TRAIL loans increased cultivation of potatoes (the major cash crop in the region)
and farm incomes by 17–21%, whereas GBL loans had insignificant and highly dispersed effects.
We argue this was because TRAIL agents selected borrowers that were low-risk and highly productive,
whereas the GBL scheme attracted farmers that were riskier on average and highly heterogeneous
in terms of productivity. TRAIL loans also achieved higher repayment and take-up rates, and lower
administrative costs.


Pushkar Maitra                                    Alberto Motta
Monash University                                 University of New South Wales
Department of Economics                           School of Economics
Clayton Campus, VIC 3800                          Australian School of Business
Australia                                         Sydney 2052
Pushkar.Maitra@buseco.monash.edu.au               Room 3124
                                                  Australia
Sandip Mitra                                      motta@unsw.edu.au
Indian Statistical Institute
Sampling and Official Statistics Unit             Sujata Visaria
203 BT Road                                       Department of Economics
Kolkata 700108                                    Lee Shau Kee Business Building
sandipisi@gmail.com                               Hong Kong University of Science
                                                   and Technology
Dilip Mookherjee                                  Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Department of Economics                           svisaria@ust.hk
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
dilipm@bu.edu
1       Introduction

A major challenge in development policy is finding ways to finance the agricultural needs of
poor farmers. Institutional finance is typically available only to those with enough assets
to post as collateral, and as a result the majority of the rural population in developing
countries is excluded from the formal financial sector. In turn this restricts growth in
agricultural production and prevents poor farming households from diversifying into high
value cash crops (Feder, 1985, Armendáriz and Morduch, 2005).

Microcredit has filled this chasm to some extent, but because loans must be repaid in
frequent installments, and there is low tolerance for risk, micro-loans have not financed
the productive needs of poor borrowers successfully. Some recent experimental evaluations
of microcredit suggest that rather than increasing entrepreneurship or borrower incomes,
its principal role has been to allow consumption smoothing and the purchase of consumer
durables (Morduch, 1998, Banerjee et al., 2011, Banerjee, 2013).1

This paper investigates a new mechanism (called Trader Agent Intermediated Lending, or
TRAIL) for selecting farmers with low landholdings to receive unsecured individual-liability
loans to finance agricultural working capital. In contrast to standard microcredit, loan
durations match crop cycles, and repayment amounts are index-insured against yield and
price risk in the major cash crop. The interest rate is set below the average interest rates
on loans from informal lenders. Local intermediaries embedded in the local community,
who have extensive experience and knowledge about the creditworthiness of local farmers
are appointed as agents and are asked to recommend borrowers to the lender. They are
incentivized through commissions that depend on the loan repayments of the borrowers.
Borrowers are induced to repay by conditioning their future credit access on current loan
repayments.

Through a field experiment conducted in 48 villages in two districts of West Bengal, India
during 2010-12, we assess the performance of the TRAIL scheme. We focus on potato-
growing districts, since potatoes are the leading cash crop in West Bengal. Shree Sanchari,
a Kolkata-based microfinance institution offered TRAIL loans at an annual interest rate
of 18% (compared to 26% average rates charged by informal lenders), with a duration of
4 months. Successful repayment would render a borrower eligible for another TRAIL loan
in a future lending cycle equal to 133% of the current loan repaid. The lender paid agents
75% of the interest received from their recommended borrowers as commission.

One randomly-selected trader from the village was appointed to be the agent. Loans were
offered to a randomly-selected subset of the borrowers he recommended to the lender. To
evaluate the impact of these loans on borrower outcomes, we compare the outcomes of the
treated borrowers with outcomes of those who were recommended but were unlucky in the
lottery and so did not receive the loans. This allows us to estimate the average treatment
    1
    There has been a long controversy over the impact of microcredit on borrower incomes in Bangladesh.
For a recent contribution to this debate, see Khandker and Samad (2013).


                                                  2
effect of the TRAIL loans, uncontaminated by endogenous selection.

We compare the impacts of the TRAIL scheme with those of a Group Based Lending
(GBL) scheme, where selection and enforcement were induced through a mechanism similar
to that used in traditional microcredit. Borrowers self-selected into groups that met with
an official of the MFI twice every month and fulfilled savings targets, before becoming
eligible to receive joint-liability loans. All other features of the loans such as interest rate,
duration, index insurance and the eligibility for future credit access were the same in two
schemes. We develop a theoretical model to analyze the patterns of borrower selection in
both alternatives, as well as their impacts on cultivation, output and agricultural incomes.
The predictions of the model are tested with data from loan records as well as detailed
household surveys collected every four months over a period of two years, from a sample
of households in the study villages.

Our theoretical model is one of segmented credit markets within each village, where bor-
rowers are classified into two categories: connected and floating. Connected borrowers are
in turn partitioned into different networks: each network consists of lenders and borrowers
who behave in a cooperative fashion to maximize the aggregate payoffs of network mem-
bers, and share useful production and marketing information that raises farm productivity.
This cooperative behavior could be the result of close social and economic relationships,
or altruism within networks. Every lender belongs to some network. Floating borrowers
do not belong to any network, and do not have access to network benefits. The credit
relationships across networks or between lenders and floating borrowers is characterized
by non-cooperative behavior, because of the lack of altruism and close social links. Partly
for this reason, and partly due to higher default risk caused by their lower productivity,
floating borrowers pay higher interest rates in the informal market.

The predictions of this model are similar to related models of segmented credit markets
based on non-cooperative behavior and informational or enforcement frictions (as explained
in the online Appendix). A lender appointed as a TRAIL agent is motivated to recommend
borrowers from his own network. This is due both to cooperation within networks, and the
fact that the agent’s commission depends on borrower repayment. In contrast, in the GBL
scheme, floating borrowers are not excluded: all borrowers whose opportunity cost of the
time spent attending group meetings, and cost of meeting savings requirements are small
enough, will form groups and apply for loans. Thus GBL groups may consist of connected
or floating borrowers, or both. Since floating borrowers do not have network benefits, the
pool of GBL borrowers is likely to have lower average productivity and repayment rates
than the pool of TRAIL borrowers.

Since connected borrowers are more productive, the same drop in interest rates causes
TRAIL borrowers to expand production and borrowing by more, and achieve higher income
increases than GBL borrowers. This effect is reinforced by the cooperation between the
TRAIL borrowers and the agent, since a larger scale of borrowing generates higher agent
commissions, which are internalized by borrowers. In contrast, the joint liability feature in
GBL raises the effective cost of credit, and peer pressure from group members discourages

                                               3
borrowers from expanding the scale of borrowing and taking risk. Hence the TRAIL scheme
is predicted to lead to higher total borrowing, greater production of high value cash crops
and higher farm incomes than the GBL scheme.2

The experiment was carried out in two districts in the potato-growing belt of the state
of West Bengal in India. Potatoes generate substantially higher value added and farm
income per acre than the major alternatives: paddy and sesame. However they also involve
higher working capital requirements to pay for expensive inputs. The loans were timed to
match the production and marketing cycles of potatoes, and index insurance was provided
against fluctuations in potato yield and prices in the localized area. Hence our expectation
is that access to cheaper credit would induce farmers to expand production of potatoes in
particular.

In line with the predictions of the model, we find evidence that the TRAIL scheme induced
a large and statistically significant increase in levels of borrowing, acreage devoted to pota-
toes, and farm incomes. The effects of the GBL scheme were substantially smaller, and
mostly statistically insignificant. The evidence also supports the main channels suggested
by the theory. TRAIL agents were significantly more likely to recommend own-network
borrowers, viz., persons who had borrowed from them in the past, belonged to the same
caste network, and who were charged below-average interest rates on the informal market.
In contrast, GBL applicants paid above-average interest rates on informal loans. The rate
of return on potato cultivation and total farm income for TRAIL borrowers was estimated
to be between 70 and 115%. In contrast we do not find that increased expenditure on
cultivation resulted in an increase in output for GBL borrowers.

The TRAIL scheme also exhibited superior performance in terms of loan repayments and
take-up. The average repayment rate at the end of two years was 98% for TRAIL loans
and 91% for GBL loans. The higher loan take-up rates and larger effects on farm incomes
suggest that TRAIL borrowers benefitted more from the scheme than GBL borrowers did.3
Moreover, we find no evidence that the TRAIL agent extracted the benefits of TRAIL
borrowers by manipulating prices or quantities. Nor is there evidence that the agent helped
TRAIL borrowers by lowering their interest rates, lowering input prices or raising output
prices. Finally, since the TRAIL scheme did not require group meetings, the lender’s
administrative costs of implementing the TRAIL scheme were significantly lower than for
the GBL scheme.

These results indicate that the TRAIL scheme successfully harnessed local network rela-
tionships between loan agents and borrowers to create a “win-win” situation where both
   2
     Models of segmented credit markets based on non-cooperative behavior predict similar selection pat-
terns, because of the incentives of the TRAIL agent induced by repayment-based commissions. To the
extent that TRAIL borrowers are more productive than GBL borrowers, the same drop in the cost of
credit expands their scale of cultivation and farm incomes by more. This expansion is accentuated when
the TRAIL borrowers and agent cooperate.
   3
     However, because the GBL estimates are imprecise, some of these differences are not statistically
significant.



                                                   4
borrowers and agents benefitted, while generating high loan take-up, high repayment rates
and lower administrative costs. In contrast, the GBL scheme attracted borrowers of more
dispersed and lower average quality, and the impacts of GBL loans were smaller on average
and more dispersed. Consistent with the hypothesis that the differential effects are driven
by productivity differences among the borrowers in the two schemes, we find that GBL
borrowers also expanded area under potato cultivation, but their output did not increase
significantly. However we cannot rule out the competing explanation that the individ-
ual liability TRAIL loans gave borrowers a stronger incentive to exert effort and increase
output.

Our paper contributes to the policy debate on ways to promote financial inclusion of the
rural poor in the developing world. Various countries have attempted to expand financial
services in rural areas by employing local agents, but with limited success.4 Research
suggests that these programs often fail because agents can collude and extract rents from
the customers (Floro and Ray, 1997). Instead, we demonstrate that it is possible to design
an agent-intermediated lending scheme in a manner that limits the possibility of collusion.5
In the TRAIL scheme, agents can only recommend households that own less than a pre-
determined threshold of land. All loan transactions take place between the lender and the
borrower and the agent has no control over funds. Only a random subset of households
recommended are selected to receive the loan, which also limits the benefit to borrowers
of making side-payments to the agent in return for a recommendation. These restrictions
limit the avenues through which the agent could extract surplus from the recommended
borrowers. We also do not find any evidence of extraction in our experimental sample.6

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the experimental design and data,
followed by Section 3 which presents the theoretical model. Section 4 contains the main
empirical results, followed by robustness checks and sensitivity analysis in Section 5 and a
discussion of financial sustainability of the two schemes in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.
   4
      Agents have been employed to intermediate financial services in Thailand (Onchan, 1992), Philippines
(Floro and Ray, 1997), Bangladesh (Maloney and Ahmad, 1988), Malaysia (Wells, 1978) and Indonesia
(Fuentes, 1996).
    5
      A large literature in contract theory discusses the role of middlemen and managers in contexts with
asymmetric information. See Melumad et al. (1995), Laffont and Martimort (1998, 2000), Faure-Grimaud
et al. (2003), Mookherjee and Tsumagari (2004), Celik (2009), Motta (2011). It has been shown that the
problems associated with a delegation of discretionary power to an informed third party can be limited by
constructing appropriate incentive schemes and constraining the extent of discretion that middlemen are
allowed.
    6
      India’s central bank has recently been promoting a lending approach where “banking facilitators”
are recruited from within communities to select and monitor borrowers on behalf of formal banks (Srini-
vasan, 2008). In practice, these loans are usually given to joint liability groups (also known as self-help
groups). The TRAIL scheme is an alternative where the banking facilitator would recommend borrowers
for individual liability loans. To our knowledge this is the first rigorous evaluation of such a scheme.




                                                    5
2       Experimental Design and Data

We collaborated with Shree Sanchari, a microfinance institution based in Kolkata, to con-
duct a field experiment in two districts Hugli and West Medinipur in the state of West
Bengal, India. These two districts grow some of the largest quantities of potatoes in West
Bengal. The state itself produces about a third of all potatoes grown in India. In October
2010 Shree Sanchari introduced the TRAIL scheme in 24 randomly selected villages, and
the GBL scheme in a separate set of 24 villages. To minimize spillovers, the experimental
design ensured that each TRAIL village was at least 8 kilometers away from a GBL village.
Prior to this project, Shree Sanchari had not operated in any of these villages.7

In both schemes, Shree Sanchari offered borrowers multiple cycles of loans of 4-month du-
rations at an annual interest rate of 18%. The first cycle loans were capped at Rupees 2000
(equivalent to approximately $US40 at the prevailing exchange rate), and were disbursed in
October-November 2010, to coincide with the potato-planting season. Repayment was due
in a single lump sum after 4 months. Upon full repayment, the borrower became eligible
for a new loan which was 33 percent larger than the first, for another 4-month duration
and at the same interest rate. In this way in each subsequent cycle successful borrowers
became eligible for a 33 percent increase in loan size, with all other loan terms remaining
unchanged. Those who repaid less than 50 percent of the repayment due were not allowed
to borrow again. Those who repaid less than the full but more than 50 percent of the
repayment amount were eligible to borrow 133 percent of the principal repaid. To facilitate
credit access for post-harvest storage, borrowers were allowed to repay the loan in the form
of potato “bonds” rather than cash, in which case the amount repaid was calculated at the
prevailing price of potato bonds.8 Both schemes had an in-built index insurance scheme –
the required repayment would be revised downwards if revenue per acre for potatoes fell
25 percent below a three year average in the village, as assessed through a separate village
survey. While Shree Sanchari told borrowers that these were agricultural loans, and the
terms of the loans implicitly encouraged borrowers to use them for agriculture, borrowers
were not required to report to Shree Sanchari the intended or actual use of the loan.9
    7
     In another 24 villages, Shree Sanchari implemented an alternative version of the agent intermediated
lending scheme called GRAIL, where the agent was recommended by the village council or Gram Panchayat.
Borrower selection and impacts of the GRAIL scheme will be analysed in future research. Sixty-eight of
the total of 72 villages were also part of a sample drawn for a previous project conducted by a subset of
the current authors (see Mitra et al., 2013).
   8
     When potatoes are placed in cold storage, the storage facility issues receipts, also known as “bonds”.
These are traded by farmers and traders.
   9
     However in our household surveys we did ask respondents to tell us the actual purpose of each loan
they reported having taken.




                                                    6
2.1     The Trader-Agent-Intermediated Lending (TRAIL) Scheme

In the TRAIL villages, officials from Shree Sanchari consulted with prominent persons in
the village to draw up a list of traders and business people who had at least 50 clients in
the village, and had been in business in the village for at least three years. One person
from the list was randomly chosen and offered the opportunity to become an agent.10 The
agent was asked to recommend 30 village residents who owned no more than 1.5 acres of
agricultural land, as potential borrowers. Our project officer and an official from Shree
Sanchari conducted a lottery in the presence of village leaders to select 10 out of these 30
individuals who were then offered the loan. Loan officers visited these randomly chosen
individuals in their homes to explain the loan terms and disburse the loan if they accepted
the offer.

At the beginning of cycle 1, for each loan given to borrowers whom he recommended, the
agent was required to deposit Rs 50 with Shree Sanchari. At the end of each loan cycle
he received as commission 75% of the interest received on these loans. The deposit was
refunded to the agent at the end of two years, in proportion to the loan repayment rates
of his recommended borrowers. Agents were told their contract would be terminated at
the end of any cycle in which 50% of their recommended borrowers failed to repay. Agents
were also promised an in-kind reward of an expenses-paid holiday at a local sea-side resort
if they survived in the program for two years.


2.2     The Group-based Lending (GBL) Scheme

In the GBL villages, Shree Sanchari initiated operations in February/March 2010 by inviting
residents to form 5-member groups, and then organizing bi-monthly meetings for all groups
in the presence of Shree Sanchari loan officers, where they made regular savings deposits
of Rupees 50 per member per month. Of the groups that survived until October 15, 2010,
two were randomly selected into the scheme through a public lottery. Each group member
received a loan of Rupees 2,000 in Cycle 1, for a total of Rupees 10,000 for the entire
group, with a four-month duration, payable in a single lump sum. All group members
shared liability for the entire Rupees 10,000: if less than the full amount due was repaid in
any cycle, all members were disqualified from future loans; if the loans were fully repaid the
group was eligible for a new loan which was 33% larger than the previous loan. Bi-monthly
group meetings continued throughout, in keeping with standard protocol that is used by
Shree Sanchari. To cover their administrative costs Shree Sanchari retained 75% of the
interest received.
  10
    The experimental protocol stated that if the person approached rejected the offer, the position would
be offered to another randomly chosen person from the list. Shree Sanchari officials would go down the list
in this manner until the position was filled. In practice, the first person offered the position accepted it in
every village.




                                                      7
2.3      Data and Descriptive Statistics

Starting in December 2010, we collected household survey data from 50 households in each
village at four-month intervals. This included information about household demograph-
ics, assets, landholding, cultivation, land use, agricultural input use, sale and storage of
agricultural output, credit received and given, incomes, and economic relationships within
the village. The household sample was composed of three sub-groups. In each village
sample we included all 10 Treatment households: households that both were recommended
for loans/formed groups (in TRAIL/GBL villages, respectively) and also were randomly
selected to receive loans. We also included 10 Control 1 households: chosen randomly
from those that were recommended/formed groups (in TRAIL/GBL respectively) but were
not selected to receive loans. Finally, we included 30 households that were not recom-
mended/did not form groups. These were chosen by first, purposively selecting households
to ensure that all 24 sample households from the Mitra et al. (2013) study were included,
and next, filling any remaining additional sample slots through a random draw of non-
recommended/non-selected households from the village.11

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics. Panel A shows there were no significant differences
in the village-level characteristics of TRAIL and GBL villages. Household characteristics
are described in Panel B. These statistics are computed for the restricted sample of 24
households per village that were included in the original sample drawn for the Mitra et al.
(2013) study.12 For most characteristics, there are only minor differences across households
assigned to the two treatment arms. However households in GBL villages were more likely to
be Hindu, had slightly larger household sizes, were more likely to have received government
transfers and were more likely to have purchased agricultural inputs on credit during Cycle
1. However, as the F -statistic shows, we cannot reject the joint hypothesis that these
characteristics are similar on average across the two treatment groups.

Table 2 describes credit market transactions that took place during September – Decem-
ber 2010 in all sample households that owned less than 1.5 acres of land. Since this was
the planting season for potatoes, which is the crop with the highest working capital re-
quirements in this region (as shown in Table 3, below), these data provide a picture of the
main sources of agricultural credit, and characteristics of the loans. The sample households
self-reported all borrowing, regardless of source or loan purpose. We present here data on
  11
      The 24 households in the Mitra et al. (2013) study were a stratified (by land-size) random sample of
all households that had cultivated potatoes in the year 2007.
   12
      We do this for the following reason. It is unlikely that our full sample of 50 households per village would
be balanced across treatment groups, as both Treatment and Control 1 households were systematically
selected into the sample by virtue of being recommended by the agent (TRAIL villages)/joining a group
(GBL villages). In contrast, Control 2 households were selected by virtue of not being recommended, and
form an unknown proportion of the population of households that the agent would not have wanted to
recommend. Thus it is unclear how to re-weight these two groups to arrive at a representative sample of
village households. Restricting attention to the stratified random sample drawn before the lending schemes
were introduced side-steps this problem.




                                                       8
all borrowing and borrowing for agricultural purposes.13 Note first that nearly 70 per-
cent of sample households borrowed in this 4-month period. Informal lenders (traders and
moneylenders) provided two-third of all agricultural credit and thus were the single most
important lender category. Credit cooperatives provided about a quarter of the agricultural
credit, but they loaned mainly to households with relatively larger landholdings.

The average interest rate on loans from informal lenders is 26%, substantially above the
rate that Shree Sanchari charged on the program loans. The average duration of informal
loans is 4 months, presumably reflecting the fact that agricultural cycles in this area are
four months long. Only 1% of informal loans are secured by collateral. Cooperatives
and government banks charge substantially lower interest rates and have longer average
durations, but are much more likely to be collateralized, again pointing to the fact that
they are less likely to be available to households with low levels of assets.14

Table 3 describes the mean characteristics of the major categories of crops grown by sample
farmers in 2011 and 2012, the two years of data used in our analysis. Paddy is grown twice or
thrice a year, and in both years, farmers planted on average 0.70 acres of land with paddy.
Potatoes and sesame are both winter crops planted only once a year, and the average
farmer planted each on similar quantities of land: potatoes on 0.48 acres and sesame on
0.43 acres. A large range of vegetables such as cauliflower, cabbage, gourd, chillies and
lentils are grown year-round on small patches, accounting for an acreage of 0.20 over the
year. As the table shows, potato cultivation involves large investment during cultivation:
the annual cultivation cost for potatoes was just about Rs 10,000 in both years. However
the revenues and value added earned from potato cultivation were also considerably higher
than those earned from sesame, paddy or vegetables. These figures make it clear that
potatoes have high working capital needs, and are also the major source of high farm
income in these villages. We also see that crop prices can vary considerably from year to
year. Price fluctuations are an important source of the risk involved in agriculture. Potato
prices especially can be very variable: the average of the village-level median farmgate price
of the two most widely-grown varieties of potatoes across our sample villages was Rs 2.36
in 2008, Rs 3.85 in 2011 and Rs 5.36 in 2012. Clearly, the prevailing prices for potatoes
affect the profitability of potato cultivation.
  13
     Importantly, the data also include information on trade credit from input suppliers. Since we collected
detailed data on input purchases, we are able to cross-check that all inputs purchased on credit are counted
as loans.
  14
     In statistics not presented here, we find that informal lenders become a progressively more important
source of agricultural credit as household landholding decreases from 1.5 acres to zero. Landless households
received 87% of their agricultural credit from informal lenders, and only 6% from cooperatives. Presumably
this is because cooperatives require that the borrower posts collateral: nearly three quarters of their loans
were collateralized.




                                                     9
3     Theoretical Model

As explained in Section 1, we use a model of segmented informal credit markets, which
abstracts from standard adverse selection or moral hazard, and instead assumes cooperative
behavior within borrower-lender networks, and non-cooperative behavior among players
from different networks. Our model is motivated by the dense social and economic agent-
borrower relationships described in a field study of a sub-sample of these villages by Ah-
Tye et al. (2013). Agent and borrowers interact in credit, and insurance markets, and
agents also provide borrowers with advice on production, input-sourcing and marketing
matters. This cooperative behavior may be the result of repeated interaction among non-
cooperative agents (a la the Folk Theorem), or may be due to altruism within networks.
Similar results can be obtained using more standard non-cooperative formulations of credit
markets involving adverse selection and moral hazard, as in Ghatak (2000) and Besley and
Coate (1995). Details of such formulations are provided in online Appendix A-1.

Our model is silent on how the payoffs earned by the network are distributed among its
members. Payoff vectors where the lion’s share from the benefits of cooperation accrue
to a few members (e.g., lenders rather than borrowers) are also possible in the model. In
practice however, the TRAIL scheme was designed to limit such “extraction” by agents:
agents were responsible for recommending borrowers at the beginning of the scheme, but
not for loan disbursal or collection of repayment, recommendations could not be modified
after they had been made, households with more than 1.5 acres of cultivable land were
ineligible to be recommended, and only a random sub-set of recommended borrowers were
selected to receive loans. All of these features would limit the extent to which borrowers and
agents could enter side-contracts that might siphon off the benefits accruing to borrowers.
In the empirical analysis we also test for, but do not find, evidence of extraction by the
agent through manipulation of credit, input or output contracts.


3.1    Informal Credit Market, pre-MFI

The village is partitioned into a number of networks, and a set of floating borrowers. Each
network has some lenders and connected borrowers who are knit together into a group with
close economic and social ties. Each network behaves in a cooperative fashion, in the sense
that decisions are made by network members to maximize the aggregate payoff of all within-
network members. Floating borrowers operate in isolation and behave non-cooperatively,
to maximize their own payoffs. Members of two different networks play non-cooperatively
when they participate in some transaction. Hence lenders from different networks compete
in offering credit to the floaters, a la Bertrand in the informal market.

Network members help each other with production and business matters, whereas floaters
do not receive any help. Foster and Rosenzweig (1996), Bandiera and Rasul (2006), Conley
and Udry (2010) have provided evidence that farmers learn from others in the same social


                                             10
network. As a result connected borrowers’ projects succeed with a higher probability (pc )
than the floaters’ projects do (pf ). In particular, we assume that pf (2 − pf ) < pc .15

All lenders face a cost of capital ρI , and are unconstrained in terms of lending capacity. The
connected and floating borrowers have production functions fC (l) and fF (l) respectively.
It is assumed that the help received from the network makes connected borrowers more
                   0        0
productive, i.e. fC (l) ≥ fF (l), ∀l. The production functions are strictly increasing, strictly
concave, twice-differentiable function of loan size l satisfying Inada conditions.

Loans are needed to purchase a variable input whose price is normalized to 1. We abstract
from moral hazard in loan repayments, and assume that loans are always repaid when
the borrower’s project succeeds. This is true for both floating and connected borrowers.16
Borrowers have limited liability: when the project fails, they do not repay.

Since all networks have identical costs of capital and there are no capacity constraints,
there is no gain from borrowing or lending across networks.17 Each connected borrower
obtains a loan from within his own network, and the network makes a cooperative choice
of the loan size of each own-network borrower. Hence a connected borrower selects a loan
size lIc = argmaxl≥0 {pc fC (l) − ρI l} ≡ pc ΠC ( ρpIc ) where ΠC (r) denotes the maximized value
of fC (l) − rl, and r is the effective cost of credit (ECC).

Lenders from different networks compete with one another to lend to floating borrowers a
la Bertrand. Thus floaters obtain credit at the competitive rate pρfI at which lenders break
even on average. A floating borrower selects a loan size lIf = argmaxl≥0 {pf fF (l) − ρI l} ≡
pf ΠF ( pρfI ). Since the effective cost of credit for floating borrowers is higher, they select
smaller loan sizes: lIf < lIc .


3.2     Agent-Intermediated Lending: TRAIL

Now consider the introduction of the TRAIL scheme into this credit market. A single
network lender is chosen randomly to be the agent for the scheme. He recommends a set of
borrowers, of whom a randomly chosen subset is offered TRAIL loans at the interest rate
rT . The agent stands to receive a fixed fraction K ∈ (0, 1) of the interest payment made
by the borrower. We assume rT < ρI .
  15
      This assumption affects only the comparison between repayment rates in the TRAIL and GBL schemes.
If it were not true, repayment rates would always be higher in GBL.
   16
      The results extend when floating borrowers are allowed to default strategically, provided this default
rate d is smaller than the TRAIL commission rate K.
   17
      If pc is always constant regardless of whether the loan is given by a own-network lender or an other-
network lender, then lenders are indifferent between lending within our outside their network, and so we
assume they lend within the network. If instead pc is lower when the lender belongs to another network,
then clearly the lender prefers to lend within his network.




                                                    11
Suppose initially there is no collusion, in the sense that the borrowers cannot/do not bribe
the agent in exchange for recommending them. Whom will a network lender recommend for
a TRAIL loan? If he selects an own-network borrower, this borrower will select the loan size
that maximizes the network’s aggregate profit: lTc = argmaxl≥0 {pc fC (l) − (1 − K)pc rT l} ≡
pc ΠC ((1 − K)rT ). Clearly, the ECC has decreased from ρpIc in the pre-intervention regime
to (1 − K)rT < ρI under the TRAIL scheme, and so lTc > lIc . If a floating borrower
is recommended and offered the loan, he will non-cooperatively select the loan size that
maximizes his own payoff: lTf = argmaxl≥0 {pf fF (l) − pf rT l} ≡ pf ΠF (rT ). The ECC is rT ,
so the loan size is higher than in the informal market, but smaller than for a connected
borrower in TRAIL. The network lender will earn an expected commission of Kpf rT lTf .
The gain from recommending a floating borrower is Kpf rT lTf , and from recommending a
borrower from another network is Kpc rT lTf .18 Recommending a borrower from a different
network therefore dominates recommending a floating borrower because the help that the
borrower receives from his network ensures that he repays with a higher probability, which
in turn implies a higher expected commission for the agent.

Now examine the agent’s incentive to recommend an own-network borrower, rather than a
connected borrower from another network. The former option dominates since
                                 ρI                                    ρI
       pc [ΠC ((1 − K)rT ) − ΠC ( )] ≥ Kpc rT lTf + pc [ΠC (rT ) − ΠC ( )] ≥ Kpc rT lTf
                                 pc                                    pc
Here the first inequality follows from ΠC ((1 − K)rT ) ≥ KrT lTf + ΠC (rT ) (as the agent
internalizes the increased profits from a lower ECC for a within-network borrower), and
the second inequality follows from rT < ρI < ρpIc (the network borrower in turn internalizes
the commissions earned by the agent).

Now suppose borrowers could bribe the agent in return for being recommended. Given that
the agent is already cooperating fully with own-network borrowers, only the returns from
recommending out-of-network borrowers is affected. If the agent has absolute bargaining
power, he can extract at most all the increased profits that other-network borrowers would
earn. In that case, he would earn the same benefit from selecting an other-network borrower
as from an own-network borrower.19 If the agent’s bargaining power is any lower he would
clearly prefer to select the own-network borrower.

With regard to floating borrowers, the most a network lender can extract is all their profit
gains, thus earning a net benefit of Kpf rT lTf + pf [ΠF (rT ) − ΠF ( pρfI )]. Consider the function
Q(p) ≡ KprT l∗ (rT )+p[ΠF (rT )−ΠF ( ρpI )] where l∗ (rT ) denotes the maximizer of fF (l)−rT l.
                                             F ρI
Notice that by the Envelope Theorem ∂Π     ∂p
                                              ( p ) = ρpI2 l∗ ( ρpI ). Moreover, ΠF (rT ) − ΠF ( ρpI ) ≥
  18
      By assumption, a borrower from another network will not internalize the profits earned by the agent.
Hence such a borrower will select the same loan size lTf as a floating borrower. Note we are assuming here
that a borrower from a different network will be just as productive as a borrower from the same network.
If instead he is less productive, the agent’s preference tilts further in favor of an own-network borrower.
   19
      The agent could make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to an other-network borrower, stipulating the size of
the loan as well as the bribe. Thus the agent would receive the entire benefit that accrued to this borrower
and thus earn the same payoff as he would get from recommending an own-network borrower.

                                                    12
[ ρpI − rT ]l∗ ( ρpI ). Hence

                                               ρI      ρI ρI
       Q0 (p) = KrT l∗ (rT ) + [ΠF (rT ) − ΠF (   )] − l∗ ( )
                                               p       p   p
                                  ρI      ∗ ρI     ρI ∗ ρI                     ρI
                        ∗
                 ≥ KrT l (rT ) + [ − rT ]l ( ) − l ( ) = KrT l∗ (rT ) − rT l∗ ( )
                                  p         p       p    p                     p

which is positive as long as K > k ∗ ≡ [l∗ ( ρpIc )/l∗ (rT )]. This implies collusion with a
connected borrower dominates collusion with a floating borrower, as long as the commission
rate is large enough. We thus obtain

Proposition 1 If collusion is not allowed, it is optimal for the TRAIL agent to recommend
an own-network borrower. Even when collusion is possible, he will still prefer to recommend
an own-network borrower, as long as the commission rate K is high enough.


3.3      Group-based Lending: GBL

To analyze the GBL scheme, we simplify by assuming that groups are of size two as in
Besley and Coate (1995). The group is jointly liable to repay the two loans. We abstract
from the possibility that the limited liability constraint binds for some landholding sizes.
This ensures that even if only one member’s project succeeds, both loans can and will be
repaid. Borrowers have to attend group meetings and make regular savings to qualify for
a group loan. This imposes an additional cost γi for a borrower of type i ∈ {c, f }.

If two connected borrowers from the same network form a group, both loans will be repaid
with probability pc (2 − pc ), and neither loan will be repaid with the remaining probability
1 − pc (2 − pc ). If two floating borrowers form a group, both loans will be repaid with
probability pf (2−pf ) and neither will be repaid with the remaining probability 1−pf (2−pf ).
Our assumption that pf (2−pf ) < pc implies (F, F ) groups repay at a lower rate than TRAIL
borrowers do, whereas (C, C) groups repay at a higher rate.20

Compared with individual liability loans, a joint liability loan involves a ‘tax’ corresponding
to the additional repayment burden associated with loans of other group members, should
their projects fail. A connected borrower group thus involves an ECC of rT + (1 − pc )rT =
                                                                       C
(2 − pc )rT rather than rT . Hence a (C, C) group will select a loan lG  to maximize pc [fC (l) −
(2 − pc )rT l] and attain a per member profit of pc ΠC ((2 − pc )rT ). The joint liability tax in
GBL therefore implies a smaller expansion of borrowing and cultivation scale for connected
borrowers, compared with TRAIL. As for floating borrowers, an (F, F ) group will select a
      f
loan lG   to maximize pf fF (l) − pf (2 − pf )rT l and attain a per member profit of pf ΠF ((2 −
  20
    This last result captures the fact that, for a given probability of success and interest rate, GBL repay-
ment rates still dominate those of an individual liability loan because group members have the incentive
to repay on behalf of those who are unsuccessful.

                                                     13
pf )rT ). Since (2−pf ) > (2−pc ) > 1, the loan size and scale of cultivation of GBL borrowers
will be uniformly smaller than that of TRAIL borrowers.

We do not address the question whether this model will give rise to positive assortative
matching, as this depends on the distribution of bargaining power within groups. More
importantly, it does not affect comparisons between TRAIL and GBL. Consider the con-
sequences of a mixed group (C, F ). With side-payments within the group, (lc , lf ) would
be selected to maximize pc fC (lc ) + pf fF (lf ) − [1 − (1 − pc )(1 − pf )]rT (lc + lf ). The ECC
                                                                        p
for the loan of the connected member of a group would be [1 + pfc − pf ]rT > rT , and for
a floating member would be [1 + ppfc − pc ]rT > rT . Hence the average loan size in a mixed
(C, F ) group would also be smaller than for a TRAIL borrower.

It is unclear whether an (F, F ) group or a (C, C) group would benefit more from a GBL
loan. For the (F, F ) group the decrease in the ECC is from (2 − pf )rT − pρfI which is larger
than the decrease (2 − pc )rT − ρpIc for the (C, C) group, since ρpI − (2 − p)rT is decreasing
in p. However, the profit function is a decreasing convex function of the ECC, so profits
rise at a slower rate for the (F, F ) group. Therefore we cannot order the gains for the two
groups without making additional assumptions.

In what follows, we shall represent GBL borrowers as including both (C, C) and (F, F )
groups. This is because both kinds of groups would have an incentive to form and apply
for a GBL, as long as the costs of group meetings and savings requirements are small enough
that there is still a net advantage of a lower interest burden for both groups. Importantly,
there is no mechanism in GBL to screen out one kind of group in preference to the other.
To simplify the exposition we ignore (C, F ) groups hereafter, while noting the qualitative
conclusions would be unaltered if they were also present.

The key differences in the selection patterns and cultivation outcomes between the GBL and
TRAIL schemes are the following. First, TRAIL has an in-built screening mechanism such
that the agent has a preference for selecting connected borrowers from his own network.
In contrast GBL borrowers are likely to include both connected and floating borrowers.
Therefore, TRAIL agents will select safer, more productive borrowers (who pay lower in-
terest rates on the informal market, and have a higher productivity). Second, the joint
liability tax inherent in GBL implies that the effective cost of credit is lower for TRAIL
borrowers, so they will borrow and cultivate high-value crops more. These results would
obtain even in the presence of non-cooperative behavior within networks. With cooperative
behavior resulting from close network ties, the agent and connected borrowers internalize
mutual benefits in TRAIL, which generate further increases in borrowing and cultivation
scales. These features combine to yield the prediction that TRAIL borrowers will increase
borrowing, scale of cultivation of high value cash crops, and farm income by more than
GBL borrowers.

The theory does not have a clear prediction for whether repayment rates will be higher
in the TRAIL or GBL schemes. On the one hand TRAIL agents tend to select connected
borrowers with a higher probability of project success. On the other hand, for any given

                                               14
type of borrower, GBL loans are repaid at higher repayment rates because group members
have the incentive to repay on behalf of those who are unsuccessful. Finally, we expect
lower take-up of loans in the TRAIL scheme because of the joint liability tax and the
burden of attending group meetings and achieving mandated savings targets.

Table 4 summarizes these comparisons of the TRAIL and GBL selection patterns and
impacts. These predictions will be tested in the data below.



4      Empirical Analysis

This study examines two different lending schemes, or mechanisms for delivering credit to
rural households. The schemes differ in how households were selected to become borrowers.
Therefore, when estimating and comparing the effects of the loans on borrowers in the two
schemes, we account for the fact that households selected in the two schemes may have
very different characteristics, not all of which may be observable to us. To do this, we
rely on the fact that only a randomly chosen subset of the selected households (households
recommended by the agent/that formed groups in TRAIL/GBL villages) were offered the
loans. Therefore any differences between households that were recommended but were not
offered loans (Control 1 households) and those that were both recommended and offered
loans (Treatment households) must be caused by the loans. We call this the “treatment
effect”. Similarly, we can estimate the “selection effect”: the difference between Control
1 households and Control 2 households (those that were not recommended/did not form
groups in TRAIL/GBL villages).

In our regression specification below,

       yiv = β0 + β1 TRAILv + β2 (TRAILv × Control 1iv ) + β3 (TRAILv × Treatmentiv )
           + β4 (GBLv × Control 1iv ) + β5 (GBLv × Treatmentiv ) + γ Xiv + εiv        (1)

yiv denotes the outcome variable of interest for household i in village v, β2 is the selection
effect in the TRAIL scheme, β4 is the selection effect in the GBL scheme, β3 − β2 is
the treatment effect in the TRAIL scheme and β5 − β4 is the treatment effect in the
GBL scheme.21 Xiv includes a set of additional controls including the land owned by the
household, a year dummy to control for secular changes over time, and a dummy variable
for whether the village received a separate intervention informing residents of the prevailing
market prices for potatoes.22 Standard errors are clustered at the village level to account
for spatial correlation in outcomes.
  21
     All treatment effects presented in the tables below are intent-to-treat estimates because they compare
the outcomes for households assigned to Treatment and Control 1 groups, regardless of actual take-up.
  22
     This information intervention was undertaken for a separate project examining the effect of delivering
information about potato prices to farmers and is similar to the “public information” treatment described
in Mitra et al. (2013). Villages were assigned to the information treatment randomly and orthogonally to
the credit intervention that is the focus of the present paper.


                                                    15
4.1     Treatment Effects on Borrowing, Cultivation and Farm In-
        comes

Table 5 presents estimates of treatment and selection effects of the main outcomes of
interest: borrowing (Panel A), cultivation and farm income from the major cash crop
(Panel B) and income from other crops (Panel C). These estimates are computed from
regressions according to the specification in equation (1). The complete regression results
are available in online Appendix A-1.


4.1.1    Effects on Borrowing

Row 1 in Table 5 presents effects of the TRAIL and GBL schemes on how much households
borrow for agricultural purposes. The TRAIL selection effect is estimated to be Rupees 417
but is not statistically significant, suggesting that households recommended by the agent
did not borrow a significantly different amount from those not recommended, absent the
program (column 6). However the TRAIL treatment caused overall borrowing to increase
substantially, by Rs. 7126 (column 4), which represents almost a 100 percent increase
over the Rs. 7280 mean borrowing by Control 1 borrowers (column 7). Households that
formed groups in the GBL villages also borrowed a similar amount on average to those who
did not form groups (column 5) but the program loans caused their borrowing to increase
significantly by Rs. 6464 (column 3), which is an 88 percent increase over the mean.

To check if the program loans crowded out loans from other sources, Row 3 in Panel A
examines if total borrowing for agricultural purposes through non-program loans decreased
as a result of treatment. The treatment effects are small in magnitude and non-significant
for both TRAIL and GBL borrowers. This indicates that the program loans given by Shree
Sanchari were a net addition to the agricultural borrowing of the treated groups, consistent
with the idea that sample households face credit constraints in agriculture.

Row 2 shows effects on the unit cost of borrowing. Note first that consistent with our
theoretical prediction that GBL groups include a larger fraction of floating borrowers who
pay higher interest rates in the informal market, we find that the selection effect in the
GBL scheme is significantly positive: households that formed groups paid on average 4
percentage points higher annually for agricultural credit than those who did not form
groups. In contrast the TRAIL selection effect is small and non-significant. Next, we find
that for both TRAIL and GBL schemes, the treatment caused the average annual interest
rate on agricultural loans to decrease significantly.23 For TRAIL borrowers the cost of credit
decreased by 3 percentage points (a 12.5 percent reduction over the Control 1 mean), and
  23
    We computed this interest rate using household reports of the principal of each loan, the repayment
amount due, and the repayment schedule. Trade credit was also counted as a loan and recorded as such,
and included in the total borrowing and used to compute the cost of borrowing. Since we asked detailed
questions about input purchases in each cycle, we were able to cross-check that inputs purchased on credit
were always accounted for.


                                                   16
for GBL borrowers it decreased by 7 percentage points (a 29 percent reduction).

Row 4 shows the treatment had no spill-over effects on the cost of borrowing from non-
program sources. This is consistent with the idea that being recommended/forming a
group and then receiving a program loan did not change the local information about these
households’ inherent repayment probabilities, or substantially change these probabilities.


4.1.2    Effects on Cultivation and Farm Incomes

Since the treatment caused total borrowing for agricultural purposes to increase, one would
expect it to have created real effects through increased agricultural activity. Since the loans
were designed specifically to make it possible to finance the cultivation of the major cash
crop, potatoes, we present first the estimated effects on potato cultivation.24

Row 5 of Table 5 shows that households recommended by the TRAIL agent were likelier
(by 9.5 percentage points, which is 14 percent of the Control 1 mean of 68%) than average
to cultivate potatoes. Receiving the program loans did not change this probability signif-
icantly, but it did change the acreage devoted to potatoes by potato cultivators (by 0.09
acres, 20 percent of the Control 1 mean, Row 6). About half of this increase in acreage
was achieved by leasing in more land (Row 7). TRAIL treatment households also spent
more on inputs (Row 8) and produced higher output (treatment effect is 18% of Control 1
mean, Row 9). The net effect is an 18% increase in revenue of 18% (Row 10), and an 18%
increase in value-added (Row 11). Value-added is computed by subtracting from revenues
only the costs of purchased or rented inputs.25 Importantly, self-provided inputs are not
accounted for, the most important of which is typically family labor. Row 12 shows a small
and statistically insignificant increase in family labor hours devoted to potato cultivation.
We impute a cost of family labor at the average market wage rate for hired labor in the
village (which is an upper bound to the shadow cost of family labor) to obtain an estimate
of imputed net profits from potato cultivation (Row 13). The TRAIL treatment effect on
imputed net profit is Rs 1676, which is 21% of the control 1 mean. For GBL households, the
point estimates suggest that households that formed GBL groups cultivated smaller quan-
tities of potatoes, spent less on inputs and earned lower revenue and value-added (Column
5). However, although the program loans increased these (Column 3) the treatment effects
are estimated imprecisely, presumably due to the high variance in the productivity of these
households. As a result the average effect is not significant.

Panel C of Table 5 shows program effects on incomes earned from other main crops (paddy,
sesame and vegetables). TRAIL loans caused farmers to increase acreage devoted to these
  24
    See Panel A in Table A-3 in online Appendix A-1 for the full set of results.
  25
    For all inputs purchased, we asked the respondent to report both the payment made immediately upon
purchase and the amount of trade credit received. The total cost of the input is calculated as the sum of
the two. For share-cropped land the household reports to us the share of the harvest that is paid to the
landlord. We use this in combination with the harvest quantity and the price at which the harvest was
sold to compute the monetary value of this rental payment.


                                                   17
crops as well, but although positive, the increases in harvest, revenue or value-added were
not significantly different from zero. For GBL borrowers also there was no significant
increase in value-added from any of the other crops.

Finally in Row 20 we present the treatment and selection effects on total farm income of
the households, aggregating across all crops. Given the large share of potatoes in total
cultivation, the positive TRAIL treatment effect on value-added from potatoes leads to a
large, positive and statistically significant TRAIL treatment effect on overall farm profits,
of the order of 25% over the Control 1 mean. In contrast, GBL loans had a negligible and
statistically insignificant treatment effect on total farm income.


4.2     Testing Theoretical Assumptions and Predictions

Having estimated the large positive effects of the TRAIL scheme on borrowers’ agricultural
value-added and incomes, we now examine the mechanisms behind these effects.


4.2.1    Comparing Productivity of Selected TRAIL and GBL Borrowers

First, we test the prediction that households recommended by TRAIL agents were more
productive than households that formed groups in GBL villages. Assuming that revenue
is a Cobb-Douglas function of the cost of production, we estimate the regression

 log(Revenueiv ) = α0 + α1 TRAILv + α2 (GBLv × log Costiv ) + α3 (TRAILv × log Costiv )
         +α4 (GBLv × Recommendediv ) + α5 (TRAILv × Recommendediv ) + γ Xiv + εiv
                                                                                     (2)
for household i in village v. This is run for each separate crop, as well as after aggregating
across all 4 major crop categories.26 Cost refers to cost of cultivation. Given our finding
above that program loans caused households to expand cultivation of all crops, we use
assignment to treatment as an instrument for the cost of cultivation. The underlying
identification assumption is that treatment status does not affect productivity. This is
because productivity depends on network relationships, which are available whether or not
the household receives a loan. Under this identification assumption, we obtain consistent
estimates of the elasticities α2 of revenue with respect to cost for GBL households, and
α3 for TRAIL households, which are presented in Panel A of Table 6. This enables us
to estimate the rate of return on the additional cultivation costs incurred as a result of
receiving program loans. Specifically, we can estimate RoRGBL = (α2 × Revenue      Cost
                                                                                         ) − 1,
and RoRTRAIL = (α3 × Revenue Cost
                                   ) − 1. As  seen here, a 1  percent increase  in the  cost of
potato cultivation for TRAIL borrowers caused their revenue from potatoes to increase
by a statistically significant 0.8 percent, which translates into a rate of return of 72%. In
  26
    The vector of control variables includes the land owned by the household, a year dummy and a dummy
variable for the information intervention, as described in Section 4.

                                                 18
contrast, an increase in the cost of cultivation for GBL borrowers did not increase revenue
significantly. Since potatoes are a major source of agricultural income in this region, the
large impact of TRAIL loans on potato output also translates into a large effect on total
farm income: we estimate a rate of return of 103 percent on TRAIL loans.

An alternative, less parametric procedure of estimating rates of return is shown in Panel B
of Table 6. We calculate directly the ratio of the treatment effect on value-added, to the
treatment effect on cultivation cost in TRAIL and GBL respectively. These are reported
in Panel B, with standard errors computed by bootstrapping using 600 replications. The
rate of return achieved by the TRAIL treatment group in potato was 105%, and for total
farm income was 115%, both statistically significant at the 1% level. The rates of return
achieved by the GBL treatment group were a substantially smaller 9% and negative 1% in
Panel B, neither of which are statistically significant.


4.2.2   Selection Patterns in TRAIL and GBL

We showed above that TRAIL borrowers were more productive than GBL borrowers. In our
theoretical model this occurs because TRAIL agents recommend households that belong
to their own network, who benefit from network benefits, rather than floating borrowers
who do not receive any network benefits. In Table 7 we test if TRAIL agents showed a
preference for recommending households that belonged to their own network. We run a
linear probability regression of the form
                           3
                           X
  Recommendediv = α0 +           βk (Interacted with agent in market k)iv + γ X1iv + εiv   (3)
                           k=1

on the sample of households owning at most 1.5 acres of cultivable land in TRAIL villages.
On the left hand side we have an indicator variable for whether household i in TRAIL
village v was recommended for a TRAIL loan by the agent, and on the right hand side,
three variables indicating whether the household had interacted with the agent in the three
years prior to this study – by buying inputs from, borrowing from, or working for the agent.
We control for a range of other household demographics and assets, including land owned.
In line with our prediction, we see in Column 1 that households that had borrowed from the
agent in the past, were 14 percentage points (or 6 times) more likely to be recommended
than households that had not interacted with him. In Column 2 we include indicators
for the household’s religion and caste, and also interact them with the agent’s religion and
caste. Clearly, agents were more likely to recommend households that belonged to the same
religion or caste as themselves. However, note that there remains a strong significant effect
of prior borrowing, suggesting that a prior credit relationship and possibly information
acquired about the household through this relationship, are independently important in
the agent’s decision of whom to recommend.

Consider now the interest rate that the households paid on informal loans taken prior to
this lending scheme, as a measure of their inherent default risk. We use this measure to test

                                              19
the hypothesis that TRAIL agent recommended farmers with below-average default risk,
whereas the GBL scheme attracted households with above-average default risk. We expect
that (i) among the group of sample households that had interacted with the agent previ-
ously, those that he recommended had paid a relatively low interest rate; (ii) the average
default risk of GBL group-members was higher than that of the general population; and
(iii) the average default risk of GBL group-members was higher than TRAIL recommended
households.

To test hypothesis (i) we run the regression

              riv = β0 + β1 Recommendediv + β2 Interacted with agentiv
                  + β3 (Recommendediv × Interacted with agentiv ) + γ X2iv + εiv                           (4)

where riv is the average interest rate the household paid on informal loans reported in Cycle
1. The sample is restricted to households in TRAIL villages that owned at most 1.5 acres
of land. The variable Interacted with agent is a summary indicator variable for whether the
agent and the household had interacted in the input, credit or labour markets in the three
years prior to the study. In Columns 1 and 2 of Table 8, we find that within the group of
households whom he had interacted with in the past, those that the agent recommended
were likely to have been charged interest rates that were on average 7 percentage points
(or about 30 percent) lower than the interest rates paid by those within this group that
were not recommended.27,28

This is in stark contrast to the borrower selection pattern in GBL villages seen in Columns
3 and 4, where we test hypothesis (ii). Households that formed GBL groups had paid over
5% points (or 27 percent) higher interest rates on the informal market than those who did
not form a group. The GBL scheme thus attracted borrowers who were perceived by local
lenders to be higher default risks than the rest of the village population.29

Finally, to test hypothesis (iii), we run the regression

                                 riv = β0 + β1 TRAILiv + γ X2iv + εiv                                      (5)
  27
      Columns 1 and 2 correspond to an OLS and a Heckman-selection-corrected regression of the informal
interest rate respectively, where the correction is for selection of those who chose to borrow. The first round
selection equation uses as an instrument a dummy variable for whether the household head reported cul-
tivation as his primary occupation. Since agricultural production loans are much larger than consumption
loans, this is a good predictor that the household reported at least one loan. The identifying assumption
is that conditional on taking a loan, and all the included regressors such as landholding and caste, the
occupation of the household head per se does not affect the interest rate.
   28
      The coefficient on the Recommended dummy in Columns 1 and 2 has a positive but non-significant
coefficient. This could be because the agent has less information about households that he has not interacted
with in the past, and so he recommends from this group using criteria that do not correlate with default
risk.
   29
      Here we run the following regression

                                riv = β0 + β1 Recommendediv + γ X2iv + εiv

on the sample of households that owned at most 1.5 acres of land in GBL villages.

                                                      20
on the pooled sample of TRAIL recommended and GBL group-forming households (Treat-
ment and Control 1) that owned at most 1.5 acres of land. In the corresponding regression
results in Columns 5 and 6, we see that the TRAIL agent recommended borrowers who had
paid 6.4% points (or 24 percent) lower interest rates in the informal market than those who
formed GBL groups. This is consistent with our model’s prediction that the GBL scheme
attracts a larger proportion of floating borrowers.


4.2.3    Repayment and Take-up Patterns in TRAIL and GBL

The preceding results suggest the TRAIL agent selected borrowers who were more pro-
ductive and had a lower risk of default. However, borrowers in the GBL scheme have the
benefit of joint liability: even when their own projects fail, their group members have an
incentive to repay the loan on their behalf. This positive effect on loan repayment could
overwhelm the negative effect of being less productive, and so there is no clear theoretical
prediction for which of the two schemes would generate higher repayment rates.

Panel A of Figure 1 shows the evolution of repayment rates in TRAIL and GBL across
the six loan cycles, along with the corresponding 90% confidence intervals. Repayment
rates were high in both schemes: at the end of 6 cycles, the average repayment rate was 98
percent in the TRAIL scheme, and 91 percent in the GBL scheme.30

The take-up rate of loans in our two schemes could also be a useful metric of the extent
to which these loans affected borrower welfare ex ante. A low take-up rate would indicate
that households did not expect to receive large benefits from the loans. In Panel C we
present the take-up rate, which is the proportion of those eligible to borrow at the outset
of Cycle 1 who took the loan in any subsequent cycle. In Panel B of Figure 1 we present
the continuation rate, which is the proportion of those eligible to borrow in the cycle in
question that actually took the loan. The continuation rate is jointly determined by past
take-up, default (which would disqualify the household from participating in a subsequent
cycle) and current take-up. Both panels show that borrower participation was consistently
higher in the TRAIL scheme in all cycles. The differences are statistically significant in all
cycles starting with Cycle 3.
  30
    In column 1 of Table A-6 in online Appendix A-1, we show a regression of the repayment rate on
Cycle 6 loans on the TRAIL treatment dummy, landholding and its square. The coefficient estimate on the
TRAIL dummy is 0.09 and statistically significant at the 1% level. However, a borrower is only eligible for
a loan in any cycle if he/she successfully repaid previous loans, and so repayment rates in Cycle 2 onwards
are subject to selective attrition. This problem is avoided in an alternate measure: whether a household
that was assigned to the treatment group in Cycle 1 continues to be eligible for future loans at the end
of Cycle 6. (Households that are eligible in a cycle but choose not to borrow in that cycle continue to
be eligible in the subsequent cycle.) In the regression result presented in column 2 of the table, we find
that TRAIL treatment households are 6 percentage points (or 8 percent) more likely than GBL treatment
households to be eligible for a future loan at the end of Cycle 6. This difference is statistically significant
at the 10% level.




                                                      21
5       Robustness Checks and Sensitivity Analysis

In this section, we examine a number of ancillary issues that affect our assessment of the
success of the TRAIL scheme in enhancing borrowers’ welfare. These involve (i) possible
compensatory effects on non-farm incomes; (ii) sensitivity of farm income effects to price
and wage fluctuations; (iii) sensitivity of the standard errors to the choice of the cluster
(iv) the possibility that borrower benefits may have been siphoned off by the TRAIL
agent through higher input, lower output prices or higher interest rate on loans; and (v)
distributive impacts.


5.1       Effect on Non-Farm Incomes

Did the increase in TRAIL borrower farm incomes come at the expense of non-farm in-
comes? Conversely, could the GBL loans have had positive treatment effects on non-farm
incomes instead of agricultural incomes? Table 9 suggests otherwise. We see positive but
imprecisely-estimated effects of the TRAIL loans on rental income, income from sales of
animal products, labor income, reported business profits, current value of business and
total household income from non-agricultural sources. The treatment effects of GBL loans
are smaller and also estimated imprecisely. The point estimate of the GBL treatment effect
on aggregate non-farm income is negative, while that for TRAIL is positive, though both
are statistically indistinguishable from zero.31


5.2       Sensitivity to Potato Price Fluctuations

The production of cash crops usually involves high risk, part of which arises from price
fluctuations. Potato prices exhibit substantial volatility across years, as well as over time
within the year, as explained in detail in Mitra et al. (2013). In our sample villages the
median farmgate price for the two most widely-grown varieties of potatoes was on average
Rs 2.34 in 2008, Rs 3.85 in 2011 and Rs 5.36 in 2012. In Table 10 we show how estimated
treatment and selection effects for potato value-added would have been affected had farmers
faced different potato prices than they actually did. In particular, we impute the farmers’
revenue from potato sales using the average of the village-level median prices from a different
year but the actual quantity sold and actual cost of cultivation. Row 1 is identical to Row
11 in Table 5, and shows estimated effects on value-added given actual prices at which
farmers sold. Row 2 is computed as if all farmers sold potatoes at Rs. 3.85 which was the
average price in 2011, Row 3 is computed as if they sold them at Rs. 5.36, and so on. As
is to be expected, there is a rank-ordering of the size of the estimated treatment effects
that matches the ordering of the prices used: the TRAIL treatment effects would have
been largest if farmers had sold their produce in both years of the study at the high 2012
 31
      The full set of results are presented in Table A-5 in online Appendix A-1.


                                                     22
price. They would have been insignificant if they had sold it at the low price of 2008. The
GBL treatment effects would have always been negative and insignificant.32 These variable
treatment effects are not surprising: the scheme successfully financed agriculture, therefore
it is to be expected that agricultural price fluctuations would drive profitability from year
to year. This may also explain why, in the absence of this scheme, TRAIL borrowers did
not take advantage of the large gap between the estimated rates of return (70%) and the
cost of borrowing (around 26%) in order to borrow and cultivate even more potatoes than
they already did. The rate of return that farmers anticipate at the time of planting or
cultivation in any given year is probably considerably below what we calculated in the
years of the experiment.

This uncertainty in the treatment effect on value-added highlights the need for any credit
scheme aimed at agricultural finance to also provide insurance against aggregate risk. As
stated earlier, although it was not triggered in our study period, both the TRAIL and GBL
schemes included index insurance, so that the repayment obligation would have been re-
duced if the local revenue per acre had fallen by 25% or more relative to a 3-year historical
average, thus limiting the losses to the borrower households. This feature may have posi-
tively affected the take-up of the program loans, relative to other loans that may already
be available in the formal and informal market.


5.3       Sensitivity to Choice of Cluster

Standard errors in all our regressions discussed so far are clustered at the village level, to
account for spatial correlation in outcomes. However, it could be argued that the relevant
unit at which outcomes are correlated is the specific network that the household is part
of. Although we did not map actual networks in our sample villages, we can follow the
theoretical model and identify in our sample an alternative clustering variable. Since the
model predicts that TRAIL agents would recommend borrowers from within their own
network, we can assume that in TRAIL villages, all recommended borrowers (Treatment
and Control 1) belong to the agent’s network and are placed in a common cluster. In GBL
villages we assume that all 5 members of each self-formed GBL group belong to a common
network and so are placed in clusters corresponding to their group. All Control 2 households
are assumed to belong to singleton clusters. When standard errors are estimated using these
alternative cluster definitions, the results on the program effects on potato cultivation,
output, value-added and profits are very similar to those presented in the Table 5.33
 32
      The full set of results are presented in Table A-7 in online Appendix A-1.
 33
      These results are presented in Table A-8 in online Appendix A-1.




                                                     23
5.4    Extraction by Agent in Other Spheres of Interaction

We argued above that the TRAIL agent recommended borrowers from his own network and
that network ties caused him to internalize the benefits to the borrowers. A natural question
that arises then is whether he extracted these benefits from the borrowers, thus reducing
the net benefit to the borrowers themselves. This extraction could occur in the form of a
bribe in return for being recommended, or a side-payment, say after the harvest season.
Alternatively, this extraction could have take place indirectly through manipulation of
other transactions among the lender and own-network borrowers. The TRAIL agent could
have increased the quantity that the borrower must sell to him at a discounted price, or
adjusted downward the price he paid for the output. Alternatively, the agent could have
sold inputs at higher prices to the borrower. Finally, the agent might have charged higher
interest rates on loans.

Naturally, it is difficult to collect data on bribery or side-payments between borrowers and
agents. However, we do have detailed data on input purchase and output sale of sample
households, collected every four months, which we can use to test if the agent extracted
rents from TRAIL borrowers through these channels.34

In Table 11 we analyse input, output and credit transactions reported by sample households
in TRAIL villages. Column 4 shows the mean incidence of such transactions for the Control
1 households. The first two rows of Panel A show that over the 6 cycles, only approximately
9% of input transactions by Control 1 households were with the agent, accounting for 8%
of input values purchased. The top rows of Panel B show that 21% of output transactions
of control 1 households were with the agent, representing 15% of the transaction value, and
the top two rows of Panel C show that 17% of Control 1 households borrowed from the
agent, accounting for only 5% of the total borrowing by households. It does not appear
that the agent had a monopoly or near-monopoly on these transactions in the village.35

Columns 1 and 2 present the treatment and selection effects. Looking first across Panels
A and B, Column 2 shows that recommended households were slightly more likely to buy
and sell from the agent. However, the effects are statistically non-significant for the most
part, with the exceptions that recommended households paid significantly lower rents on
power-tillers to the agent, and sold a significantly higher fraction of their output to the
agent. Hence it does not appear to be consistently true that agents charged higher prices
to recommended households as payment for recommending them. We also do not find in
Column 1 that recommended households that actually were randomly selected to receive
loans, transacted larger quantities with or paid higher prices to/received lower prices from
the agent. The treatment effect is significant only for the rental rate on power tillers and
in fact shows that Treatment households could rent power tillers even more cheaply from
the agent than Control 1 households. If anything, the benefits of the TRAIL loan obtained
  34
     Students in Boston University’s Masters of Global Development Studies program did fieldwork and
very helpful analysis addressing this question (Ah-Tye et al., 2013).
  35
     See Tables A-9 – A-11 for the full set of results.


                                                24
by the borrower were supplemented by cheaper inputs purchased from the agent, the very
opposite of the hypothesis that the benefits were being siphoned off by the agent.

In Panel C we consider the borrowing from the agent during the 6 cycles, and the interest
rate charged. Recall from Table 7 that the agent was more likely to recommend households
that had borrowed from him in the 3 years prior to the program. Column 2 shows that
recommended borrowers continue to be more likely to borrow from the agent, and also
receive a larger share of their total borrowing from the agent. However, presumably because
they now receive the program loans, treatment households become less likely to borrow from
the agent during the 6 cycles. Interest rates charged by the agent also do not change.

Overall, we do not find evidence that the agent extracted side-payments from the borrowers
by engaging in greater volume of transactions, or charging higher prices/paying lower prices
to the borrowers. It appears likely that the TRAIL treatment households retained control
over the program benefits that accrued to them.


5.5    Heterogeneity in Selection and Distributive Impacts

We have thus far discussed the estimated effects of the TRAIL and GBL schemes on the
average borrower. In Maitra et al. (2014), we study the heterogeneity of treatment and se-
lection effects, which are relevant to evaluating distributive impacts of the different schemes.
First, compared to the households that the TRAIL agent recommended, households that
formed groups in the GBL villages were less likely to own land, and more likely to belong
to socio-economically weak sections of society. In particular, TRAIL agents were likely
to recommend farmers who owned between 0.5 and 1 acres of land, whereas GBL groups
were more likely to be formed by households that owned less than 0.25 acres of land. Also,
possibly due to historical caste-based occupational patterns, most TRAIL agents did not
belong to a scheduled caste. They were less likely to recommend scheduled caste borrow-
ers, perhaps because they had not lent money to them in the past and therefore were not
informed about their default risk. Hence while the TRAIL scheme had superior effects on
cultivation, output and income, the GBL scheme was more likely to expand credit access
for the socio-economically weaker sections of the village population. Note again, however,
that the GBL scheme did not generate significant positive impacts on output or income for
borrowers.

Second, the TRAIL loans had different treatment effects on the allocation of time by
male and female members of the household. Females tended to reduce labor hours in em-
ployment outside the household and correspondingly spend more time on non-agricultural
self-employment, but their total hours worked on the family farm or in the aggregate did
not change significantly. In contrast, male members significantly increased hours of work
on the family farm, and to some extent on other self-employment, without cutting back on
hours spent on employment outside the household. We find no effects of the schemes on
the demand and supply of child labour in the borrower households.


                                              25
Finally, the effects of the schemes differed by the land-size category of borrowers. The
treatment effects in both schemes were significantly stronger for households that owned
0.5 – 1 acres of land. It is possible that local intermediaries interact more intensively with
households in this category, because they have greater marketable surplus to sell to traders,
or are in greater need of agricultural credit.



6      Financial Sustainability

Lending institutions usually evaluate loan programs in terms of their repayment rates,
clientele size and administrative costs. We have shown that both repayment rates and loan
take-up rates were higher for the TRAIL than the GBL scheme. In addition, it cost the
MFI less to implement the TRAIL scheme than the GBL scheme. The per-month cost of
operating the GBL scheme in a village was Rupees 1463, whereas the cost of running the
TRAIL scheme was only Rupees 68 per village: a difference of almost Rupees 1400 per
village. About 80 percent of this difference is explained by lower salary costs and transport
expenses for loan officers, which followed from the absence of meetings in the TRAIL design.
The MFI also paid for the services of an office assistant for the GBL villages, and made
phone calls and additional visits to the village to negotiate with the borrowing groups,
which it did not do in the TRAIL villages.

Thus our results show that the TRAIL scheme delivered superior results on borrower im-
pacts, repayment and take-up rates, at a lower cost than the traditional group-based lending
scheme. Nevertheless, at the 12 percent per annum that Shree Sanchari would have paid
for loanable funds from formal financial institutions in India, it would not have broken
even on the TRAIL scheme.36 However, cheaper financing options would allow this scheme
to become financially sustainable. If our results generalize to other settings, the TRAIL
scheme would become viable at an even higher cost of funds than the GBL scheme would.



7      Conclusion

The problem of identifying creditworthy borrowers and ensuring repayment in the ab-
sence of collateral have made agricultural finance in developing countries notoriously cost-
ineffective. While microcredit has famously solved these problems by leveraging local in-
formation and enforcement, it is not usually used as a source of agricultural finance. In this
study, we have demonstrated that it is possible to build on the key principles of microcredit
  36
    For example, in Cycle 1, if all loans were repaid in full, the total loan interest generated from 10 loans
would be Rupees 1200. Shree Sanchari would retain 25 percent of this after paying agent commissions.
Since a cycle lasts 4 months this would generate a revenue of Rupees 75 per month per village, which would
cover the administrative cost of Rs 68 mentioned above, but not the cost of funds of Rs. 200 per month
per village in Cycle 1.


                                                     26
and design a lending mechanism that targets productive farmers who earn high rates of
return and repay the loans with high probability.

The trader-agent intermediated lending (TRAIL) scheme involved individual liability loans
at below-market-average interest rates, durations that matched crop cycles of the most
important cash crop in the region, and insured against local yield and price shocks. The
scheme was particularly successful at inducing selected beneficiaries to increase the culti-
vation and output of potatoes. This did not come at the cost of reduction in income from
any other source that we measured. We explained this result in terms of the underlying se-
lection patterns: TRAIL agents recommended households from among their own networks
that they knew were low-risk borrowers and had high productivity. The GBL scheme em-
ployed the traditional group-based micro-finance approach to borrower selection, and did
not generate comparable positive effects on farm output. We argue this is because both
high and low productivity households participated in the GBL scheme. However possibly
due to joint liability incentive to repay on behalf of defaulting group-members, the GBL
loans also had high repayment rates, although marginally lower than for TRAIL loans.
Loan take-up rates were higher in the TRAIL scheme, indicating higher ex ante effects on
borrower welfare. We also found no evidence that TRAIL agents siphoned off the benefits
of recommended or treated borrowers.

It is clear that TRAIL borrowers increased their output of the cash crop as a result of the
expanded credit access. The high crop prices prevailing during the years of the experiment
ensured that this translated into large positive effects on value added and income. The
effects would have been much smaller had prices been lower, as they were as recently as 2008.
This is consistent with the well-known fact that agricultural prices fluctuate considerably
from year to year, and therefore agriculture is a high-risk enterprise. This underscores the
need for agricultural financing schemes to also include an insurance component. It is likely
that the crop insurance that both our schemes provided contributed positively to their high
take-up rates.

Nevertheless, the fact that the TRAIL scheme lowered borrowing costs, and induced bor-
rowers to expand the cultivation scale of potatoes, suggest that there were positive ex ante
welfare improvements. The absence of mandatory group meetings, savings requirements,
or the burden of joint liability also likely lowered the costs of participating in the scheme.

For the lender, administrative costs were considerably lower in the TRAIL scheme than
the GBL scheme. The bulk of the cost savings came from lower outlays on loan officers’
salaries and transport, since the TRAIL design did not require bi-monthly meetings with
borrowers. However, the lender paid 75% of the loan interest received on TRAIL loans
to the agents, whereas it retained the entire interest received on GBL loans. In some
developing countries, government policy ensures that institutions that offer microcredit
and agricultural financial services have access to funds at lower than the market interest
rate.37 In such environments, the lender could break even or earn profits from the TRAIL
 37
      Notably, in Bangladesh, MFIs receive loanable funds from a government-sponsored agency at roughly



                                                   27
scheme. Coupled with the large effects on agricultural production and farm incomes, this
approach could help to fulfill the promise of microfinance.




half the interest rate that commercial banks charge.


                                                   28
References
Ah-Tye, T., O. Bai, J. Blanco, C. Pheiffer, and S. Winata (2013). The effect of social and economic ties on
  loan repayment in agent-intermediated lending in west bengal, india. Master’s thesis, Boston University.

Armendáriz, B. and J. Morduch (2005). The Economics of Microfinance. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bandiera, O. and I. Rasul (2006). Social networks and technology adoption in northern mozambique.
  Economic Journal 116(514), 869 – 902.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2011). The miracle of microfinance? evidence from
  a randomized evaluation. Mimeo, MIT, JPAL.

Banerjee, A. V. (2013). Microcredit under the microscope: What have we learned in the past two decades,
  and what do we need to know? Annual Review of Economics 5, 487 – 519.

Besley, T. and S. Coate (1995). Group lending, repayment incentives and social collateral. Journal of
  Development Economics 46(1), 1 – 18.

Casini, P. (2010). Competitive microcredit markets: Differentiation and ex-ante incentives for multiple
  borrowing. Licos discussion papers 26610, LICOS - Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance,
  K.U.Leuven.

Celik, G. (2009). Mechanism design with collusive supervision. Journal of Economic Theory 144(1), 69 –
  95.

Conley, T. G. and C. R. Udry (2010). Learning about a new technology: Pineapple in ghana. American
  Economic Review 100(1), 35 – 69.

Demont, T. (2012). The impact of microfinance on the informal credit market: An adverse selection model.
  Technical report, Namur.

Faure-Grimaud, A., J. J. Laffont, and D. Martimort (2003). Collusion, delegation and supervision with
  soft information. Review of Economic Studies 70, 253 – 275.

Feder, G. (1985). The relation between farm size and farm productivity : The role of family labor,
  supervision and credit constraints. Journal of Development Economics 18(2-3), 297 – 313.

Floro, M. S. and D. Ray (1997). Vertical links between formal and informal financial institutions. Review
  of Development Economics 1(1), 34 – 56.

Foster, A. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1996). Technical change and human-capital returns and investments:
  Evidence from the green revolution. American Economic Review 86(4), 931 – 953.

Fuentes, G. (1996). The use of village agents in rural credit delivery. Journal of Development Studies 33(2),
  188 – 209.

Ghatak, M. (2000). Screening by the company you keep: joint liability lending and the peer selection effect.
  Economic Journal 110(465), 601 – 631.

Guha, B. and P. R. Chowdhury (2012). Borrower targeting under micro-finance competition with motivated
  mfis. Technical report, Singapore Management University, School of Economics.


                                                     29
Jain, S. (1999). Symbiosis vs crowding-out: The interaction of formal and informal credit markets in
   developing countries. Journal of Development Economics 59(2), 419 – 444.

Jain, S. and G. Mansuri (2003). A little at a time: the use of regularly scheduled repayments in microfinance
   programs. Journal of Development Economics 72(1), 253 – 279.

Khandker, S. and H. Samad (2013). Dynamic effects of microcredit in bangladesh. Policy research working
  paper 6821, World Bank.

Laffont, J. J. and D. Martimort (1998). Collusion and delegation. RAND Journal of Economics 29, 280 –
  305.

Laffont, J. J. and D. Martimort (2000). Mechanism design with collusion and correlation. Econometrica 68,
  309 – 342.

Maitra, P., S. Mitra, D. Mookherjee, A. Motta, and S. Visaria (2014). Distributive impacts of loans to
  finance smallholder agriculture. Technical report, Mimeo, Boston University.

Maloney, C. and A. B. Ahmad (1988). Rural Savings and Credit in Bangladesh. University Press Ltd.,
  Dhaka Bangladesh.

McIntosh, C. and B. Wydick (2005). Competition and microfinance. Journal of Development Economics 78,
  271 – 298.

Melumad, N. D., D. Mookherjee, and S. Reichelstein (1995). Hierarchical decentralization of incentive
  contracts. RAND Journal of Economics 26, 654 – 672.

Mitra, S., D. Mookherjee, M. Torero, and S. Visaria (2013). Asymmetric information and middleman mar-
  gins: An experiment with west bengal potato farmers. Technical report, Mimeo, Hong kong University
  of Science and Technology.

Mookherjee, D. and M. Tsumagari (2004). The organization of supplier networks: Effects of delegation
 and intermediation. Econometrica 72(4), 1179 – 1219.

Morduch, J. (1998). Does microfinance really help the poor? new evidence from flagship programs in
  bangladesh. Technical report, New York University: New York.

Motta, A. (2011). Collusion and selective supervision. Technical report, UNSW, Australia.

Navajas, S., J. Conning, and C. Gonzalez-Vega (2003). Lending technologies, competition and consolidation
  in the market for microfinance in bolivia. Journal of International Development 15(6), 747 – 770.

Onchan, T. (1992). Informal rural finance in thailand. In D. W. Adams and D. Fitchett (Eds.), Informal
  Finance in Low-Income Countries. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.

Srinivasan, N. (2008). Microfinance India. State of the Sector Report. SAGE.

Wells, R. J. G. (1978). An input credit programme for small farmers in west malaysia. Journal of
  Administration Overseas 17, 4 – 16.




                                                     30
                                     Table 1: Randomization


                                                    TRAIL                 GBL              Difference
                                                 Mean     SE          Mean    SE          TRAIL - GBL



Panel A: Village Level Differences

Number of households                             297.59     48.06     388.50     80.36        -90.91
Percent households electrified                    0.60      0.06       0.59       0.05          0.01
Has primary school                                0.77      0.09       0.79      0.08          -0.02
Has primary health centre                         0.27      0.10       0.21       0.08          0.06
Has bank branch                                   0.14      0.07       0.17      0.08          -0.03
Has pucca road                                    0.27      0.10       0.42      0.10          -0.14
Panel B: Household Level Differences

Male Head                                          0.95     0.01       0.94      0.01            0.01
Non Hindu                                         0.21      0.02      0.16       0.02         0.06**
Scheduled Caste (SC)                               0.23     0.02       0.25      0.02           -0.02
Scheduled Tribe (ST)                               0.05     0.01       0.04      0.01            0.01
Other Backward Caste (OBC)                        0.06      0.01      0.06       0.01           -0.01
Household Size                                     5.13     0.12       5.32      0.11           -0.19
Age of Household Head                             49.94     0.58      51.56      0.53         -1.61**
Household Head: Married                            0.91     0.01       0.90      0.01            0.01
Household Head: Completed Primary School          0.50      0.02      0.49       0.02            0.00
Household Head: Occupation Cultivator             0.56      0.02      0.55       0.02            0.01
Household Head: Occupation Labor                  0.22      0.02      0.22       0.02           -0.01
Household Head: Resident                           0.99     0.01       0.99      0.01            0.00
Landholding (acres)                               1.00      0.05      1.05       0.06           -0.05
Landless                                           .07      0.01      0.08       0.01           -0.01
Purchased inputs on credit                        0.38      0.02      0.43       0.02          -0.05*
Received government benefits                       0.54     0.02       0.62      0.02        -0.08***
Total Borrowing+                                6579.42    524.32    6417.26    489.24        162.52
Duration (Days)+                                 124.88     1.57     122.47      1.27            2.40
Interest Rate (Per annum)+                       20.48      0.87      20.89      0.77           -0.40
Number of Loans+                                  2.17      0.06      2.24       0.06           -0.06
Collateralized+                                   0.02      0.00      0.01       0.00           0.01*



Joint Significance of Household Variables‡                                                     27.07



 Notes:
 ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1. ‡ : χ2 (16). Panel A uses village census data collected in 2007-

 2008; Panel B uses the 2007-2008 sample, but data from the 2010 Cycle 1 survey. + : Restricted to loans
 from informal sources for agriculture.




                                                  31
          Table 2: Credit Market Characteristics


                                       All Loans         Agricultural Loans
                                          (1)                    (2)



Does the household Borrow?        0.69                   0.59
Total Borrowing†                 6221.78   (10140.18)   4952.85    (8607.67)

Proportion of Loans by Source‡

Informal Lenders                  0.65                    0.66
Family and Friends                0.05                    0.03
Cooperatives                      0.23                    0.24
Government Banks                  0.05                    0.05



Interest Rate (Annualized) by Source

Informal Lenders                  26.57      (24.14)     26.36      (24.51)
Family and Friends                20.53      (15.09)     19.84      (16.32)
Cooperatives                      15.41       (3.07)     15.62       (3.15)
Government Banks                  11.91       (4.30)     11.83       (4.65)


Duration (Days) by Source

Informal Lenders                 123.63      (27.54)     122.52      (20.29)
Family and Friends               168.92     (103.61)     174.13     (101.31)
Cooperatives                     323.53      (91.19)     320.19      (93.97)
Government Banks                 299.67     (108.95)     300.35     (108.74)


Proportion of Loans Collateralized by Source

Informal Lenders                  0.01                    0.01
Family and Friends                0.02                    0.07
Cooperatives                      0.73                    0.77
Government Banks                  0.77                    0.83



 Notes:
 The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with
 less than 1.5 acres of land. All loan characteristics are summarized for loans
 taken by the household in Cycle 1. Program loans are not included. When
 computing interest rate summary statistics we do not consider loans for which
 the borrower reports that the principal amount equals the repayment amount.
 † : Total borrowing = 0 for households that do not borrow.
 ‡ : Proportion of loans in terms of value of loans at the household level.

 Proportion computed for households that borrow. Standard Deviations in
 parenthesis.




                                     32
                          Table 3: Selected Crop Characteristics


                                                             2011                                    2012
                                            Sesame          Paddy      Potatoes        Sesame       Paddy            Potatoes
                                              (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)         (5)               (6)



Acreage (acres)                               0.44            0.70        0.48            0.46        0.70              0.48
                                             (0.01)          (0.01)      (0.01)          (0.01)      (0.02)            (0.01)
Harvested quantity (Kg)                      141.69        1153.46      5207.62         144.74     1187.24            5052.68
                                             (3.27)         (20.03)     (90.98)          (4.04)     (29.25)          (125.94)
Cost of cultivation (Rupees)                 717.51        4495.50     10474.21         741.58     4939.15           10627.31
                                            (17.42)         (81.38)    (197.19)         (24.22)    (126.63)          (281.48)
Family labor (Hours)                         26.57           41.23       58.92           29.02       44.56             61.62
                                             (0.39)          (0.61)      (0.86)          (0.60)      (0.93)            (1.18)
Price Received by Farmers (Rupees)           27.23            9.45        4.61           31.54        9.38              5.51
                                             (0.22)          (0.04)      (0.03)          (0.15)      (0.05)            (0.04)
Revenue (Rupees)                            3005.74        7385.61     21208.61        3627.83     8080.20           24901.82
                                            (69.69)        (145.93)    (412.20)        (111.11)    (237.77)          (687.96)
Value-added (Rupees)                        2286.77        2999.18     10615.09        2885.21     3149.42           14243.61
                                            (61.75)        (104.76)    (268.57)         (98.90)    (168.13)          (455.34)
Value-added Per Acre                        5192.29        4310.88     22144.13        6320.40     4515.78           29584.66



  Notes:
  The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with less than 1.5 acres of land.
  Standard Errors in parenthesis.




                    Table 4: Summary of Theoretical Predictions

Treatment                 Composition           Observed                  Repayment                     Effective
                           C=connected        Interest rate                  Rate                     Cost of Credit
                               F=floaters




            Treatment              C                  rT                       pc                       (1 − K)rT
                                                      ρI                                                        ρI
TRAIL       Control 1              C                  pc
                                                                               pc                               pc

                                                  ρI ρI                                                    ρI ρI
             Control 2           C, F               ,
                                                  pc pf
                                                                             pc , pf                         ,
                                                                                                           pc pf



            Treatment          CC, FF                 rT            pc (2 − pc ), pf (2 − pf )    (2 − pc )rT , (2 − pf )rT
                                                 ρI
  GBL       Control 1          CC, FF            pc
                                                       , pρI                 pc , pf                       ρI ρI
                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                              ,p
                                                            f                                               c        f
                                                 ρI        ρI                                              ρI       ρI
             Control 2           C, F            pc
                                                       ,   pf
                                                                             pc , pf                       pc
                                                                                                                ,   pf




                                                            33
                    Table 5: Program Impacts. Treatment and Selection Effects.


                                     Unit              Treatment                   Selection            Sample      Mean
                                                   TRAIL       GBL              TRAIL       GBL          Size      Control 1


                                      (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)



Panel A: Effects on Total Borrowing and Cost of Borrowing

1      Total Borrowing                Rs         7126.23***     6464.46***      -417.02      -919.86      2758      7279.76
       (All Loans)
2      Cost of Borrowing           Percent         -0.03**         -0.07***      -0.01       0.04**       2428        0.24
       (All Loans)               (Annualized)
3      Total Borrowing               Rs            -495.74         254.72       -372.19      -930.27      2601      7279.76
       (Non-program Loans)
4      Cost of Borrowing           Percent           0.01           -0.01        -0.01       0.04***      2159        0.24
       (Non-program Loans)       (Annualized)



Panel B: Effects on Potato Production

5      Cultivate                                    0.0545         0.0492     0.0949***      0.0614       4163       0.677
6      Acreage                      Acres         0.0896***        0.0402       0.0010       -0.0421      2718       0.432
7      Leased-in acres              Acres          0.0467**        0.0222      -0.00265      0.00447      2718       0.111
8      Cost of production            Rs             1774**          1308         372.8        -1111       2718       9538
9      Output                        Kg            888.0***          278         145.4        -417.9      2718       4760
10     Revenue                       Rs            3429***          1637          942         -2534       2718       19137
11     Value added                   Rs             1687**          271.8        555.6        -1371       2718       9498
12     Family labour hours          Hours            6.03           4.906         -0.2        4.951       2718       57.86
13     Imputed profit                Rs             1676**           457        203.2*        -1665       2718       8076



Panel C: Comparing Acreage and Value-Added in Different Crops

Sesame
14 Acreage                           Acres         0.0424*         0.0111       0.0192       -0.0052      2037       0.414
15 Value added                        Rs             180           -158.3       -115.7        73.41       2037       2126
Paddy
16 Acreage                           Acres         0.0324**        0.0516       -0.0402     -0.00237      3054       0.641
17 Value added                        Rs             271.6          573.6        -469.9      -759.6*      3047       2506
Vegetables
18 Acreage                           Acres         0.159**         -0.0197      -0.0161      -0.0145      402        0.196
19 Value-Added                        Rs             1255           -1955        1329         -957.5      402        8325



Panel D: Effects on Household Income

20     Total Farm Income              Rs           2621***          53.24      11466***     10066***      4163       10328



    Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the village level are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1. Sample
    restricted to households with at most 1.5 acres. All regressions include TRAIL dummy, TRAIL dummy interacted with
    Treatment household, TRAIL dummy interacted with Control 1 household, GBL dummy interacted with Treatment
    household and GBL dummy interacted with Control 1 household, land owned by the household, a Year 2 dummy and a
    dummy for Information Village. The full set of results corresponding to presented in Table A-2 (corresponding to Panel
    A), Table A-3 (corresponding to Panels B and C) and Table A-1 (corresponding to Panel D) in online Appendix A-1.




                                                              34
               Table 6: Rates of Return

                  Potatoes              Total Farm Income
                     (1)                         (2)


Panel A: IV estimates based on Cobb-Douglas production function


TRAIL (α3 )       0.83***                     0.92***
                   (0.16)                      (0.16)

GBL (α2 )           0.67                        0.63
                   (0.47)                      (0.56)

Implied RoRs at mean cost/revenue ratio

TRAIL               0.72                        1.03
GBL                 0.37                        0.38


Panel B: Bootstrapped estimates


TRAIL             1.05***                     1.15***
                   (0.06)                      (0.02)

GBL                 0.09                        -0.1
                   (0.37)                      (0.29)
 Notes:
 In Panel A, ROR defined as the elasticity of revenue on cost (from a
 regression of log revenue on log cost using assignment to treatment
 as the instrument) multiplied by ratio of revenue to cost. In Panel
 B, ROR defined as the ratio of the treatment effect on value added
 and the treatment effect on cost. Standard errors are bootstrapped
 with 600 replications. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1.
 Sample restricted to Treatment and Control 1 households with at
 most 1.5 acres of land.




                               35
                 Table 7: Selection: TRAIL
(Dependent Variable: Household was recommended into the scheme)



                                 (1)                   (2)



Bought from agent               0.023                  0.016
                               (0.044)               (0.047)
Borrow from agent             0.139***              0.142***
                               (0.037)               (0.035)
Work for agent                  0.003                 -0.005
                               (0.049)               (0.055)
Non Hindu                                              0.030
                                                     (0.143)
Non Hindu × Agent Hindu                               -0.098
                                                     (0.132)
SC                                                  0.544***
                                                     (0.031)
SC × Agent High Caste                              -0.610***
                                                     (0.036)
ST                                                   -0.198*
                                                     (0.108)
ST × Agent High Caste                                 0.218
                                                     (0.166)
Constant                        0.023                  0.037
                               (0.079)               (0.098)



Sample Size                     1,031                1,031
Number of Villages               24                    24



 Notes:
 Linear Probability Estimates. Dependent variable is household was
 recommended/selected into the scheme. Standard errors, clustered at
 the village level, are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ :
 p < 0.1. Sample restricted to households with at most 1.5 acres.
 All regressions control for age, gender, educational attainment, pri-
 mary occupation of the household head, household size, dummies for
 whether the household purchased on credit or received government
 transfers and landholding.




                                 36
                           Table 8: Interest Rate Comparisons
                  (Dependent Variable: average interest rate paid on informal loans)



                                          TRAIL                       GBL               TRAIL v GBL
                                   OLS       Heckman         OLS        Heckman        OLS     Heckman
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)



Recommend                          0.022        0.022       0.053*       0.052*
                                  (0.016)      (0.017)      (0.027)      (0.029)
Own-clientele                      0.050       0.049*
                                  (0.033)      (0.027)
Own-clientele × Recommend        -0.071**     -0.071**
                                  (0.026)      (0.035)
TRAIL                                                                                  -0.064     -0.064**
                                                                                      (0.046)      (0.027)
High caste                       -0.058***    -0.059***     0.134*      0.134***        0.053      0.053*
                                  (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.071)      (0.031)      (0.044)      (0.028)
Landholding                        0.091          0.090      -0.103       -0.071       -0.047       -0.023
                                  (0.070)       (0.078)     (0.170)      (0.142)      (0.182)      (0.129)
Landholding Squared                -0.063        -0.062       0.065        0.050        0.053        0.042
                                  (0.044)       (0.052)     (0.129)      (0.093)      (0.136)      (0.086)
Constant                         0.238***      0.240***    0.196***        0.151     0.271***      0.235**
                                  (0.013)       (0.068)     (0.027)      (0.118)      (0.046)      (0.112)



Inverse Mill’s Ratio (λ)                        -0.002                    0.038                    0.032
                                               (0.055)                   (0.095)                  (0.098)
Sample Size                         438          1,032        417         1,038        412          911



 Notes:
 The dependent variable is the average interest rate the household pays on loans taken from traders or
 moneylenders, for non-emergency and non-consumption purposes, in Cycle 1. The sample in columns
 1 and 2 consists of all sample households in TRAIL villages. The sample in columns 3 and 4 consists
 of all sample households in GBL villages. The sample in columns 5 and 6 consists of all Recommended
 (Treatment and Control 1) households in TRAIL and GBL villages. Columns 2, 4 and 6 report the results
 of the second step of a Heckman two-step regression, where the first stage selection regression estimates
 the likelihood that the households takes a non-emergency and non-consumption loan from a trader or
 moneylender in Cycle 1. Explanatory variables included in the first stage are Landholding, Landholding
 squared and an indicator variable for cultivator household. Standard errors are in parenthesis. In
 columns 1, 3 and 5, standard errors are clustered at the village level. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p <
 0.1. Sample restricted to households with at most 1.5 acres.




                                                   37
Figure 1: Loan Performance: Repayment, Continuation and Take-up Rates




             Panel A: Repayment conditional on being eligible and continuation

             Panel B: Takeup/Continuation conditional on eligibility

             Panel C: Maximum number eligible in each village is 10




                                               38
                        Table 9: Treatment Effect on Non-Farm Income.


                                                     Treatment               Selection          Sample    Mean
                                                   TRAIL    GBL            TRAIL     GBL         Size    Control 1



1     Rental Income (Rupees)                        153.6       784.4       -182.1   -427.9      4162      1508
2     Income from Animal Products (Rupees)          166.8       49.18       62.66    -279.1      4162       771
3     labour income (year; Rupees)                   393       -5642      -12729**   -4941       4162     37465
4     Wage employment (last 2 weeks; Hours)         0.615      -4.496      -6.855*    1.749      4162     40.24
5     Self-employment (last 2 weeks; Hours)         6.884       4.294       0.215    5.914*      4162     121.8
6     Reported profits (Rupees)                     2343        2918        100.9    -1917       4162     5802
7     Current value business (Rupees)               4917        6692        952.1     353.8      4162     10465
8     Total Non-Farm Income (Rupees)                3056       -1890       -12748    -7565       4162     45546


    Notes:
    Standard errors, clustered at the village level are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1.
    Sample restricted to households with at most 1.5 acres. All regressions include TRAIL dummy, TRAIL
    dummy interacted with Treatment household, TRAIL dummy interacted with Control 1 household, GBL
    dummy interacted with Treatment household and GBL dummy interacted with Control 1 household, land
    owned by the household, a Year 2 dummy and a dummy for Information Village. Full set of results presented
    in Table A-5 in Online Appendix A-1




               Table 10: Sensitivity of Treatment Effects for Potato Value
               Added to Price Changes.
                                Dependent Variable: Value added (Actual/Imputed)



                                        Treatment             Selection          Sample    Mean
                                      TRAIL    GBL          TRAIL     GBL         Size    Control 1



                 1     Actual         1687**    271.8        555.6      -1371     2718        9498
                 2     2011 prices   1833***    -541.4      -63.12      -258.2    2516        8687
                 3     2012 prices   3370***    -299.7      -42.65      -764.3    2516        15859
                 4     2008 prices     304.0    -782.0      -83.48       245.5    2516        1550



                     Notes:
                     Standard errors, clustered at the village level are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p <
                     0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1. Sample restricted to households with at most
                     1.5 acres. All regressions include TRAIL dummy, TRAIL dummy interacted
                     with Treatment household, TRAIL dummy interacted with Control 1 household,
                     GBL dummy interacted with Treatment household and GBL dummy interacted
                     with Control 1 household, land owned by the household, a Year 2 dummy and
                     a dummy for Information Village. Full set of results presented in Table A-7 in
                     Online Appendix A-1.




                                                         39
      Table 11: Treatment and Selection Effects for Transactions with TRAIL Agent


                                                     Treatment Effect     Selection Effect    Sample Size    Mean Control 1
                                                           (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)



Panel A: Input Purchase

Buy any Input from agent†                                 -0.00338            0.00780           12,448            0.0875
Share of agricultural input purchased from agent          -0.00359            0.0187            10,196            0.0760

Input Price (Rs/unit)

Inorganic fertilizer                                       -0.322               0.170            1,672             13.78
Organic fertilizer                                          29.39              -4.024             370              16.12
Outside seeds                                              2.174               -2.863            1,654             22.36
Pesticide                                                  -31.08              -25.32            2,691             533.5
Powertiller                                              -32.33***            -33.23**           1,403             195.2
Water/irrigation                                            148.3              -148.3            1,230             72.30



Panel B: Output Sold

Sold output to agent†                                     0.00559             0.00560            2,990             0.209
Share of output sold to agent                              0.0152             0.0465*            2,765             0.151

Output Price (Rs/kg)

Potato                                                      0.098             0.00955            1,386             4.507
Paddy                                                      0.0289              -0.149             498              9.282
Sesame                                                     -7.817              8.429              881              28.42



Panel C: Borrowing

Borrowed from agent†                                       -0.082*             0.060*            1398              0.173
Share of total borrowing from agent                       -0.036**             0.016*            1398              0.049

Interest rate (APR)                                        -0.003              0.007             4320              0.145



 Notes:
 Standard errors, clustered at the village level are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1. Sample restricted
 to sample households in the TRAIL villages. Borrowing (in Panel C) restricted to agricultural purposes. All regressions
 include TRAIL dummy interacted with Treatment household, TRAIL dummy interacted with Control 1 household, land
 owned by the household, a Year 2 dummy and a dummy for Information Village. † : Purchased inputs from , sold output
 to or borrowed from agent in the last 2 years. Full set of results presented in Table A-9 (corresponding to Panel A), Table
 A-10 (corresponding to Panel B) and Table A-11 (corresponding to Panel C) in Online Appendix A-1.




                                                            40
For Online Publication

A-1           Alternative Theoretical Models

In this appendix we explain how similar predictions would be generated with alternative models
of the informal credit market based on noncooperative behavior and adverse selection or moral
hazard.

The following assumptions are common to all the models:


       • The informal credit market is segmented. In each segment there is one lender who is in a
         privileged position to deal with borrowers in that segment. Lenders in different segments
         engage in price competition with one another. All lenders face a common cost of capital ρI
         and have no capacity constraints.

       • Borrowers are shielded by limited liability, have no collateral, and require capital to start a
         productive project.

       • We allow for side-contracts between informal lenders and borrowers, which are unobservable
         to the MFI.

       • All parties are risk neutral.

       • The TRAIL and GBL loans charge interest rate rT < ρI .


       • Adverse Selection Model: This model is based on Ghatak (2000). Borrowers know the
         riskiness of their own and each other’s projects. A safe project succeeds with probabil-
         ity ps ∈ (0, 1), whereas a risky project succeeds with a strictly lower probability, pr . All
         borrowers belong to some segment. The model abstracts from repayment incentives and
         assumes borrowers repay whenever they have the means to do so. With certain paramet-
         ric assumptions, the model generates an Akerlof-style ‘lemons’ equilibrium, where low-risk
         borrowers do not have access to any loans at all, an outcome that causes investment to be
         lower than the social optimum. Ghatak (2000) showed how this under-investment can be
         eliminated through a group-based lending scheme with joint liability. In Ghatak (2000) in-
         formal lenders are just as uninformed as the MFI about the borrowers’ risk type.38 Instead,
         we assume that informal lenders are informed about the risk type of certain borrowers in
         the market. In particular, we assume that each lender lends on a regular basis to borrowers
         in her segment, and has learnt their risk types through past experience. This information
         about borrower risk type is unavailable to lenders in other segments. This gives lenders
         monopoly power over safe borrowers within their segments. All segments have the same
         ratio θ of risky to safe types of borrowers.
  38
    The theoretical literature on microcredit has usually assumed that the MFIs and the informal lenders
are either equally uninformed (Navajas et al., 2003, McIntosh and Wydick, 2005, Casini, 2010, Guha and
Chowdhury, 2012, Demont, 2012), or they share the same information (Jain, 1999, Jain and Mansuri,
2003).


                                                    41
         As in Ghatak (2000), this model assumes all projects involve a fixed scale of cultivation and
         a given need for working capital, so loan sizes do not vary.39 Hence this model is useful
         in illustrating selection patterns that can arise with TRAIL and GBL, rather than impacts
         on loan size and scales of cultivation. The moral hazard model to be developed below has
         the advantage of incorporating these latter aspects as well. Let the required loan size to be
         normalized to 1, while the outside option of the borrower is denoted by a. If the project
         succeeds, a borrower of type i ∈ {r, s} obtains a payoff Ri and 0 otherwise.
         The informal market before the MFI enters is as follows. A strategy for each lender is
         represented by a set of interest rates offered to own-segment borrowers distinguished by their
         risk types, and to borrowers in other segments: {rs , rr , r}, respectively denoting interest rate
         offered to own-segment safe borrowers, own-segment risky borrowers, and other-segment
         borrowers. Lenders simultaneously announce their interest rates. Following Ghatak (2000),
         we impose the assumptions below to ensure that an equilibrium exists in the informal
         market:
                                                       a          a
                                                Rr −      ≥Rs −                                      (A-1)
                                                       pr        ps
                                                       a ρI
                                                Rs −      <                                          (A-2)
                                                       ps   p
                                                    ps Rs >ρI + a                                    (A-3)

         Equation (A-1) ensures that any interest rate that satisfies the safe borrowers’ participation
         constraint also satisfies the risky borrowers’ participation constraint, so that there is no
         interest rate that attracts only safe borrowers. Equation (A-2) implies that the participation
         constraint of safe borrowers is not satisfied when the interest rate, r, is greater or equal
         to ρI /p, with p ≡ θpr + (1 − θ)ps . Equation (A-3) states that the safe project is socially
         productive.

       • Moral Hazard Model: in this version of the model we assume that borrowers’ projects are
         always successful but borrowers can nonetheless default on their loans intentionally. In each
         segment there is at least one lender who has social and economic ties with the borrowers
         belonging to that segment. Harnessing this social capital, he can induce borrowers in his
         own segment to repay with probability pc . However, he is unable to enforce the same
         repayment rate with external borrowers, who repay with probability pf < pc .40 We assume
         that default risks are independent of the loan contract, for the sake of simplicity.41
         As in the model in the main text, we assume that there is a set of floater-borrowers that
         do not belong to any segment, and pf (2 − pf ) < pc . We also make similar assumptions
  39
     With variable loan sizes, it is well known that the simple result of market breakdown for safe types
with adverse selection may no longer occur, as lenders can screen borrower types via nonlinear interest
rates that vary with loan size. Safe types can get small enough loans at low interest rates that do not
attract risky types. The resulting extension of the adverse selection model becomes more complicated.
  40
     This can be rationalized in the following way: suppose that the benefit from defaulting is a random
variable that takes three possible values θ ∈ {θL , θM , θH } with probabilities {pf , pc −pf , 1−pc } respectively.
Also assume that the informal lender can commit to deny future loans in case of default, which entails
a cost ∆ ≡ θL to the borrower. The lender can impose an additional penalty s ≡ θM on own-segment
borrowers that default, but not on any other borrowers.
  41
     This requires benefits of default and subsequent sanctions be large enough relative to the loan repay-
ments involved.

                                                        42
      concerning the production function. A borrower with a TFP denoted by g has a production
      function gf (l) where f is a strictly increasing, strictly concave, twice differentiable function
      of loan size l satisfying Inada conditions. The TFP of connected borrowers (who belong
      to some segment) and floating borrowers (who do not belong to any segment) are denoted
      by gc and gf , where gc ≥ gf (for reasons similar to those discussed in the text: connected
      borrowers have access to technical and marketing information within their networks, unlike
      floaters). Each borrower’s outside option equals a. Use li (r) to denote the Walrasian loan
      demand of type i = c, f borrower at interest rate r, i.e., which maximizes gi f (l) − rl.
      Lenders compete with one another in the credit market, and can make different contract
      offers to different borrowers. Besides their advantage with respect to enforcement of re-
      payments ex post, a lender has a slight locational advantage over other lenders with regard
      to transactions with own-segment borrowers: whenever the latter are indifferent between
      borrowing from different lenders they end up borrowing from their own-segment lender.
      The timing of the game is as follows: at stage 1, the informal lenders announce contract
      offers. At stage 2, each borrower accepts at most one offer. At stage 3, the borrowers learn
      θ and decide whether to repay or not. Conditional on default, sanctions are imposed.



Predictions

The Informal Credit Market

We present the main results for the two alternative models, and explain the underlying reasoning
informally; formal proofs are available upon request.

Proposition 2 (Adverse Selection Model) There is a unique equilibrium outcome in the informal
market, in which safe types borrow from their own-segment lender at interest rate rs ≡ Rs − pas ,
while risky types borrow (from any lender) at interest rate rr ≡ ρpIr .

Here the informal lender uses his privileged information to identify the safe clients in his own
segment, and charges them an interest rate that extracts all their surplus. Other lenders cannot
compete for these safe clients because they cannot identify them. The only way to attract them
would be to offer all the borrowers in the segment a common loan contract, but this would
attract the risky clients as well. Hence, asymmetric information shields the informal lender from
competition over safe borrowers in his segment. However, all informal lenders compete over risky
borrowers, and so they all earn zero expected profits from lending to them. From equation (A-2)
it follows that the equilibrium interest rate charged to risky borrowers, rr , is higher than the
equilibrium interest rate charged to safe borrowers.

Denote the payoff that a borrower of type (i) earns from his informal loans as ui . Proposition 2
implies that us = a, whereas ur = pr Rr − ρI > a. Similarly denote the profit that the informal
lender makes from lending to a borrower of type i as Πi . In equilibrium, lenders make positive
profits on the loans they make to their own-segment safe borrowers: Πs = ps Rs − ρI − a, but they
break even on loans to risky borrowers: Πr = 0.

                                                 43
Proposition 3 (Moral Hazard Model) There is a unique equilibrium outcome in the informal
market, in which connected types borrow loan amount lc (ρI ) from their own-segment lender at
interest rate ρI /pc , while floaters borrow (from any lender) loan amount lf (ρI ) at interest rate
ρI /pf .


In the moral hazard model, Bertrand competition across lenders implies they earn zero expected
profit. Each borrower is charged an interest rate which takes into account their respective default
risks. A borrower is offered an interest rate of ρpIc by his own-segment lender, and an interest rate
of pρfI by every other lender. Since the loan is repaid with probability pc to the former, and pf to
any other lender, this implies the expected loan repayment is ρI per rupee borrowed by any type
of borrower, irrespective whether or not the lender is from the same segment. In turn this implies
all lenders compete with one another on an equal footing for all borrowers, implying that they
must all earn zero expected profit. However observed interest rates vary across connected and
floating borrowers (with the latter paying higher rates), and loan sizes also vary with the floaters
borrowing less owing to a lower TFP. Despite the segmented nature of the market, this is actually
a Walrasian equilibrium.



TRAIL Selection

Now suppose the TRAIL scheme is started in the village, with one of the segment lenders being
selected to be the agent. Who will the agent select? To start with, we presume the agent cannot
be bribed by borrowers to induce him to recommend them.

In the adverse selection model, the agent earns positive profit from safe borrowers in their own
segment, which they would stand to lose if these borrowers switch to the TRAIL loan. They earn
zero profit from all other borrowers, so on the basis of profits foregone they would prefer not to
recommend own-segment safe borrowers. On the other hand, these borrowers are more likely to
repay the loan which generates the commission for the agent, so this consideration pre-disposes
the agent to recommend their own-segment safe borrowers. If the commission rate is large enough:
                                             ps Rs − ρI − a
                                       K≥                   ≡K                                      (A-4)
                                               rT (ps − p)
the latter consideration dominates. If there is sufficient adverse selection in the sense that ps − p̄ >
ps Rs −ρI −a
     rT      , the threshold K is smaller than one, so there exist commission rates less than 100%
for which safe borrowers will be recommended.

The moral hazard model is different insofar as there are no profits foregone on the informal
market as a result of borrowers switching to TRAIL loans. The only consideration is the com-
mission that the agent expects to earn. Suppose that the agent’s discount factor is δ ∈ (0, 1).
An own-segment borrower offered a TRAIL loan will repay with probability pc , and so will se-
lect loan size lc (pc rT ). Since the agent loses his commission whenever the borrower defaults, he
sanctions the borrower the same way as when default occurs on an informal loan. Then the ex-
pected present value of recommending an own-segment borrower satisfies the Bellman equation
Vc = pc [KrT lc (pc rT ) + δVc ], implying Vc = Kpc r1−δp
                                                       T lc (pc rT )
                                                             c
                                                                     . A connected borrower in a different
segment offered a TRAIL loan will repay with probability pf , and so will select loan size lc (pf rT ).

                                                   44
The expected present value of recommending an other-segment borrower satisfies the Bellman
                                                                Kp rT lc (pf rT )
equation Vco = pf [KrT lc (pf rT ) + δVco ], implying Vco = f 1−δp        f
                                                                                  . Finally, a floating borrower
will repay with probability pf , and so will select loan size lf (pf rT ). The expected present value
of recommending such a borrower satisfies the Bellman equation Vf = pf [KrT lf (pf rT ) + δVf ],
                Kpf rT lf (pf rT )
implying Vf =       1−δpf          . It follows that recommending a different segment borrower domi-
nates recommending a floating borrower (since the former selects a larger loan size, generating a
higher commission for the agent, while the default risk is the same). And the agent prefers to
recommend an own-segment borrower rather than a connected borrower from a different segment
if
                                   prT lc (prT )
                                                 is increasing in p at p = pf                              (A-5)
                                     1 − δp
This requires either the loan demand function lc to be inelastic; otherwise the discount factor δ
needs to be large enough. If the loan demand has constant elasticity , (A-5) requires δpf > 1 − 1 .
The trade-off arises since other-segment borrowers select a larger loan size (translating into a
larger commission in the absence of default), but also default more often.

In summary,


Proposition 4 Assume borrowers cannot bribe the agent. In the adverse selection model the
AIL agent recommends an own-segment safe borrower if and only if the commission rate satisfies
K ≥ K, and a randomly chosen other-segment borrower otherwise. In the moral hazard model, the
agent never recommends a floating borrower, and recommends an own-segment borrower rather
than a connected borrower from a different segment if (A-5) holds.


Now consider what happens when the TRAIL agent can be bribed. Assume that the agent has all
the bargaining power in the bribe negotiations, so extracts all the surplus of borrowers from the
TRAIL loan. Similar results apply when the agent gets a fixed fraction of the borrower surplus.


Proposition 5 Suppose the agent can extract all the borrowers’ surplus upfront by charging a
bribe in exchange for a recommendation for the TRAIL loan. In the adverse selection model it is
never optimal for the lender to recommend an own-segment safe borrower, and it is always optimal
to recommend a borrower from a different segment. In the moral hazard model, it is never optimal
to recommend a floating borrower, and it is optimal to recommend an own-segment borrower if
the discount rate δ is large enough.


The intuition behind Proposition 5 is the following. Given that the agent has all the bargaining
power, he can extract the entire surplus that the borrower stands to earn as a result of his
recommendation. In effect the agent becomes a residual claimant on the recommended borrowers’
projects, besides earning the TRAIL commissions. In the adverse selection model, this reduces the
effective cost of credit to pi (1−K)rT when a type i borrower is recommended, as the TRAIL agent
internalizes the commission into the cost of credit. The agent therefore prefers to recommend a
risky borrower rather than a safe borrower from within his own segment, as the effective cost of



                                                      45
credit for the former is smaller. It can be shown that it is always optimal to select a borrower from
a different segment, either on the basis of screening by the bribe demand or random selection.42

In the moral hazard model, we obtain a different conclusion in the presence of bribery. Recom-
mending a floating borrower is always dominated by recommending a connected borrower from
a different segment, on account of a lower TFP of the former which implies a lower loan size
and willingness to pay a bribe, while both default with the same probability. Hence the agent
will definitely recommend a connected borrower. There is a trade-off between recommending an
own-segment borrower and an other-segment borrower: the former is less likely to default but
also selects a smaller loan size (owing to a higher effective cost of credit which arises from the
lower default risk) which implies a smaller commission. The former consideration dominates if
the discount factor is large enough.43

With adverse selection, we see that the presence of collusion implies that the agent will never
recommend safe borrowers from his own segment, and will be inclined to exhibit a bias in favor
of other-segment borrowers. Whereas in the absence of collusion, he will select own-segment safe
borrowers if the commission rate is high enough. Empirically we see the latter outcome, so this
could be viewed as evidence in favor of the model without any collusive side payments. The
adverse selection model without collusion produces the same predictions as the model in the text:
the agent selects low-risk high-productivity borrowers from his own segment.

The moral hazard model also generates the same prediction, given the assumption that the agent
is patient enough, irrespective of whether or not there is collusion. If the agent is not so patient,
we see that the agent could conceivably switch to recommending a connected borrower from
a different segment, but not a floating borrower. High productivity connected borrowers will
be selected, irrespective of the discount rate (and also irrespective of whether or not there is
collusion).
  42
       Details are available in the Appendix in Maitra et al (2013).
  43
       Recommending an own-segment borrower generates an expected present value payoff of

                                  Kpc rT lc (pc rT ) + {Πc (pc rT ) − Πc (ρI )}
                                                                                                      (A-6)
                                                     1 − δpc
while recommending an other-segment borrower generates

                                  Kpf rT lc (pf rT ) + {Πc (pf rT ) − Πc (ρI )}
                                                                                                      (A-7)
                                                     1 − δpf

and recommending a floater generates

                                  Kpf rT lf (pf rT ) + {Πf (pf rT ) − Πf (ρI )}
                                                                                                      (A-8)
                                                     1 − δpf

Here Πi (r) denotes the borrower’s profit function, the maximized value of gi f (l) − rl. It is evident that
an other-segment borrower dominates a floater, while the comparison between an own-segment and other-
segment borrower is ambiguous (with the own-segment borrower being the best option if the agent is
patient enough).




                                                      46
GBL

Neither model makes a definite prediction regarding which type of group should be more likely to
apply for a GBL loan. The adverse selection model predicts positive assortative matching but it
is unclear whether a risky group or a safe group stands to gain more from GBL. GBL loans are
more attractive to the safe borrowers relative to the risky type, because they are exploited in the
informal market implying a lower outside option. However, the safe type also expects to repay
more often, compared to a risky type, which reduces the attractiveness of a TRAIL loan. The
net impact of these two contrasting impacts is ambiguous.

In the moral hazard model, a group consisting of connected borrowers will be less likely to default,
which will raise their value of participating in a low-interest group loan compared with a group
which contains floating borrowers. On the other hand, floating borrowers have a lower effective
cost of credit owing to a higher default risk, which makes the low interest loan more attractive to
them compared with connected borrowers. Which effect dominates is ambiguous.

Compounding this ambiguity, the costs of attending group meetings and meeting savings re-
quirements may also differ between the two types (safe/risky in the adverse selection model, and
connected/floater in the moral hazard model) in a way that is difficult to predict a priori. Hence
it is possible for GBL to comprise only of groups consisting of risky types/floaters, or a mixture
of these with safe/connected types. Consequently the composition of GBL could involve lower
productivity and higher default risk on average compared to TRAIL.




                                                47
For Online Publication

A-2 Additional Tables

                Table A-1: Impact on Farm In-
                come


                                          Total Farm Income



                 TRAIL                          100.184
                                               (449.420)
                 TRAIL × Control 1          11,466.308***
                                              (1,357.722)
                 TRAIL × Treatment          14,087.352***
                                              (1,756.879)
                 GBL × Control 1            10,065.811***
                                              (1,500.573)
                 GBL × Treatment            10,119.055***
                                              (1,093.911)
                 Landholding                 7,824.408***
                                               (772.377)
                 Year 2                      2,175.697***
                                               (299.017)
                 Information                 1,574.616**
                                               (755.062)
                 Constant                   -5,650.377***
                                               (673.451)



                 TRAIL Treatment              2621***
                 GBL Treatment                  53.24
                 TRAIL Selection              11466***
                 GBL Selection                10066***



                 Sample Size                   4,163
                 Mean Control 1                10328



                  Notes:
                  The sample consists of sample households
                  in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most
                  1.5 acres of land. Standard errors clustered
                  at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p <
                  0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                     48
                                              Table A-2: Program Impacts. Total Borrowing and Cost of Borrowing.


                                                           All Loans                                                                 Non-program Loans
                                              Total Borrowing                    Cost of Borrowing                          Total Borrowing                           Cost of Borrowing
                                   All          Borrowing        Heckman              (APR)            All Households    Borrowing Households   Heckman 2-step             (APR)
                                Households      Households        2-step                                                      Households          Households
                                   (1)              (2)             (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)                 (7)                     (8)



     TRAIL                       1,094.254       1,704.645      1,746.997***             -0.006           1,062.212             1,665.675           1,702.941***              -0.005
                                 (945.728)      (1,308.410)       (488.485)             (0.019)           (935.991)            (1,306.636)             (471.188)             (0.019)
     TRAIL × Control 1             47.326         -417.019         -428.268              -0.006              65.011              -372.194               -381.244              -0.007
                                 (371.871)       (661.254)        (625.369)             (0.009)           (361.071)             (642.224)              (603.412)             (0.009)
     TRAIL × Treatment         7,579.477***    6,709.212***     6,675.995***          -0.035***             -82.520              -867.933               -964.129              -0.001
                                 (888.288)       (890.298)        (582.656)             (0.010)           (416.302)             (616.041)              (614.693)             (0.012)
     GBL × Control 1               78.576         -919.860         -809.764             0.042**              -2.199              -930.275               -831.534             0.041*
                                 (623.694)       (906.190)        (640.958)             (0.021)           (628.424)             (895.678)              (618.635)             (0.021)
     GBL × Treatment           5,527.292***    5,544.600***     5,597.085***           -0.026**              42.640              -675.566               -660.068            0.027***
                                (1,086.979)     (1,138.491)       (600.825)             (0.012)           (733.259)            (1,068.298)             (622.590)             (0.010)
     Landholding               9,860.229***    10,362.743***    8,776.287***           -0.020**         9,076.121***          10,175.240***         8,723.097***           -0.030***




49
                                 (947.583)      (1,074.144)       (633.095)             (0.009)           (909.033)            (1,077.420)             (641.741)             (0.011)
     Year 2                       -295.288         557.355       988.271***            0.035***         -1,194.769***          -967.172***              -564.873            0.047***
                                 (220.161)       (335.761)        (376.855)             (0.012)           (196.727)             (278.993)              (376.023)             (0.015)
     Information                   841.956       1,232.649      1,334.164***             -0.008            631.290              1,038.375            1,131.793***             -0.010
                                 (890.136)      (1,143.823)       (359.296)             (0.013)           (835.111)            (1,158.007)             (355.956)             (0.017)
     λ                                                          -3,402.336***                                                                       -2,857.281***
                                                                  (955.461)                                                                            (910.291)
     Constant                     -228.497        919.534       3,070.452***          0.228***             697.530             1,822.373*            3,825.254***          0.230***
                                 (654.453)       (916.659)        (774.882)            (0.022)            (659.398)            (922.888)               (794.714)            (0.024)



     TRAIL Treatment            7532.15***       7126.23***       7104.26***           -0.03**             -147.53               -495.74                -582.89               0.01
     GBL Treatment              5448.72***       6464.46***       6406.85***          -0.07***              44.84                 254.71                 171.47              -0.01
     TRAIL Selection              47.33            -417.02          -428.27              -0.01              65.01                -372.19                -381.24              -0.01
     GBL Selection                78.58            -919.86          -809.76             0.04**              -2.20                -930.27                -831.53             0.04**



     Sample Size                   4,140           2,758            4,140               2,429               4,140                 2,601                 4,140                2,159
     Mean Control 1               4826.45         7279.76          4826.45               0.24              4826.45               7279.76               4826.45                0.24



         Notes:
         The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p <
         0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1. In columns (3) and (7) we present the the second step of a Heckman two-step regression. The first stage selection regression estimates the likelihood
         that the households produces the relevant crop. Explanatory variables included in the first stage are land owned by the household, an indicator variable for cultivator household,
         a Year 2 dummy and price information treatment dummy.
                                                 Table A-3: Program Impacts. Treatment and Selection Effects.


                         Cultivate   Acreage       leased-in acres     Output       Cost of production   Family labor hours     Revenue       Value added
                                     (Acres)           (Acres)          Kg                  Rs                 Hours              Rs              Rs
                            (1)        (2)               (3)            (4)                 (5)                  (6)              (7)             (8)


     Panel A: Potato

     TRAIL                 0.055        0.001            0.004          -115.238          97.615                -0.958           -1,486.249      -1,589.679
                          (0.055)     (0.058)          (0.028)         (669.726)       (1,333.226)             (7.009)          (2,750.641)     (1,551.934)
     TRAIL × Control 1   0.095***       0.001           -0.003           145.390         372.820                -0.200              942.021         555.596
                          (0.027)     (0.031)          (0.028)         (340.508)        (802.783)              (3.895)          (1,413.094)       (772.692)
     TRAIL × Treatment   0.149***     0.091**            0.044       1,033.433***      2,146.572**              5.830          4,370.949***    2,242.245***
                          (0.036)     (0.037)          (0.028)         (382.309)        (871.933)              (3.874)          (1,438.652)       (761.007)
     GBL × Control 1       0.061       -0.042            0.004          -417.906        -1,111.024               4.951           -2,533.858      -1,371.324
                          (0.056)     (0.054)          (0.031)         (651.373)       (1,251.406)             (7.196)          (2,799.426)     (1,646.360)
     GBL × Treatment      0.111**      -0.002            0.027          -139.874         197.007                 9.857             -896.902      -1,099.531
                          (0.041)     (0.037)          (0.027)         (430.239)        (955.507)              (6.133)          (1,551.877)       (756.493)
     Landholding         0.380***    0.495***        -0.118***       5,469.185***     9,383.561***           15.447***        25,291.922***   15,729.890***
                          (0.037)     (0.049)          (0.029)         (560.767)       (1,182.893)             (4.003)          (2,506.055)     (1,464.911)
     Year 2              -0.053***     -0.008         -0.016**       -430.967***          62.384              4.826***         6,514.608***    6,626.796***
                          (0.009)     (0.008)          (0.007)         (105.858)        (258.183)              (1.273)            (670.838)       (613.263)




50
     Information           0.020        0.053            0.034           596.451         926.414                5.073            1,561.330          602.351
                          (0.050)     (0.053)          (0.023)         (613.697)       (1,268.748)             (6.294)          (2,615.559)     (1,440.187)
     Constant            0.425***    0.178***        0.161***        2,092.029***     4,562.177***           43.865***          3,897.719*         -756.274
                          (0.049)     (0.048)          (0.030)         (572.784)       (1,090.692)             (5.284)          (2,159.238)     (1,234.441)


     TRAIL Treatment       0.0545    0.0896***        0.0467**        888.0***           1774**                 6.030           3429***          1687**
     GBL Treatment         0.0492      0.0401          0.0222           278.0             1308                   4.906            1637            271.8
     TRAIL Selection     0.0949***   0.000956         -0.00265          145.4             372.8                 -0.200           942.0            555.6
     GBL Selection         0.0614     -0.0421          0.00447         -417.9             -1111                  4.951           -2534            -1371


     Sample Size           4163        2718            2718             2718              2718                  2718              2718            2718
     Mean Control 1        0.677       0.432           0.111            4760              9538                  57.86            19137            9498


     Panel B: Sesame

     TRAIL                 0.101       0.015            0.008           11.712            -24.437                1.593           135.763         156.846
                          (0.063)     (0.037)          (0.022)         (19.248)          (66.943)               (2.441)         (378.014)       (345.314)


                                                                                                                                              Continued . . .
                                        Table A-3 (Continued): Program Impacts. Treatment and Selection Effects.

                         Cultivate   Acreage    leased-in acres    Output       Cost of production   Family labor hours     Revenue      Value added
                                     (Acres)        (Acres)         Kg                  Rs                 Hours              Rs             Rs
                            (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)                 (5)                  (6)              (7)            (8)


     TRAIL × Control 1   0.107***       0.019        0.001           -4.657         102.349**               0.081             -13.851       -115.552
                           (0.027)    (0.028)      (0.026)         (13.536)          (45.830)              (1.801)          (311.201)      (291.653)
     TRAIL × Treatment    0.128***    0.062**        0.009           1.537         121.289**                1.974            184.743         61.565
                           (0.027)    (0.023)      (0.017)         (12.945)          (55.199)              (1.708)          (251.764)      (229.696)
     GBL × Control 1      0.110**      -0.005        0.006           -3.592         -123.154*              5.252**            -44.667         73.646
                           (0.047)    (0.043)      (0.024)         (14.780)          (63.018)              (2.355)          (336.784)      (294.467)
     GBL × Treatment       0.072*      0.006        0.009            -9.488          -129.753             4.387**            -213.993        -84.676
                           (0.043)    (0.037)      (0.028)         (12.353)          (78.938)              (1.985)          (244.533)      (211.506)
     Landholding         0.395***    0.394***     -0.141***       117.164***       570.860***             5.763**         2,782.291***   2,208.820***
                           (0.035)    (0.037)      (0.024)         (15.859)          (55.230)              (2.220)          (311.658)      (280.557)
     Year 2              -0.044***    0.022**       -0.011            2.902           30.745              4.630***        1,125.419***   1,095.483***
                           (0.014)    (0.011)      (0.008)          (6.106)          (39.870)              (1.091)          (152.713)      (133.379)
     Information            -0.029   0.091***      0.038**          16.229            65.313                1.417             334.426        265.557
                           (0.060)    (0.030)      (0.019)         (14.337)          (62.366)              (2.288)          (277.557)      (247.071)
     Constant            0.250***    0.137***     0.147***        59.264***        346.167***            18.156***          606.102*        263.871
                           (0.050)    (0.035)      (0.024)         (15.763)          (64.600)              (2.256)          (316.109)      (283.038)




51
     TRAIL Treatment       0.0209     0.0424*      0.00796          6.193             18.94               1.893              198.6           177.1
     GBL Treatment        -0.0377     0.0111       0.00273          -5.896            -6.598              -0.866             -169.3          -158.3
     TRAIL Selection     0.107***     0.0192       0.00124          -4.657           102.3**              0.0811             -13.85          -115.6
     GBL Selection       0.110**     -0.00519      0.00584          -3.592           -123.2*              5.252              -44.67          73.65


     Sample Size           4163       2037           2037           2037              2037                 2037              2037            2037
     Mean Control 1        0.544      0.414         0.0921          132.5             683.8                27.25             2812            2126


     Panel C: Paddy

     TRAIL                 -0.019      0.014         0.020           -6.338          -143.502              -1.150            214.124        382.545
                          (0.037)    (0.052)       (0.036)        (109.673)         (544.045)             (4.426)          (787.181)       (546.951)
     TRAIL × Control 1   0.114***     -0.040        -0.035          -56.110          -219.156               1.452           -700.064        -505.665
                          (0.028)    (0.033)       (0.032)         (46.281)         (257.134)             (2.559)          (518.429)       (366.657)
     TRAIL × Treatment   0.093***     -0.008         0.012          -55.121           -58.746              -0.724           -239.936        -197.674
                          (0.030)    (0.035)       (0.032)         (48.004)         (276.427)             (2.885)          (546.477)       (412.309)
     GBL × Control 1        0.033     -0.002        -0.015        127.751**          411.864              5.864**           -350.043       -725.624*
                          (0.034)    (0.037)       (0.031)         (56.408)         (374.376)             (2.692)          (611.068)       (431.453)


                                                                                                                                         Continued . . .
                                          Table A-3 (Continued): Program Impacts. Treatment and Selection Effects.

                           Cultivate   Acreage    leased-in acres    Output       Cost of production   Family labor hours     Revenue      Value added
                                       (Acres)        (Acres)         Kg                  Rs                 Hours              Rs             Rs
                              (1)        (2)            (3)           (4)                 (5)                  (6)              (7)            (8)


     GBL × Treatment         0.030       0.049         0.040          101.543          452.041             10.452***           202.923        -156.909
                            (0.035)     (0.039)       (0.036)         (69.433)        (420.198)              (3.536)          (660.932)      (419.408)
     Landholding           0.481***    0.916***     -0.136***       853.654***      5,118.839***           23.771***        7,686.338***   2,748.557***
                            (0.026)     (0.058)       (0.048)         (93.595)        (548.070)              (3.682)          (852.889)      (570.041)
     Year 2                 -0.020*      -0.006      -0.018**       924.978***       825.094***             6.291***        1,304.679***       278.458
                            (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.008)         (63.374)        (153.752)              (1.235)          (414.488)      (361.593)
     Information             -0.032      -0.042        0.034           -66.922         -492.203               -5.315            76.243         576.528
                            (0.037)     (0.044)       (0.025)         (96.763)        (512.177)              (3.714)          (684.021)      (461.329)
     Constant              0.522***    0.197***      0.165***         -198.219       1,455.659**           25.995***        2,407.988***    1,034.253**
                            (0.031)     (0.056)       (0.045)        (120.074)        (583.654)              (4.089)          (896.958)      (482.411)


     TRAIL Treatment        -0.0210    0.0324**     0.0466***         0.988             160.4                -2.176           460.1**          308.0
     GBL Treatment         -0.00369      0.0516       0.0543          -26.21            40.18               4.588*             553.0           568.7
     TRAIL Selection       0.114***     -0.0402      -0.0351          -56.11            -219.2                1.452            -700.1          -505.7
     GBL Selection           0.0334    -0.00237      -0.0147         127.8**            411.9               5.864**            -350.0         -725.6*




52
     Sample Size            4163        3054           3054            3054             3054                 3054              3054            3054
     Mean Control 1         0.767       0.641         0.0852           708.0            4324                 42.02             6718            2490


     Panel D: Vegetables

     TRAIL                    0.018     -0.014         0.020           781.525          306.603                3.894           -181.983      -678.376
                            (0.049)    (0.029)       (0.024)         (519.171)        (455.798)             (14.993)         (3,326.134)    (3,050.016)
     TRAIL × Control 1       -0.011     -0.016       -0.035*           -20.969          -43.546                4.025           1,182.277     1,328.894
                            (0.011)    (0.022)       (0.020)         (183.535)        (307.927)             (18.392)         (1,288.349)    (1,025.976)
     TRAIL × Treatment       -0.007    0.142**         0.045           302.504        1,072.094              22.135           3,626.783*     2,583.865
                            (0.011)    (0.067)       (0.046)         (232.142)        (745.138)             (17.945)         (1,844.248)    (1,587.705)
     GBL × Control 1        0.045**     -0.014        -0.010          -110.290         -102.531                3.206          -1,010.409     -957.482
                            (0.021)    (0.032)       (0.021)         (215.276)        (611.214)              (9.885)         (2,248.128)    (1,645.141)
     GBL × Treatment       0.068***    -0.034*         0.017           -35.956         -165.752               3.478          -3,080.971*   -2,912.706**
                            (0.023)    (0.019)       (0.018)         (104.440)        (502.244)             (10.686)         (1,772.812)    (1,378.714)
     Landholding            0.065**      0.049      -0.122***       1,001.805**         349.959               -2.970        7,774.166***   7,263.317***
                            (0.026)    (0.040)       (0.025)         (430.355)        (440.349)             (12.961)         (2,354.370)    (1,980.563)
     Year 2                  -0.007     0.026*        -0.008          740.838*      1,001.058***             20.512         6,169.337***   5,035.842***
                            (0.010)    (0.015)       (0.008)         (374.548)        (198.930)             (12.729)         (1,723.776)    (1,700.895)


                                                                                                                                           Continued . . .
                                            Table A-3 (Continued): Program Impacts. Treatment and Selection Effects.

                            Cultivate    Acreage     leased-in acres    Output       Cost of production   Family labor hours    Revenue      Value added
                                         (Acres)         (Acres)         Kg                  Rs                 Hours             Rs             Rs
                               (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)                 (5)                  (6)             (7)            (8)


     Information              0.050       0.059**         -0.002       1,005.792**      1,062.282***           46.768**        7,452.088**   6,186.548**
                             (0.051)      (0.025)        (0.017)        (479.856)         (332.893)            (17.833)        (3,131.713)   (2,829.793)
     Constant                 0.028      0.140***       0.110***         -448.654       2,173.384***          48.213***           91.940      -1,874.682
                             (0.025)      (0.040)        (0.026)        (721.773)         (404.649)            (16.376)        (2,990.169)   (2,665.239)


     TRAIL Treatment        0.00376      0.159**        0.0793*           323.5            1116**              18.11**           2445           1255
     GBL Treatment           0.0236      -0.0197         0.0276           74.33            -63.22               0.272            -2071         -1955
     TRAIL Selection         -0.0112     -0.0161        -0.0345*         -20.97            -43.55               4.025             1182          1329
     GBL Selection          0.0446**     -0.0145         -0.0104         -110.3            -102.5               3.205            -1010         -957.5


     Sample Size              4163         402            402              402               402                 402              402            402
     Mean Control 1           0.100       0.196          0.0204           1381              3564                90.22            12030          8325




53
     Notes:
     The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land.
     Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1
                                     Table A-4: Program Impacts. Heckman estimates


                                           Potato                                                Sesame
                    Cost of production      Revenue        Value added     Cost of production      Revenue       Value added
                            (1)                (2)             (3)                 (4)               (5)             (6)



                                           Potato                                                Sesame
                           (1)                 (2)              (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)


                    Cost of production        Revenue       Value added    Cost of production       Revenue      Value added
TRAIL                     135.922           -1,411.725      -1,553.780**         -23.061             145.876         165.614
                         (500.423)           (973.981)         (629.503)        (46.030)           (176.605)       (158.528)
TRAIL × Control 1         388.004              971.560          569.825         101.908*             -16.177        -117.443
                         (621.431)         (1,209.502)         (782.135)        (54.341)           (208.405)       (187.092)
TRAIL × Treatment     2,104.936***        4,289.951***     2,203.227***        119.731**            175.755           54.115
                         (613.238)         (1,193.556)         (771.625)        (54.244)           (208.059)       (186.776)
GBL × Control 1           -969.847         -2,259.210*        -1,239.025       -119.017*             -17.900          96.338
                         (678.740)         (1,321.044)         (854.366)        (61.572)           (236.134)       (211.986)
GBL × Treatment           204.778             -881.783        -1,092.248      -130.027**            -218.662         -89.023
                         (655.451)         (1,275.716)         (824.983)        (63.218)           (242.425)       (217.638)
Land                   7,955.755***       22,514.242***    14,391.876***      500.000***         2,366.826***    1,863.323***
                         (611.934)         (1,191.004)         (765.550)        (67.486)           (260.270)       (233.339)
Information             825.136**           1,364.303*          507.442         69.919**          361.512***       288.080**
                         (370.492)           (721.088)         (463.790)        (33.538)           (129.308)       (115.936)
Year 2                    283.407         6,944.590***     6,833.919***          38.944          1,175.618***    1,137.585***
                         (373.948)           (727.813)         (468.106)        (33.800)           (130.317)       (116.840)
λ                     -2,920.583***       -5,681.754***    -2,736.912***        -121.883          -719.302**       -598.946*
                         (813.710)         (1,583.721)       (1,018.762)        (91.587)           (352.973)       (316.502)
Constant              6,616.633***        7,894.495***         1,168.980      467.974***         1,320.403***      857.887**
                         (772.043)         (1,502.624)         (966.455)       (102.897)           (396.648)       (355.646)


TRAIL Treatment          1717**              3318**           1633*              17.82               191.9          171.6
GBL Treatment             1175                1377            146.8              -11.01             -200.8          -185.4
TRAIL Selection           388.0               971.6           569.8              101.9*             -16.18          -117.4
GBL Selection            -969.8              -2259*           -1239            -119.0***            -17.90          96.34


Sample Size               4,163               4,163            4,163             4,163              4,163            4,163
Mean Control 1            6457                12954            6430              371.9              1529             1156


                                           Paddy                                                Vegetables
                    Cost of production      Revenue        Value added     Cost of production      Revenue       Value added
                            (7)               (8)              (9)                (10)                (11)           (12)



TRAIL                    -141.786             222.203          389.124          308.939             -157.742       -656.307
                        (195.251)           (363.432)        (276.877)         (405.084)          (1,447.774)     (1,229.151)
TRAIL × Control 1        -223.150            -700.581         -502.693           -45.264           1,164.444       1,312.659
                        (249.130)           (463.859)        (353.426)         (528.898)          (1,890.210)     (1,604.765)
TRAIL × Treatment         -51.742            -229.043         -192.900        1,071.083**          3,616.288*      2,574.311
                        (253.828)           (472.499)        (359.979)         (529.019)          (1,890.682)     (1,605.171)
GBL × Control 1          394.038             -356.353        -716.361*           -97.383            -956.970       -908.831
                        (261.633)           (487.176)        (371.202)         (499.585)          (1,785.826)     (1,516.199)
GBL × Treatment         459.679*             220.473          -146.032          -171.444          -3,140.056*    -2,966.499**
                        (260.680)           (485.421)        (369.870)         (465.492)          (1,663.537)     (1,412.313)
Land                  5,547.607***        8,091.820***     2,779.448***         449.884          8,811.439***    8,207.665***
                        (302.001)           (560.657)        (426.716)         (536.442)          (1,935.738)     (1,646.084)


                                                                                                                Continued . . .


                                                      54
                                  Table A-4 (Continued): Program Impacts. Heckman estimates

                        Cost of production       Revenue         Value added     Cost of production       Revenue     Value added


Information                 -512.905***            64.940        583.312***         1,144.137***       8,301.785***   6,960.124***
                              (146.338)          (271.827)        (206.931)           (441.079)         (1,591.981)    (1,353.816)
Year 2                       808.721***        1,297.769***        285.852           990.220***        6,056.830***   4,933.414***
                              (145.200)          (269.709)        (205.317)           (295.063)         (1,065.574)      (906.246)
λ                             711.531*            692.495           70.869             344.704            3,578.222      3,257.660
                              (394.867)          (733.784)        (558.687)          (1,372.699)        (4,954.280)    (4,213.077)
Constant                    999.727***         1,951.444***      976.031**            1,480.118          -7,104.547     -8,426.458
                              (321.275)          (596.774)        (454.299)          (2,794.411)       (10,085.317)    (8,576.448)


TRAIL Treatment                 171.4              471.5             309.8              1116*               2452          1262
GBL Treatment                   65.64              576.8             570.3              -74.06             -2183         -2058
TRAIL Selection                -223.1             -700.6            -502.7              -45.26              1164          1313
GBL Selection                   394.0             -356.4           -716.4**             -97.38             -957.0        -908.8


Sample Size                    4,163               4,163            4,163               4,163              4,163         4,163
Mean Control 1                 3317                5153             1910                356.4              1203          832.5




Notes:
Second step of a Heckman two-step regression are presented.
The first stage selection regression estimates the likelihood that the households produces the relevant crop.
Explanatory variables included in the first stage are land owned by the household, an indicator variable for
   cultivator household, a Year 2 dummy and price information treatment dummy.
Standard errors, clustered at the village level are in parentheses.
∗∗∗ : p < 0.01,∗∗ : p < 0.05,∗ : p < 0.1. Sample restricted to households with at most 1.5 acres.




                                                           55
                                                           Table A-5: Effect on Non-Farm Incomes


                                       Income From            Labor Income    Wage Employment       Self-employment     Reported      Current value   Total non-farm
                               Rent         Animal Products       Year          last 2 weeks          last 2 weeks       profits       of business        income
                               (Rs)               (Rs)            (Rs)            (Hours)                (Hours)          (Rs)            (Rs)              (Rs)
                                (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)                   (5)             (6)             (7)               (8)



     TRAIL                     108.560            5.554            635.466            1.781               0.596          -2,534.427      -1,126.579      -1,784.848
                             (532.085)         (355.240)        (7,068.918)         (3.580)              (4.820)        (1,771.661)     (2,678.297)     (8,184.392)
     TRAIL × Control 1        -182.095           62.660       -12,729.069**         -6.855*               0.215            100.867         952.105     -12,747.637**
                             (500.805)         (202.625)        (5,437.318)         (3.583)              (2.921)          (988.988)     (3,415.009)     (5,461.814)
     TRAIL × Treatment         -28.469           229.463      -12,336.034**         -6.240*               7.099          2,443.751      5,869.309*       -9,691.290
                             (584.958)         (167.812)        (5,786.361)         (3.405)              (4.420)        (1,529.128)     (3,208.141)     (6,311.356)
     GBL × Control 1          -427.992          -279.106         -4,948.024           1.745              5.914*          -1,917.362        354.307       -7,572.483
                             (588.114)         (188.273)        (6,249.854)         (3.505)              (3.485)        (1,971.453)     (4,569.906)     (6,067.983)
     GBL × Treatment           356.382          -229.930      -10,589.894**          -2.751             10.208**         1,000.666        7,045.903     -9,462.776*
                             (679.482)         (196.540)        (4,472.769)         (2.465)              (4.474)        (2,358.029)     (5,808.770)     (4,864.195)
     Landholding           2,687.798***          267.666           -358.910       -22.727***           39.051***       3,920.037***    9,864.171***      6,516.591
                             (399.336)         (171.962)        (3,894.848)         (2.092)              (3.811)        (1,319.515)     (3,084.993)     (4,418.838)
     Year 2                 618.637***           -50.971       9,365.086***        2.587***            10.004***       1,545.952***        -95.606     11,478.704***




56
                             (117.937)          (50.638)          (810.267)         (0.548)              (1.852)         (426.144)        (782.110)     (1,104.196)
     Information              -112.776           -90.339         -2,107.285          -2.224               0.137            287.369         -48.114       -2,023.031
                             (351.375)         (289.516)        (5,156.547)         (2.927)              (4.568)        (1,637.636)     (2,990.193)     (6,138.902)
     Constant                  350.758        824.185***      42,521.843***       51.408***            96.781***       5,410.073***    6,250.040***    49,106.859***
                             (449.002)         (284.628)        (5,251.554)         (2.429)              (4.515)        (1,351.452)     (2,161.766)     (6,245.452)



     TRAIL Treatment           153.6             166.8            393.0              0.615               6.884            2343            4917             3056
     GBL Treatment             784.4             49.18            -5642              -4.496              4.294            2918            6692             -1890
     TRAIL Selection          -182.1             62.66          -12729**            -6.855*               0.215           100.9           952.1          -12748**
     GBL Selection            -427.9             -279.1           -4941               1.749              5.914*           -1917           353.8            -7565



     Sample Size               4162              4162              4162              4162                4162              4162            4162             4162
     Mean Control 1            1508              771.0            37465              40.24               121.8             5802           10465            45546



      Notes:
      The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses.
      ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.
Table A-6: Repayment and Eligibility
(end of Cycle 6)


                         Repayment      Eligibility
                            (1)             (2)



 TRAIL                    0.086***       0.062*
                           (0.030)       (0.036)
 Landholding                -0.050        -0.064
                           (0.044)       (0.068)
 Landholding Squared         0.011         0.002
                           (0.010)       (0.030)
 Constant                 0.923***      0.830***
                           (0.028)       (0.029)



  Notes
  Dependent variable in column (1) takes the value
  of 1 if the household successfully repaid the loan
  (within 30 days of the date of repayment) in Cy-
  cle 6. Dependent Variable in column (2) takes the
  value of 1 if the household remains eligible for a
  program loan at the end of Cycle 6 and 0 oth-
  erwise. The sample consists of treatment house-
  holds in TRAIL and GBL villages. Robust stan-
  dard errors in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p <
  0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                       57
Table A-7: Sensitivity of Potato Value Added to Price Changes


                           Actual         2011 prices      2012 prices      2008 prices
                            (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)



TRAIL                     -1,589.679        -681.103           -981.553       -382.080
                         (1,551.934)      (1,425.721)       (2,386.433)      (629.108)
TRAIL × Control 1           555.596          -63.118            -42.655        -83.485
                           (772.692)       (697.545)        (1,201.742)      (349.626)
TRAIL × Treatment       2,242.245***     1,770.263**       3,327.452**        220.468
                           (761.007)       (816.831)        (1,426.712)      (389.260)
GBL × Control 1           -1,371.324        -258.233           -764.343        245.474
                         (1,646.360)      (1,349.746)       (2,317.721)      (468.574)
GBL × Treatment           -1,099.531        -799.660         -1,064.052       -536.524
                           (756.493)       (828.295)        (1,462.097)      (344.318)
Landholding            15,729.890***    11,518.215***     19,718.261***    3,357.112***
                         (1,464.911)      (1,186.455)       (2,016.228)      (519.378)
Year 2                 6,626.796***     -1,587.446***     -2,243.538***    -934.469***
                           (613.263)       (361.422)          (507.059)      (252.254)
Information                 602.351        1,421.686         2,334.476        513.232
                         (1,440.187)      (1,236.508)       (2,102.137)      (542.645)
Constant                    -756.274     3,585.035***      6,958.038***        228.050
                         (1,234.441)      (1,292.965)       (2,133.777)      (555.589)



TRAIL Treatment            1687**          1833***             3370           304.0
GBL Treatment               271.8           -541.4            -299.7          -782.0
TRAIL Selection             555.6           -63.12            -42.65          -83.48
GBL Selection               -1371           -258.2            -764.3           245.5



Sample Size                 2718               2516            2516            2516
Mean Control 1              9498               8687           15859            1550



 Notes:
 The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most
 1.5 acres of land. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p <
 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1 Sample in Columns (2) - (4) restricted to the 68 villages that
 were also surveyed as a part of an earlier project as discussed in Mitra et al. (2013)




                                          58
                         Table A-8: Effects on Potato Cultivation. Robustness to Alternative Clustering


                            Cultivate        Output      Cost of production    Family labour hours       Revenue         Value added     Agricultural Income
                                (1)            (2)                 (3)                  (4)                 (5)                (6)                 (7)
     TRAIL                    0.055*        -115.796             93.385               -0.989            -1,488.198        -1,587.492         -1,586.918*
                              (0.028)      (380.534)          (805.738)              (3.529)           (1,634.807)         (972.165)           (947.199)
     TRAIL × Control 1        0.095*         151.936            392.224               -0.235              976.978            570.811             478.369
                              (0.049)      (513.788)        (1,147.261)              (4.479)           (2,173.439)       (1,188.446)         (1,168.674)
     TRAIL × Treatment       0.149***     1,039.587*         2,164.464*                5.664            4,402.500*        2,255.587*          2,151.543*
                              (0.040)      (566.385)        (1,260.021)              (3.988)           (2,386.021)       (1,239.065)         (1,204.041)
     GBL × Control 1           0.035         -17.484           -296.812               6.770              -559.851           -218.571            -558.360
                              (0.045)      (525.387)        (1,088.376)              (6.557)           (2,214.644)       (1,340.869)         (1,325.603)
     GBL × Treatment         0.114**         -51.683           403.830               10.449              -530.708           -944.247          -1,300.749
                              (0.047)      (476.750)        (1,006.425)              (6.892)           (2,032.389)       (1,140.104)         (1,086.478)
     Landholding             0.380***    5,545.846***      9,549.262***            14.903***          25,701.365***     15,969.069***      15,660.449***
                              (0.026)      (405.070)          (929.099)              (3.693)           (1,763.803)       (1,000.462)           (978.687)
     Year 2                 -0.054***    -424.243***             93.039             5.065***          6,637.673***      6,721.975***        6,377.538***
                              (0.008)       (96.864)         (232.454)               (1.103)            (529.659)         (491.487)           (498.982)
     Information               0.023        509.441            777.030                 4.185             1,180.579           371.460            265.762
                              (0.026)      (332.960)         (732.170)               (3.048)           (1,407.725)         (775.764)           (755.626)
     Constant               0.425***     2,086.371***      4,521.095***            44.525***           3,783.681**          -828.040         -1,700.583*




59
                              (0.029)      (399.873)         (832.060)               (3.820)           (1,677.875)         (968.571)           (943.829)



     TRAIL Treatment         0.0546        887.7***            1772**                  5.899             3426***           1685***             1673***
     GBL Treatment           0.0782         -34.20              700.6                  3.680              29.14             -725.7              -742.4
     TRAIL Selection         0.0949*         151.9              392.2                 -0.235              977.0             570.8               478.4
     GBL Selection            0.035         -17.48             -298.81                 6.770             -559.85           -218.57             -558.36



     Sample Size              4,103         2,668               2,668                 2,668                2,668            2,668               2,668
     Mean Control 1           0.677         4760                9538                  57.86                19137            9498                8076



      Notes:
      The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land. Standard errors clustered at the group/network
      level. In GBL villages, for each Treatment and Control 1 household the GBL group they formed is the cluster; each Control 2 household is a singleton
      cluster. In TRAIL villages, all Treatment and Control 1 households belong to the same cluster, and all Control 2 households belong to singleton clusters.
      . ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.
                                                Table A-9: Transactions with TRAIL Agent Input Market


                                  Ever buy from   Share buy from                                  Input Price (Rs/unit)
                                      Agent           Agent        Inorganic Fertilizer   Organic Fertilizer Outside Seed   Pesticide    Powertiller   Water/irrigation
                                       (1)              (2)                (3)                  (4)               (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)



     Inorganic fertilizer           -0.030***        -0.011*
                                     (0.007)         (0.006)
     Organic fertilizer             -0.100***         0.011
                                     (0.011)         (0.017)
     Outside seed                   -0.054***       -0.044***
                                     (0.011)         (0.009)
     Plough/bullock                 -0.156***       -0.101***
                                     (0.011)         (0.010)
     Powertiller                    -0.160***       -0.102***
                                     (0.010)         (0.009)
     Local seed                     -0.158***       -0.086***
                                     (0.010)         (0.013)
     Water/irrigation               -0.160***       -0.103***




60
                                     (0.010)         (0.009)
     Treatment                        0.004           0.015
                                     (0.013)         (0.013)
     Control 1                        0.008           0.019
                                     (0.013)         (0.013)
     Buy from agent                                                        0.070             -10.833***         -0.644       66.470**     36.711**         147.802
                                                                         (0.323)               (3.677)         (1.343)       (28.633)      (14.958)       (131.529)
     Buy from agent × Treatment                                           -0.152               25.365*          -0.690        -56.406    -65.564***
                                                                         (0.428)              (15.010)         (1.574)       (48.582)      (15.024)
     Buy from agent × Control 1                                            0.170                -4.024         -2.863*        -25.323     -33.231**        -148.345
                                                                         (0.508)               (2.631)         (1.568)       (45.789)      (15.136)       (132.129)
     Landholding                    -0.040***          -0.020              0.291                -3.600         -4.804*        -20.291        0.996          12.531
                                     (0.013)          (0.013)            (0.226)               (7.811)         (2.719)       (18.900)       (3.606)        (11.597)
     Year 2                         -0.021***         0.007**           6.406***                 9.052          -2.174      36.118***    19.594***       -20.841***
                                     (0.003)          (0.003)            (0.132)               (6.914)         (1.517)       (10.393)       (2.161)         (5.864)
     Information Village              0.003             0.009              0.111                 6.908          1.342          -2.178        1.220           -2.888
                                     (0.010)          (0.010)            (0.175)               (6.071)         (1.889)       (15.979)       (2.403)         (6.256)
     Constant                       0.190***         0.101***          10.081***             19.101***        26.283***     533.145***   183.253***       83.088***
                                     (0.015)          (0.014)            (0.171)               (4.702)         (1.270)       (17.676)       (2.401)         (3.991)



     TRAIL Treatment                -0.00338         -0.00359            -0.322                29.39*           2.174         -31.08     -32.33***          148.3
     TRAIL Selection                 0.00780          0.0187              0.170                -4.024          -2.863*        -25.32      -33.23**          -148.3



     Sample Size                     12,448           10,196              1,672                 370             1,654         2,691        1,403            1,230
     Mean Control 1                  0.0875           0.0760              13.78                16.12            22.36         533.5        195.2            72.30
           Table A-10: Transactions with TRAIL Agent Output Market


                            Ever sold output   Share of output             Output (price/kg)
                                to agent        sold to agent     Potato       Paddy        Sesame
                                   (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)



Paddy                          -0.089***            -0.005
                                 (0.019)           (0.018)
Sesame                         -0.132***            -0.019
                                 (0.015)           (0.014)
Treatment                         0.011           0.062**
                                 (0.027)           (0.026)
Control 1                         0.006            0.046*
                                 (0.026)           (0.024)
Landholding                    -0.114***             0.005       0.282***        -0.045     0.640
                                 (0.027)           (0.024)        (0.086)       (0.200)    (0.567)
Year 2                         -0.084***          0.016**        1.267***     -0.563***   8.195***
                                 (0.010)           (0.008)        (0.053)       (0.117)    (0.681)
Information Village             0.128***          0.107***       -0.287***      -0.238*   -0.892***
                                 (0.020)           (0.019)        (0.063)       (0.141)    (0.250)
Sell to agent                                                    -0.286***        0.245     0.619
                                                                  (0.108)       (0.166)    (0.511)
Sell to agent × Treatment                                          0.195         -0.120     0.612
                                                                  (0.184)       (0.206)    (0.795)
Sell to agent × Control 1                                          0.096         -0.149     8.429
                                                                  (0.148)       (0.195)    (7.904)
Constant                       0.297***             0.047**      3.894***      9.849***   23.110***
                                (0.024)             (0.023)       (0.057)       (0.153)    (0.222)



TRAIL Treatment                 0.00559            0.0152         0.0998        0.0289      -7.817
TRAIL Selection                 0.00560           0.0465**        0.0955        -0.149       8.429



Sample size                      2,990               2,765         1,386         498         881
Mean Control 1                   0.209               0.151         4.507        9.282       28.42



 Notes:
 The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land.
 Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                               61
         Table A-11: Transactions with TRAIL Agent Credit Market


                                  Ever Borrow from Agent       Share Borrow from Agent          APR
                                            (1)                          (2)                     (3)



Treatment                                    -0.022                       -0.020
                                            (0.031)                      (0.013)
Control 1                                   0.060*                       0.016*
                                            (0.031)                      (0.009)
Loan from Agent                                                                                  0.026
                                                                                               (0.019)
Loan from Agent × Treatment                                                                     -0.004
                                                                                               (0.045)
Loan from Agent × Control 1                                                                     -0.007
                                                                                               (0.029)
Landholding                                  -0.029                       -0.019                -0.002
                                            (0.059)                      (0.019)               (0.007)
Year 2                                     -0.037**                        0.008              -0.011**
                                            (0.017)                      (0.009)               (0.005)
Information Village                           0.101                        0.018              0.024***
                                            (0.115)                      (0.025)               (0.006)
Loansize                                                                                      0.004***
                                                                                               (0.001)
Duration > 120 days                                                                           0.045***
                                                                                               (0.007)
Constant                                     0.099                        0.031               0.089***
                                            (0.077)                      (0.025)               (0.008)



TRAIL Treatment                            -0.082*                       -0.036**              0.003
TRAIL Selection                             0.060*                        0.016*               -0.007



Sample size                                 1,398                         1,398                 4,320
Mean Control 1                              0.173                         0.049                 0.145



 Notes:
 The sample consists of sample households in TRAIL and GBL villages with at most 1.5 acres of
 land. Standard errors clustered at the village level in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.
 Borrowing restricted to agricultural purposes.




                                                 62
