                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO CREDIT MARKET SHOCKS AFFECT THE REAL ECONOMY? QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL
   EVIDENCE FROM THE GREAT RECESSION AND ‘NORMAL’ ECONOMIC TIMES

                                          Michael Greenstone
                                           Alexandre Mas
                                          Hoai-Luu Nguyen

                                         Working Paper 20704
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20704


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




Michael Greenstone, University of Chicago, mgreenst@uchicago.edu; Alexandre Mas, Princeton,
amas@princeton.edu; Hoai-Luu Nguyen, MIT, HQN@mit.edu We are grateful to Laurien Gilbert,
Felipe Goncalves, Ernest Liu, and Steven Mello for excellent research assistance. We thank Daron
Acemoglu, Pat Kline, Lawrence Summers, Ivan Werning, and seminar participants at the NBER Summer
Institute, Columbia, Brookings, Boston Federal Reserve, and Bank of Mexico for helpful comments.
We also thank Abigail Cooke, Javier Miranda, and Lars Vilhuber for enabling our use of the Census
LBD microdata. The first version of this paper was released in November 2012. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael Greenstone, Alexandre Mas, and Hoai-Luu Nguyen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Credit Market Shocks affect the Real Economy? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the
Great Recession and ‘Normal’ Economic Times
Michael Greenstone, Alexandre Mas, and Hoai-Luu Nguyen
NBER Working Paper No. 20704
November 2014
JEL No. D22,D53,G01,G1,G21,J01,J23

                                            ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of the reduction in credit supply that followed the 2008 financial crisis on the
real economy. We predict county lending shocks using variation in pre-crisis bank market shares and
estimated bank supply-shifts. Counties with negative predicted shocks experienced declines in small
business loan originations, indicating that it is costly for these businesses to find new lenders. Using
confidential microdata from the Longitudinal Business Database, we find that the 2007-2009 lending
shocks accounted for statistically significant, but economically small, declines in both small firm and
overall employment. Predicted lending shocks affected lending but not employment from 1997-2007.


Michael Greenstone                                 Hoai-Luu Nguyen
University of Chicago                              Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street                                77 Massachusetts Avenue, E19-750
Chicago, IL 60637                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                           hqn@mit.edu
mgreenst@uchicago.edu

Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu
The 2008 financial crisis caused an extraordinarily sharp decline in employment and, despite
extensive fiscal and monetary policy interventions, the subsequent recovery was slow compared
to the recovery from typical recessions. The range of explanations for this deep decline and slow
pace of recovery include reduced aggregate demand (Mian and Sufi 2014), uncertainty (Baker,
Bloom, and Davis 2013; Bloom et al. 2012), and structural factors (Charles, Hurst, and
Notowidigdo 2012). This paper considers the role of declines in bank lending over this period.
In particular, we assess how disruptions in the supply of credit to small businesses affected the
real economy between 2007 and 2010.

Small firms, who are more reliant on bank lending, experienced disproportionate employment
losses in the Great Recession (Charnes and Krueger 2011, CBO 2012, Fort et al. 2013). Based on
this observation, some policymakers (e.g., Bernanke 2010, Krueger 2010) have suggested that
fractured credit markets played a major role in overall employment declines. Indeed, restoring
access to credit was a key feature of the policy response following the financial crisis.1 The
academic literature dating at least to Brunner and Meltzer (1963) and then revived with new
purpose by Bernanke (1983) and others has emphasized that banks can play a central role in the
functioning of the economy because small and medium-sized businesses do not have ready
substitutes for bank credit. For this reason, banks have been labeled “special”, and it is thought
that their health can be an important determinant of macroeconomic fluctuations (Bernanke and
Gertler 1995; Peek and Rosengren 2000; Ashcraft 2005).

This paper gauges the degree to which the economic consequences of shocks to small business
credit contributed to the employment losses of the 2007-2009 recession, in addition to providing
new evidence on the credit channel’s empirical importance. We also examine whether the
relationship between local lending supply shocks and economic activity differs between the
recent crisis and the less turbulent 1997-2007 period.2


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
1
  Ben Bernanke stated in 2010 that "making credit accessible to sound small businesses is crucial to our economic
recovery and so should be front and center among our current policy challenges,” and that "the formation and
growth of small businesses depends critically on access to credit, unfortunately, those businesses report that credit
conditions remain very difficult.”
2
  This paper is an updated version of Greenstone and Mas (2012). The substantive difference between versions is
that we primarily use restricted-use LBD data, whereas Greenstone and Mas (2012) used NETS data. Smaller
changes include incorporating a symmetric growth measure, weighting the sample by county population in 2006
instead of the number of establishments in 2006, and extending the sample back to 1997.
                                                                ! "!
!
Our identification strategy leverages substantial heterogeneity in the extent to which different
national banks cut their small business lending during the financial crisis, and isolates the portion
of these cuts that can be attributed to supply factors. Specifically, we predict the change in
county-level small business lending over the 2007-2009 period using interactions of banks' pre-
crisis county market shares and their national change in lending. Between 2007 and 2009, for
example, Citigroup reduced small business lending by 84%, while US Bankcorp's small business
lending declined by just 3%. In our procedure, we purge each bank’s national change in lending
of its exposure to local markets in order to isolate supply, rather than demand, shocks to lending.

There is sufficient variation in banks' market shares across counties in the same state that our
results are based on within-state comparisons. The essence of our approach is to ask whether,
within a given state, counties with more Citigroup branches than US Bankcorp branches before
the crisis experienced sharper declines in their economies over the 2007-2010 period.

There are three primary findings. First, counties with banks that cut lending had declines in
small business loan originations over the 2008-2009 period.                     For example, a one standard
deviation reduction in predicted lending in 2009 is associated with a 17% reduction in total
county-level small business loan originations from 2009 through 2010. In the short term, at
least, it appears that the costs to switch lenders are meaningful for small firms. Second, this
same predicted negative shock in lending depresses 2009-2010 small (less than 20 employee)
establishment employment growth rates by 0.6 percentage points.                        Third, while there is a
significant relationship between predicted lending shocks and bank loans to small businesses
during the 1997-2007 period, these predicted shocks are not associated with changes in economic
activity. This finding suggests that the credit channel is not empirically important in normal
times.

To gauge the degree to which the reduction in credit supply contributed to the decline in
employment over the 2008-2010 period, we conduct a simple bounding exercise by assuming
that the entire 22% and 33% reductions in small business lending in 2008 and 2009, respectively,
were due to banks' credit supply decisions.3 Under this polar assumption, the point estimates
imply that these shocks led to a maximum of a 0.5 percent decline in employment in
establishments with less than 20 employees nationally; this is roughly 5 percent of the overall

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3
    These figures refer to small business loan originations from the Community Reinvestment Act disclosure data.
                                                                ! #!
!
decline in small business employment over this period. Taking the upper end of the 95 percent
confidence interval of the estimates, and assuming that all credit reductions were supply-driven,
gives a maximum contribution of 13% of the overall change. As this is the combination of two
extreme assumptions, the true aggregate effect is likely to be considerably smaller. We conclude
that the credit channel contributed to the significant changes in the real economy during the
Great Recession, but its effects were modest. Of course, we cannot reject that the employment
effects would have been larger in the absence of the extraordinary interventions undertaken by
the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Government to aid banks.

Our paper is most closely related to Chodorow-Reich (2014).                       Chodorow-Reich examines
disruptions in the syndicated loan market following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008,
and finds that borrowers of weaker banks faced restrictions in credit supply, which translated
into greater cuts in employment at these firms. He estimates the withdrawal of credit accounts
for between one-third and one-half of the employment decline at small and medium firms in his
sample over this period.

This paper adds to the Chodorow-Reich paper in several ways. First, our study is nationally
representative whereas the Chodorow-Reich sample is from a particular market of (generally)
larger firms.4 This allows us to consider the aggregate implications of our estimates without
external validity concerns. We focus on small firms, which are more likely to be affected by
bank supply decisions (we also consider overall employment). We incorporate new business
formation (and destruction) as well as employment growth of existing businesses, which allows
us to obtain overall employment impacts at the regional level. Our sample also allows for effects
that incorporate multiplier-style effects as well as indirect effects via competitor responses.

In addition to these features, we utilize a research design that allows us to control for
confounding demand factors that may have affected employment growth.                            Our study also
contributes to the literature on the causes of the Great Recession and the subsequent slow
recovery.




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
%
    !His sample of 2040 firms has an average employment size in 2008 of 2985 employees (median 620).!!
                                                                ! $!
!
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some brief background
on the financial crisis and the role of small businesses in the U.S. economy. Section III describes
the data sources. Section IV explains the research design and how it is implemented. Section V
outlines the econometric models and presents the results. Section VI interprets the findings and
Section VII concludes.




II. Background

The mechanisms behind the unraveling of the financial system in 2008 are complex, and have
been analyzed in depth by Brunnermeier (2009) and Shleifer and Vishny (2011) among others.
Most relevant to our context is that the liquidity crisis translated into less available credit across
the economy, and the decline in commercial bank lending was especially severe for small
business loans. According to data from the Federal Reserve Survey of Senior Loan Officers, the
net percentage of loan officers reporting tightening standards for medium and large firms was 64
percent in the first quarter of 2009 as compared to zero percent in the first quarter of 2007.!!Data
from banks reporting under the Community Reinvestment Act show loan originations to small
businesses fell by 52% between 2007 and 2010.5 A similar pattern is seen in the survey of
members of the National Federation of Independent Business: loan availability began to decline
in the beginning of 2007, did not reach its nadir until 2009, and has been on a slow recovery
since then (Dunkelberg and Wade 2012).

A number of papers explore the underlying mechanisms for this decline in lending and conclude
that it was, in large part, “supply-driven.”                      Ivashina and Scharfstein (2010), for example,
document that new loans to large borrowers fell by 79% between the second quarter of 2007 and
the fourth quarter of 2008. They argue that an important mechanism behind this decline was




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
5
  Appendix Figure 1 plots the log of constant dollar loan originations to small businesses—defined here as
businesses with gross revenues of less than $1 million—from banks reporting under the Community Reinvestment
Act. It is apparent that the 2008 financial crisis led to an enormous decline in originations to small businesses.
Appendix Figure 2 shows a kernel density plot of the change in log (nominal) small business loan originations
between 2007 and 2009 across counties, weighted by the number of establishments in each county in 2006. It
reveals substantial geographic dispersion in the decline in small business lending, though the pervasive nature of the
recession is also evident in the fact that almost all establishments were in counties that experienced some decline.
                                                                ! %!
!
banks’ reduced access to short-term debt following the failure of Lehman, coupled with a
drawdown of credit lines by their borrowers.6

This severe contraction in small business lending may have led to significant real economic
effects given both the importance of small businesses in the U.S. economy (in 2007, firms with
less than 100 employees represented approximately 36% of employment and 20% of net job
creation in the U.S.7,8) and their dependence on local bank credit. Using data from the Survey of
Small Business Finances through 2003, Brevoort, Holmes, and Wolken (2010) estimate the
median distance between firms and their suppliers of credit to be 3 miles, and find only 14.5
percent of small firms borrowed from an institution that was more than 30 miles from their
headquarters.9 A number of empirical studies have investigated the benefits of long-term lending
relationships as a way to overcome information asymmetries in the lending market (e.g., Cole
1998, Berger and Udell 1995, Hoshi et al. 1990, Petersen and Rajan 1994). Berger et al. (2002)
argue that firms that borrow from large banks tend to be more credit rationed, suggesting that
firms that are cut off from credit from larger banks (as in our study) may not be able to obtain
credit elsewhere. Nguyen (2014) provides direct evidence of this by showing that branch
closings that follow mergers between large banks lead to prolonged declines in local small
business lending, indicating that borrowers who lose access to credit have difficulty obtaining
credit from other (bank) lenders. In the macroeconomics literature, credit market frictions have
been suggested as a channel for the transmission of monetary policy, specifically through the
effect of interest rates on the external finance premium, which arises through imperfections in
credit markets (Bernanke and Gertler 1995).



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
6
  See also Huang and Stephens (2014), Berrospide and Edge (2010), Goetz and Gozzi (2010), and Almeida et al.
(2012).
7
  Calculated using Census Business Dynamic Statistics.
8
  We note, however, that there is considerable debate about the importance of small firms for net job creation. For
example, using different datasets on firm employment dynamics Neumark, Wall and Zhang (2009) and Haltiwanger,
Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) both find evidence supporting an inverse relationship between net growth rates and firm
size, but the latter study notes that it is really new businesses, rather than small businesses, that disproportionately
contribute to net job creation.
9
  Amel and Brevoort (2005) use survey data from the National Federation of Independent Business Research
Foundation to show the median distance over which small firms search for credit is only 4.3 miles. Using data from
a single large commercial bank, Agarwal and Hauswald (2010) find a similar median distance between the lending
branch and the firm (2.6 miles), and argue this is because geographic proximity facilitates the acquisition of “soft”
information. Using data from the Community Reinvestment Act, Laderman (2008) finds that only about 10 percent
of small business lending is from banks with no branch in the local market.

                                                                ! &!
!
III.           Data Sources

Our analysis is conducted with what we believe to be the most comprehensive data ever
assembled to investigate the role of bank lending in the real economy. The predicted lending
shock is constructed using Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) disclosure data from the
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). The CRA requires banks above a
certain asset threshold to report small business lending each year and by Census tract. The asset
threshold was $1.033 billion in 2007 and is adjusted with CPI.10 We estimate that, in 2007, CRA
eligible banks accounted for approximately 86% of all loans under $1 million.11,12

The FFIEC provides data by bank, county, and year. Two definitions of small business lending
are available: the total dollar amount of small business loan originations, defined as loans under
$1 million (≈30% of total originations in 2007), and the dollar amount of small business loan
originations to businesses with $1 million or less in annual gross revenue (≈13% of total
originations in 2007).13 As our focus is on small firms, we use the second measure throughout
the paper. These data are available from 1997 through 2010.

To calculate changes in a bank’s lending over time without including changes due to
acquisitions, we employ the standard correction (e.g., Bernanke and Lown 1991), which is to
identify acquisitions over every pair of years and treat the acquired and acquiring bank as a
single entity over that span. Following this procedure, we roll banks up to the holding company
level.14 This leaves us with 654 bank holding companies that are in the data for at least one year
over the 1997-2010 period. While these are a relatively small fraction of all banks, they are the
largest banks nationally and thus account for a large share of all lending.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
10
   Before 2005, the asset threshold was $250 million.
11
   We use FDIC Call report data from 2007 to compute the fraction of all loan balances held by banks below the
asset threshold. This is an inexact estimate since loan balances in the FDIC Call reports are a stock measure, while
CRA originations are a flow.
12
   FDIC Call reports are not designed to study regional lending because the balance sheet data are only available
nationally at the bank-level. For small community banks, however, it may not be a bad approximation to assign the
location of the bank’ headquarters as the market in which the bank lends (something that would clearly not work for,
say, Bank of America). In Section IV we use these data to better understand the implications of excluding the
smaller banks that do not meet CRA reporting thresholds from our analysis. We find no evidence that small banks
change lending balances in response to lending shocks of larger banks, and we conclude that our analysis is not
greatly affected by the exclusion of these smaller banks.
13
   In the FDIC Call reports, loan balances of $1 million or less are approximately 30% of all loans.
14
   We used the FDIC institution directory to identify acquisitions and the FIDC Call reports to link banks to their
holding companies.
                                                                ! '!
!
To study establishment-level dynamics, we use confidential microdata from the near universe of
establishments in the U.S. Census Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). A key advantage of
using these microdata is that we can compute growth rates over a given period based on
establishments' sizes at the beginning of that period.15 Specifically, for a given size category i
(e.g., establishments with less than 20 employees), we define employment growth between t-1
and t in a given county as:

       (1) Employment growth rateit = [jobs created by new establishmentsit - jobs lost from closing
           establishmentsit + employment in continuing establishmentsit - employment in continuing
           establishmentsi,t-1] / [0.5*employmentit-1 + 0.5*employmentit].

Subscript i denotes establishments that are in size category i at the end of period t-1 so that we
are only measuring the change in employment for establishments that were in the relevant size
class in the base period, as well as new establishments. Note that the above is a symmetric
growth measure, ranging between -2 and 2, as we use the average of t-1 and t employment in the
denominator.

Similarly, we compute the establishment growth rate as:

       (2) Establishment growth rateit = [new establishmentsit – closing establishmentsit] /
           [0.5*establishmentsit-1 + 0.5*establishmentsit].


We use the LBD microdata to compute these measures. In addition, we also use a special extract
of the NETS database, which is compiled by Walls and Associates using Dun and Bradstreet’s
Market Identifier files.16 From these micro data, we construct employment and establishment
growth rates for all small establishments in each county and year, as well as for establishments
that are part of multi-state firms (defined as operating in at least three states). Estimates using
the NETS database are used primarily to assess robustness.

County-level outcomes are constructed from the County Business Patterns (CBP) and the
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). The CBP are derived from the Census

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
15
   An example may help to clarify this approach to calculating the growth rate. Consider calculating the growth
rates of establishments with 20 or fewer employees, and with 21 to 150 employees. Suppose that an establishment
had 100 employees in 2007, shrank to 10 employees in 2008, and then increased to 15 employees in 2009. This
establishment would contribute to the 2007-8 growth rate for the 21 to 150 employee category and to the 2008-9
growth rate for the 20 or fewer category.
16
   See Walls (2007) for an in-depth description of these data.
                                                                ! (!
!
Business Registrar, while the QCEW are derived by the Bureau of Labor Statistics from state
unemployment insurance records. Since the CBP and QCEW have very limited information on
firm size, we use them exclusively for county-level analyses.17

Finally, our main estimating equations also include county-level controls derived from Census
data, the QCEW, and county debt-to-income ratios from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.18



IV. Research Design

A. Isolating Supply Shocks in Lending

Our research design is based on the observation that some banks cut small business lending more
than others following the crisis, and that bank market shares vary substantially across local areas.
Table 1 shows the percent change in the nominal dollar amount of small business lending
between 2007 and 2009 according to FFIEC CRA disclosures. While small business lending
declined by 48% nationally over this period, the table reveals considerable differences across
individual banks.

Our identification strategy exploits heterogeneity in counties’ exposure to these banks (as
measured by their pre-crisis market shares) under the testable assumption that firms can only
incompletely substitute for a reduction in the supply of credit from their bank. Accordingly, a
supply shock to a subset of banks in a given region will affect aggregate lending in that area. We
test this assumption empirically, but the numerous papers cited above provide evidence of such
frictions.

To implement our strategy, we develop a modified version of the shift-share approach that has
been used to identify local labor demand shocks, as in Bartik (1991).19 A standard application of
the shift-share approach to our setting would involve constructing an instrument for bank lending
in county i and year t as the sum across all banks in i of the interaction between bank market
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
17
   The County Business Patterns has information on the number of establishments by size-category of firm, but this
breakdown is inadequate for our purposes. The QCEW does not breakdown the data by firm size.
18
   County-level debt-to-income ratios are posted on Amir Sufi’s website at
http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/amir.sufi/data.html.
19
   See also Blanchard and Katz (1992), Card (2001), Autor and Duggan (2003), and Notowidigdo (2011) for other
applications of this approach.
                                                                ! )!
!
shares in t-1 and changes in those banks’ national lending between t-1 and t. The identifying
assumption is that shocks to banks’ national lending reflect supply restrictions rather than
demand conditions in the areas where the banks operate. This assumption is unlikely to be valid
in this setting because firms in depressed areas will both reduce employment and demand less
credit. If employment is lower in areas with banks that cut lending, this may reflect the tendency
for banks to cut lending when credit demand is lower.

We use a modified approach to address this identification problem. The presence of branches of
multiple bank holding companies in each county provides an opportunity to purge the common
county, or demand, effects from banks’ national changes in lending. Specifically, we estimate
the following equation that attempts to divide the contribution of demand and supply shocks to
changes in bank lending:

    (3) !!"!!!!" ! ! !! ! !! ! !!" .


The outcome variable in Equation (3) is the percentage change in small business lending by bank
j in county i between two years. We weight the sample by each bank’s base period lending in
county i so that an observation's influence is proportional to its lending in that year. The bank
fixed effects, !! , are re-centered so that their (bank asset size weighted) mean is zero. The
county fixed effects, !! , capture the variation in banks’ change in lending that is due to the
condition of the local economy, which we interpret as measuring the effects of local demand for
credit.

The parameters of interest are those associated with the vector of bank fixed effects, !! . They are
estimates of banks’ supply response that are purged of their differential exposure to regional
variation in demand for small business loans. We estimate the !! for every pair of consecutive
years beginning in 1997.

Finally, we use these estimated bank-specific supply shocks (the !! ’s) to construct a county-level
measure of the predicted lending supply shock. For each county and year, we take the weighted




                                                ! *!
!
average of the estimated bank fixed effects from (3), weighting by the bank’s base period market
share in that county20:

       (4) !! !              ! !!" !! .




!! is the estimated bank fixed effect from Equation (3), and !!" is bank j’s market share in
county i (as measured by CRA small business loans) in the year prior to the estimated shock.
We standardize the county-level predicted shock, !! , using its mean and standard deviation, and
weighting by county-level lending in the base year. As with the !! , we compute the predicted
lending shock across every pair of consecutive years beginning in 1997.

The advantage of this approach is that the identifying assumption now only requires that banks
with above- or below-average supply-shifters are not systematically sorted into counties with
worse-than-average shocks to outcomes. This assumption could be invalid if, for example,
managerial skill in choosing branch locations is correlated with skill in choosing investments for
the bank’s portfolios.21 In the following section, we provide empirical evidence that suggests
banks are not systematically sorting in this fashion.

Nevertheless, to confront the possibility of a violation of this assumption, we also exploit
establishments’ differential dependence on bank credit. As a specification check, we separately
examine (non-franchise) establishments that are part of larger multi-unit and multi-state firms.
These firms plausibly have greater access to alternative sources of financing than the local banks
in a given county. This group serves as a useful check for whether our specification is adequately
controlling for confounding factors that affect all establishments located in the same area.

There may, of course, be indirect effects of local lending shocks on establishments who are not
reliant on local banks. For example, the shock may enable them to take market share from
establishments who are affected, or there may be a multiplier from the shock that negatively
affects all firms in the area. Such indirect effects would complicate the interpretation of these
intra-county comparisons.


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20
   To calculate year t's value of the instrument, the estimated bank fixed effects are obtained from fitting equation (3)
for changes in bank lending between t and t-1. The relevant bank market share is taken from year t-1.
21
   We provide a more precise description of the underlying assumptions in the Online Appendix.
                                                                ! "+!
!
B. Summary of the Predicted Supply Shock

Figure 1 is a map of the United States with counties’ shading reflecting the quartile of their
predicted lending shock. Here, we use a version of the predicted lending shock that is computed
for the entire 2007-2009 period. The regional correlation is evident, though not always in
obvious ways. Florida and Massachusetts, for example, appear to have experienced worse-than-
average shocks, while Georgia and Tennessee fared better. The figure also shows substantial
within-state variation in the value of the predicted shock, thereby allowing for within-state
comparisons.

In Table 2 we show summary statistics of county characteristics based on whether the county is
above- or below-median in terms its predicted lending shock. Columns (1) and (2) are the raw
means with no adjustments, and column (4) is the within-state difference after purging out state
fixed effects. Columns (3) and (5) report the p-values from tests that the covariates are balanced.

Columns (1) and (2) show that counties with worse predicted lending shocks (i.e., below-
median) have different characteristics compared to counties with better predicted shocks. This is
not surprising given the spatial patterns seen in Figure 1. These columns compare areas that are
far-removed from one another, and, since different regions of the country were likely
differentially affected by the economic downturn for a variety of reasons (such as exposure to the
construction or manufacturing sectors) that are not directly related to the supply of bank credit, a
richer model that controls for regional effects is desirable.       Column (4) shows that, when
looking within states, counties with above- and below-median predicted shocks look much more
similar. The only characteristics for which there remains a significant difference are population,
population density, and the debt-to-income ratio.         Consequently, our main analysis will
emphasize specifications that include state fixed effects and that control for county population
and debt-to-income ratio, as well as a larger set of county characteristics.

We also investigate whether banks with larger cuts in lending systematically sort into particular
types of counties. The presence of such sorting might indicate that banks are able to observe
something about a county’s future prospects that is both unrelated to the predicted supply shocks
and unobservable to the econometrician. Evidence of such sorting would undermine the validity
of our research design.


                                                ! ""!
!
Table 3 assesses the degree to which unhealthy banks non-randomly sorted into certain counties.
In Column (1) we regress the fixed effect of the bank with the largest market share in a county
against the fixed effect of the bank with the second largest market share in the same county. We
do not find a significant correlation between the two. In Column (2) we take a more systematic
approach by regressing bank j’s fixed effect against the average fixed effect of other banks in
markets where j operates, weighted by j’s lending in each county. This specification also shows
no significant relationship between the lending change of a bank and the lending changes of
other banks in the same market. These spatial patterns are consistent with the presence of
unhealthy banks in particular counties being due to “the luck of the draw”, rather than to a
systematic sorting of banks into certain counties as a function of their lending policy over the
2007-2009 period.



V. Econometric Models and Results

A. The Relationship Between the Predicted Lending Shock and Actual Loan Originations

This section provides evidence that our predicted lending shock measure is predictive of realized
county-level loan originations. We begin with a graphical analysis where we divide counties
into a top quartile, middle 50%, and bottom quartile according to the value of their 2007-2009
predicted lending shock. The bottom quartile consists of those counties who experienced the
largest negative supply shock. We then estimate the following model:

       (5) !" !!" ! !!" ! !! !!" ! !!!!!" !!!!!" ! !!!!"!!" !!!!"!!" ! !!" ,


where !!" denotes small business loan originations in county i and year t, !!!!!" is an indicator for
whether the county is below the 25th percentile according to the value of its 2007-2009 predicted
lending shock, and !!!!"!!" is an indicator for whether the county lies in the middle 50%. The
model includes a full set of state-by-year fixed effects, !!" , and 2006 county characteristics
whose effects are allowed to vary by year.22 The state-by-year fixed effects mean that



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
22
  The controls are log per capita income, construction share, manufacturing share, log population, log population
density, and debt-to-income ratio.
                                                                ! "#!
!
comparisons between the groups of counties are made within-state for each year. Finally, we
weight the sample by each county’s 2006 employment count.23

It is worth noting that the use of loan originations as the dependent variable is similar in spirit to
using changes in total loans outstanding as an outcome variable. In this respect, since the
outcome is a flow variable, the subsequent models are interpretable as first-differences. Thus,
these are relatively rich models where the covariates predict changes, rather than levels, of the
outcome variable.

The coefficients of interest are the !!!! , which capture the annual within-state difference in loan
originations between the counties with top quartile values of the predicted lending shock and
counties in the bottom and middle two quartiles, respectively. In Figure 2, the line with triangle
data points plots the coefficients associated with the bottom quartile and year interactions (i.e.,
!!!!!" ), while the line with square data points plots the coefficients from the middle quartiles and
year interactions (i.e., !!!!"!!" !.

The figure confirms there is a strong first-stage relationship even after these regression
adjustments.24 Although there are differences in the level of loan originations between the three
groups, the regression adjustment removes most of the difference in pre-existing trends,
especially during the 2000-2007 period.

In the subsequent analysis, we primarily rely on the continuous version of the predicted lending
shock. In these models, we focus on the 2008 and 2009 shocks separately, and estimate versions
of the following model:

(6)            !" !!" ! !!" ! !! !!" ! !! !!!!""# ! !! !!!!""# ! !!!! !!!""# !!!!!""# !

                                                    !!!!! !!!""# !!!!!""# ! ! !!!!" !!!"#" !!!!!""# !

                                              !!!!! !!!""# !!!!!""# ! ! !!!!" !!!"#" !!!!!""# ! ! !!" !



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
23
   Unless otherwise specified, all models are weighted by the county’s 2006 employment count.
24
   Appendix Figure 3 shows the corresponding unadjusted estimates. It plots the !!!!! from estimating !" !!" !
!!!!!!" ! !!!!!" ! !!!!!" !!! !!!!!" ! ! !!!!"!!" !!! !!!!"!!" ! ! !!!!!!" !!! !!!!!" ! ! !!" . These represent the annual
means of small business loan originations for each group, relative to the 2007 value, which is constrained to be equal
across all groups.
                                                                          ! "$!
!
where !!!! is the predicted lending shock in county i in year !, and !! are year dummies. The
predicted shock main effects control for differences in county-level annual loan originations as a
function of the 2008 and 2009 predicted supply shocks.25 For ease of interpretation, the !!!! 's are
standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. We report standard errors
clustered at the county level to account for serial correlation.26

The parameters of interest are the !!!. They are the coefficients on the interactions of the 2008
predicted lending shock with year indicators for 2008, 2009, and 2010, and on the interactions of
the 2009 predicted lending shock with year indicators for 2009 and 2010. The !!! measure the
impact of the lending shocks on loan originations in the year of the shock and all subsequent
years, relative to the rate of loan originations in the years before the shock and in other counties.
Thus, this is a difference-in-differences style estimator.

We emphasize linear combinations of the estimated coefficients that are both easier to interpret
and useful for summarizing the magnitudes. Specifically, we report the cumulative effect of the
2008 shock over the 2008-2010 period, and (the larger) 2009 shock over the 2009-2010 period.
We define !! and !! to be the cumulative effect of a county having a one standard deviation
increase in its 2008 and 2009 predicted lending shocks:

                                                                !! ! !!!! ! !!!! ! !!!!"

                                                                   !! ! !!!! ! !!!!" !

For example, !! is the cumulative effect over the 2009-2010 period of a county that is +1
standard deviation in the 2009 distribution of predicted lending shocks on log loan originations.

The results in Table 4 confirm a robust and statistically significant relationship between the
predicted lending shock and loan originations.27                                  Column (1) presents estimates from the
specification that controls for state-by-year fixed effects. Column (2) adds the interaction of 2006
values of county covariates and year dummies. Column (3) adds to those covariates the
interaction of year and the county’s debt-to-income ratio in 2006. We add debt-to-income in a

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
25
   We have also estimated models that include county fixed-effects, which is another way to control for differences
in annual loan originations across counties. This alternative approach produced almost identical results. Due to the
strong similarity of the results, we emphasize the more parsimonious specification going forward.
26
   We have also experimented with clustering by state, but this did not have a notable effect on the standard errors.
27
   Appendix Table 1 presents the corresponding ! estimates.
                                                                          ! "%!
!
separate specification since it is not available for all counties. The point estimates in Column (2)
imply that a county with a one standard deviation decline in predicted lending in 2008
experiences a large and persistent decline in loan originations of approximately 7.4% in 2008,
7.7% in 2009, and 8.9% in 2010.28 The estimate for !! suggests that a county with a one
standard deviation decline in the predicted lending shock in 2009 is predicted to have a 17%
reduction in loan originations over 2009-2010 relative to pre-crisis levels, as compared to the
mean county.

Overall, these estimates provide evidence that there are important frictions in the small business
lending market. When firms lose access to credit from their bank, it appears that there are
meaningful costs that prevent them from immediately switching to other banks, thus leading to a
decline in aggregate lending in that area.29,30

B. The Relationship Between the Predicted Lending Shocks and Economic Activity During the
Great Recession

Having established a strong relationship between predicted and actual loan originations, we turn
to examining the effects of these predicted shocks on measures of economic activity using the
same specifications. Before describing these results, we note that the dependent variables are all
measured in growth rates or log differences. Thus, the controls in the statistical models can be
interpreted as controls for growth rates. This is not a change in focus from the previous
subsection since loan originations are an approximation to the preferred, but unobserved,
outcome of changes in the outstanding value of loans to small businesses.

1. Small Establishments. Table 5 provides estimates for the effects of the supply shocks on the
growth rates of small (less than 20 employee) establishments. We estimate Equation (6) where
the dependent variable is either the employment or establishment growth rate for small
establishments.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
28
   More precisely, these are log points.
29
   In Appendix Table 2, we use FDIC Call Report data to test whether non-CRA banks are offsetting the effects of
lower lending from the larger banks. For small banks, defined as those that are not subject to CRA disclosure, we
assign banks to the county where they are headquartered. We then estimate whether loan balances of small banks are
affected by the predicted lending supply shocks of larger banks in that county. We find virtually no evidence that
small banks change lending balances in response to the lending shocks of larger banks. Thus, the omission of small
banks from the analysis is not likely to be a major problem for our analysis.
30
   They may still borrow from non-bank sources, a possibility which is both plausible and one reason why the effect
of a bank lending shock may not have real effects. We discuss this in Section V.C.
                                                                ! "&!
!
The estimates for !! and !! (recall these represent the total effect of the predicted lending
shocks occurring in 2008 and 2009, respectively) show the 2008 effect (!! ) is close to zero and
statistically insignificant, while a one standard deviation in the 2009 shock corresponds to a 0.4
percent cumulative reduction in the employment growth rate over 2009-2010 without county
covariates (Column (1)), and a 0.6 percent reduction with covariates (Column (2)). Adding the
debt-to-income control in Column (3) does not change the estimated coefficient relative to the
estimate in Column (2), suggesting that the predicted lending shock is not picking up the effects
of deleveraging as emphasized in Mian and Sufi (2014). As a basis for comparison, this set of
firms experienced a 10% decline in employment between the end of 2007 and the end of 2010.31

In Columns (4)-(6) we report the results from estimating the same models, but using the small
establishment growth rate as the dependent variable, following the equation (2) definition of the
growth rate and versions of the equation (6) specification.                       These estimates range from
marginally significant to insignificant across the specifications, though the standard errors are
quite large. In the NETS data reported in Appendix Table 3 we find smaller but more precise
(and statistically significant) effects on business births and deaths. Therefore, while there is
some suggestive evidence that credit affects the formation and destruction of small businesses,
the imprecise estimate in the LBD dataset prevents us from making a firm conclusion.

2. Small Establishments in Multi-Unit Firms. As a specification check, Table 6 limits the sample
to the set of establishments that should not be as sensitive to local lending shocks: namely, small
(non-franchise) establishments that are part of larger multi-unit firms. These establishments are
less likely to be affected by the lending conditions in a particular county since multi-unit firms
tend to have broader geographic coverage. We find, across all specifications, that the estimated
effect of lending shocks for employment growth rates are insignificant. Moreover, the estimates
on the interactions of the predicted lending shocks and year dummies are jointly insignificant.

A caveat is that we were not able to verify in the LBD data whether the multi-unit firm was
geographically diversified or concentrated in a single county. In the latter case we might still
pick up some effect of the credit shock. As an additional check, we therefore present estimates
from the NETS database where we limit the sample to small establishments of multi-unit firms
that operate in at least three states. This sample of firms should have very limited, if any,

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
31
     This figure is based on data from the Census Business Dynamics Statistics.
                                                                ! "'!
!
exposure to changes in the supply of lending from banks in a particular county. These estimates
range from slightly negative and insignificant to negative and borderline significant.32 We
conclude from this analysis that the credit shock variables are not picking up differential business
cycle effects across regions.

3. County-Level Economic Outcomes. Table 7 explores the relationship between the predicted
small business lending shock and county-level employment and establishment growth. These
estimates provide an opportunity to gauge the full county-level effect of credit supply shocks
beyond the category of small firms, including any general equilibrium effects.                                We use
employment growth from the CBP and the QCEW. These datasets are designed to measure the
same thing, but they are not perfectly correlated, and the literature does not offer guidance on
which is better suited for analyses of county employment. To reduce measurement error in these
analyses, we therefore use the average of the growth rates from these datasets for each county
and year.

In the specification with state fixed effects and baseline controls (Column (2)), the cumulative
effect of one standard deviation in the 2009 shock is a statistically significant 0.34 percentage
points.33 It is not surprising that this coefficient is smaller than the small establishment sample
as we expect that a credit shock will have a larger impact on smaller firms. Note, also, that the
interactions between the predicted lending shocks and year dummies are only marginally
significant in the joint test (p-value = 0.18). As in the case for the small establishment sample,
the 2008 shock has an employment effect that is close to zero. We do not find a significant
impact of the lending shocks on total county establishments from the 2008 shock, but there is a
significant effect from the 2009 shock. The magnitude is smaller than the one estimated using
small establishments in Table 5, but it is much more precisely estimated.




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
$#
  !,-.!/.012-!why we see a negative response is that chain establishments might be indirectly affected by the local
lending shock. For example, these firms’ products may be substitutes for those sold by the small standalones. In
this case, the decline in credit for the standalones may allow the chain establishments to expand their operations if a
standalone’s inability to replace old equipment or expand its operations results in more business for establishments
that are part of multi-state firms.!
33
   It is not possible to obtain reliable estimates of population changes over these years, so it is unclear whether the
shocks affected outmigration or employment to population ratios.
                                                                ! "(!
!
C. The Role of Small Business Loans in "Normal" Economic Settings

Up to now, we have considered the effects of the credit shocks that occurred over the 2007-2009
period. However, the methodology we use to construct the predicted lending shock can also be
used to assess how shocks affected the real economy during less volatile times. To this end, we
extend the analysis to include shocks dating back to 2000 and employ a model that incorporates
all shocks simultaneously.

We estimate a model that constrains the effect of the predicted lending shock to be the same for
all years, but allows for a shift in 2008 and 2009. For loan originations, the estimating equation
is:

    (7)   !" !!" ! !! !!" ! !! !!"!! ! !! !!!""# !!!" ! ! !! !!!""# !!!"!! !

                     !!! !!!""# !!!" ! ! !! !!!"#" !!!"!! ! ! !!!" ! !! ! !!" ! !!" !

where !! !is a dummy for year t, and the lending shocks !!" are calculated as in Equation (4).   In
addition to reporting the estimated ! parameters, we also report the total effect of the 2008 shock
(!! ! !! ! !! ! !! !, the total effect of the 2009 shock (!! ! !! ! !! ! !! !!!and the excess
effect of the 2008 and 2009 shocks, which are (!! ! !! ) and (!! ! !! ), respectively. We
estimate the model separately for small establishment and total county employment growth rates.

Table 8 presents these estimates. Column (1) shows there is a strong relationship between
predicted small business lending and actual small business lending in all years of the sample.
This means we can use the predicted lending shocks to test the relationship between lending and
employment in non-crisis years. The interaction terms show that there is a much larger and more
precise effect of predicted lending on actual lending over the 2008-2009 period. We believe this
asymmetry is an inherent feature of the shift-share approach, as it is easier to predict where
lending will decline than where it will grow.

Column (2) presents estimates from Equation (7) with the LBD small establishment employment
growth outcome. The shock terms for the pre-2008 period are small and insignificant. The
estimated impact of the 2009 shock, however, is similar in magnitude to the estimate in Table 5:
one standard deviation in the predicted lending shock is associated with a 0.5 percent reduction
in the small establishment growth rate over the 2009-2010 period. The difference in effects

                                                   ! ")!
!
between 2009 and the earlier years is significant, as shown by the coefficient on the “Excess
effect of the 2009 shock.” As in Table 5, there is no relationship between the 2008 predicted
lending shocks and small establishment employment outcome.

Column (3) shows the predicted lending shocks have no significant effect on county-level
outcomes in non-crisis years. The effects of the 2008 and 2009 shocks are close to zero and
insignificant.

We also present visual evidence of the year-by-year differences in the effect of predicted lending
shocks on outcomes. To do this, we estimate the following model:

(8)            !" !!" ! !!! !! ! !!! !!!! ! !!! !!!! ! !!" ! !!!" ! !! ! !! ! !!" !

This model allows the effect of a shock to persist over two periods and to differ by calendar year.
Finally, we also include a lead term as a specification check since a shock in year t+1 should not
affect lending in year t.

Figure 3 plots the effect of the shock originating in each year. For each year t, we plot the sum
of ω1t and ω2t+1, which is the effect of a one standard deviation lending shock that occurred in
year t on lending in years t and t+1. The dotted lines show the 95 percent confidence interval.
As seen in Table 8, the relationship between predicted lending and actual lending is highly
significant in all years, but displays a counter-cyclical pattern with a point estimate that is almost
5 times larger in 2009 than in 2004.34 As previously discussed, we believe this pattern derives
mechanically from the construction of the predicted shock.

Figure 4 is analogous to Figure 3 except the outcome variable is now small establishment
employment growth. The figure visually confirms that the 2009 shock has a larger effect on
small business employment relative to any other year. Prior to 2009, the estimated response is
statistically insignificant in all years except for 2003.

We conclude that while the effect of small business lending shocks on employment is relatively
small during the 2008 financial crisis, it is larger than in earlier years. The lack of a relationship
during the pre-crisis period may be because economic activity is responsive to changes in total

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
34
   The estimated coefficient (standard error) for the average of the lead terms of the predicted credit supply shock,
ω1t, is -0.0010 (0.0007), indicating that future credit supply shocks do not significantly affect loan originations. The
lack of significance of the lead terms supports the validity of our specification.
                                                                ! "*!
!
credit availability, not just credit from banks. Alternative sources of credit for small businesses,
such as home equity loans, were also restricted during the 2007-2009 period, which could be
why the effect during the 2008 financial crisis is larger. It is also worth noting that credit was
largely booming during the pre-crisis period. As such, our results may reflect that the real effects
of negative credit supply shocks are asymmetric relative to those of positive credit supply
shocks.



VI. Interpretation

Applying estimates of the cross-sectional effects of these supply shocks to time-series variation
in aggregate small business lending is not straightforward.     One must determine how much of
the change in small business lending nationally was due to supply shifts rather than to demand
shifts, and incorporating the general equilibrium effects of these shocks is non-trivial.

Instead, we conduct the following simple bounding exercise. We obtain an upper bound estimate
of the aggregate effects by assuming that the entire reduction in small business lending between
2007 and 2009 was driven by the credit supply decisions of banks. Clearly this will overestimate
the effect of reduced credit supply since some of the observed reduction in lending was due to
lower demand for credit as a result of the recession and a more elevated risk of business default.
However, we still believe this to be a useful exercise for the purpose of assessing the magnitudes
of our estimates.

The first step is to note that CRA-disclosed small business lending declined by 22% in 2008 and
33% in 2009. Assuming that these represent supply shifts, we can apply these shifts to our
estimates to assess the magnitude of the aggregate impact of the 2007-2009 lending shocks on
small business employment growth and county-level economic activity.

The second step is to estimate a two stage least squares (2SLS) model where employment is the
dependent variable, and the regressors of interest are contemporaneous and lagged log loan
originations. The instruments for these regressors are the interactions of the 2008 lending shock
with 2008, 2009 and 2010 dummies, and the interaction of the 2009 shock with 2009 and 2010
dummy. The model also includes all main effects, state-by-year fixed effects, and the standard
set of county-level control variables interacted with year dummies. Thus, the first-stages are

                                                ! #+!
!
versions of Equation (6) where the dependent variables are contemporaneous and lagged log loan
originations. These models are estimated on data from 1997 through 2010.35

The 2SLS estimates are reported in Table 9. All entries can be interpreted as elasticities since
the outcomes are expressed as growth rates or natural log differences and the endogenous
variables are the natural log of the loan origination rate. Column (1) reports the estimates for
employment growth of small establishments in the LBD. As this is a bounding exercise, we are
less concerned with statistical significance than with magnitudes and confidence bands.
Nevertheless, we find that employment growth has a marginally significant positive relationship
with contemporaneous shocks and an insignificant relationship with lagged shocks. The elasticity
of employment growth with respect to current loan originations is 0.016 (se = 0.009), while the
elasticity with respect to lagged originations is -0.007 (se = 0.008). The first stage Angrist-
Pischke F-statistics are well above conventional thresholds.

The 2SLS estimates imply that the national changes in small business lending (22% in 2008 and
33% in 2009) resulted in 0.5 percentage points (=0.22*0.016+0.33*0.016+0.22*-0.007+0.33*-
0.007) lower small business employment at the end of 2010 due to the reduction in small
business lending. Thus, this upper bound estimate accounts for 5 percent of the 10 percent
decline in small business employment between the end of 2007 and 2010 for firms with less than
20 employees. The same exercise using the values at the upper end of the 95% confidence
interval for the time t and t-1 lending effects results in a reduction of small business employment
of 1.3 percentage points, or an upper-bound of 13 percent of the overall change over the period.36
However, this estimate is the combination of two extreme assumptions and the true contribution
is very likely much lower.

Column (2) reports on aggregate county employment. A similar calculation on the effect of total
employment shows a modest cumulative upper bound effect of 0.3 percentage points from 2008-
2009. Thus, the point estimates suggest that the reduction in small business lending accounted
for a decline in total employment of up to 5 percent of the 6 percent decline in total employment
between the end of 2007 and 2010. Using the values at the upper end of the 95% confidence
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
35
  Appendix Table 4 reports on the corresponding OLS models.
36
  Calculating the 95% confidence interval associated with the 0.005 point estimate requires calculating the standard
error of the linear combination of coefficients on ln(loan originations)(t) and ln(loan originations)(t-1). This, in
turn, requires knowing the covariance between these regression coefficients. As the LBD data are restricted access,
we are unable to calculate this directly, and therefore use the covariance calculated from the CBP/QCEW estimates.
                                                                ! #"!
!
interval implies the decline in small business lending contributed to no more than 15% of the
overall reduction in total employment. Here, too, it is apparent that the decline in small business
loans was not a primary contributor to the employment decline during the Great Recession.



VII. Conclusion

This paper has used a new identification strategy and what we believe to be the most
comprehensive data set ever assembled to investigate the role of bank lending on the real
economy. We develop a new measure of local credit supply shocks for small businesses that is
based on (i) the market shares of the banks that served a county before the crisis and (ii) the
national change in each bank’s lending that is attributable to supply factors (e.g., due to
differences in the crisis' effect on their balance sheets). The analysis finds that the 2008 and
2009 measures of local credit supply shocks are associated with sharp declines in total county-
level small business loan originations. We find that a one standard deviation reduction in the
2009 measures of local credit supply shocks is associated with a 17% reduction in total county-
level small business loan originations from the end of 2008 through the end of 2010, indicating
that, at least in the near term, it is costly for small businesses to switch lenders.

The paper then assesses the effect of these credit supply shocks on the real economy. A one
standard deviation reduction in the 2009 predicted lending shock depresses 2010 levels of small
establishment employment growth by 0.6 percentage points. Upper bound estimates suggest that
the 2007-2010 decline in small business lending accounted for up to 5 percent of both the 10
percent decline in small firm employment over the same period, and the 6 percent decline in total
employment. Finally, we note that while there is a significant relationship between predicted
lending shocks and bank loans to small businesses during the 1997-2007 period, these predicted
shocks are not associated with changes in economic activity. This finding suggests that the
credit channel is not empirically important in normal times.

These results are also informative, although unlikely to be dispositive, about a series of policy
issues. The banking industry is heavily regulated and, as the extraordinary response to the recent
financial crisis demonstrates, governments are willing to extend significant aid to banks in
moments of financial stress. In the United States, these policies included capital injections
through the Toxic Assets Relief Program, nearly costless loans from the Federal Reserve to
                                                  ! ##!
!
banks, and stress tests. It is possible, and indeed perhaps likely, that the credit shocks and
resulting impacts on the broader economy would have been more severe in their absence.

We close with two final observations. First, if the limited impact of credit shocks on the real
economy during the “normal” period of 1997-2007 reflects that borrowers are usually able to
adjust to a restriction in bank credit without impacting the real economy, it may be appropriate to
take these findings as evidence that proposals for new programs that aim to increase banks’
credit supply are unnecessary. Second, as this paper does not present evidence on the moral
hazard consequences of government interventions in the banking market, it does not provide a
complete picture of their welfare impacts.




                                               ! #$!
!
References:

Ashcraft, Adam B. 2005. "Are Banks Really Special? New Evidence from the FDIC-Induced Failure
of Healthy Banks." American Economic Review 95(5): 1712-1730.

Agarwal, Sumit, and Robert Hauswald. 2010. “Distance and Private Information in Lending.” Review
of Financial Studies 23 (7): 2757-2788.

Almeida, Heitor; Campello, Murillo; Laranjeira, Bruno, and Scott Weisbenner. 2012. “Corporate
Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis. Critical Finance Review 1: 3-58.

Amel, Dean F. and Kenneth P. Brevoort. 2005. “The Perceived Size of Small Business Banking
Markets.” Journal of Competition Law and Economics 1(4): 771-784.

Autor, David, and Mark Duggan. 2006. “The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1): 157-205.

Baker, Scott; Bloom, Nicholas, and Steven Davis. 2013. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.”
Unpublished.

Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. “Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development Policies.”
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research: Kalamazoo, Mich.

Berger, Allen; Miller, Nathan; Petersen, Mitchell; Rajan, Raghuran, and Jeremy Stein. 2002. “Does
Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence From the Lending Practices of Large and Small
Banks.” NBER Working Paper 8752.

Berger, Allen and Gregory Udell. 1995. “Universal Banking and the Future of Small Business
Lending,” Center for Financial Institutions Working Papers 95-17, Wharton School Center for
Financial Institutions, University of Pennsylvania.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Cara S. Lown. 1991. "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 22(2): 205-248.

Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression,” The American Economic Review 73(3): 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. 1995. “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary
Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4): 27-48.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2010. “Addressing the Financial Needs of Small Businesses.”Federal Reserve
Meeting Series, July 12.Available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100712a.htm.

Berrospide, Jose M., and Rochelle M. Edge. 2010. “The Effects of Bank Capital on Lending: What
Do We Know, and What Does it Mean?” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance
and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper No. 2010-44.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean. and Larry Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 1-75.

                                               ! #%!
!
Bloom, Nicholas; Floetotto, Max; Jaimovich, Nir; Saporta-Eksten, Itay, and Stephen J. Terry. 2012.
“Really Uncertain Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper 18245.

Brevoort, Kenneth P.; Holmes, John A., and John D. Wolken. 2010. "Distance still matters: the
information revolution in small business lending and the persistent role of location, 1993-2003."
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series
Working Paper No. 2010-08.

Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer. "The Place of Financial Intermediaries in the Transmission of
Monetary Policy." The American Economic Review (1963): 372-382.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. 2009. "Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008." Journal
of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 77-100.

Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant inflows, native outflows and the local labor market impacts of higher
immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(1): 22-64.

Charles, Kerwin; Hurst, Erik; and Matt Notowidigdo. 2012. “Masking and Aggregate Employment
Changes: Housing Booms and Manufacturing Declines During the 2000s,” Unpublished.

Charnes, Sarah, and Alan Krueger. 2011. “JOLTS as a Timely Source of Data by Establishment
Size.” Monthly Labor Review 134(5):16-24.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. 2014. “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1): 1-59.

Cole, Rebel A. 1998. “The importance of relationships to the availability of credit.” Journal of
Banking and Finance 22(6-8): 959-997.

Congressional Budget Office. 2012. “Small Firms, Employment, and Federal Policy.” Available at <
http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43029>.

Dunkelberg, William C., and Holly Wade. 2012. “NFIB Small Business Economic Trends: January
2012” NFIB publication available at http://www.nfib.com/Portals/0/PDF/sbet/sbet201201.pdf.

Fort Teresa C, John Haltiwanger, Ron S Jarmin and Javier Miranda, 2013. "How Firms Respond to
Business Cycles: The Role of Firm Age and Firm Size," IMF Economic Review, Palgrave
Macmillan, vol. 61(3), pages 520-559, August.

Goetz, Martin R., and Juan C. Gozzi. 2010. “Liquidity Shocks, Local Banks, and Economic Activity:
Evidence from the 2007-2009 Crisis.” Unpublished manuscript available at http://www.martin-
goetz.com/GG_Liquidity_11_12.pdf.

Haltiwanger, John C.; Jarmin, Ron S., and Javier Miranda. 2013. "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young." The Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 347-361.

Hoshi, Takeo; Kashyap, Anil; and David Scharfstein. 1990. “The role of banks in reducing the costs
of financial distress in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27(1): 67-88.

Huang, Haifang, and Eric Stephens. 2014. “From Housing Bust to Credit Crunch: Evidence from

                                                 ! #&!
!
Small Business Loans.” Forthcoming, Canadian Journal of Economics.

Ivashina, Victoria, and Sharfstein, David. 2010. “Bank lending during the financial crisis of 2008.”
Journal of Financial Economics 97(3): 319-338.

Krueger, Alan. 2010. Speech to Charlotte Chamber of Commerce's Summit on Access to Capital for
small Businesses and Entrepreneurs. June 29, 2010. Available at <http://www.treasury.gov/press-
center/press-releases/Pages/tg762.aspx>.

Laderman, Elizabeth S. 2008. “The quantity and character of out-of-market small business lending.”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review : 31-39.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2014. “What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?”
Forthcoming, Econometrica.

Neumark, David, Wall, Brandon, and Junfu Zhang. 2011. "Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs?
New Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time Series." The Review of
Economics and Statistics 93(1): 16-29.

Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q. 2014. “Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local
Economic Outcomes.” Unpublished.

Notowidigdo, Matthew. 2013. “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks.” Unpublished.

Peek, Joseph, and Eric Rosengren. 2000. “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank Crisis on
Real Activity in the United States.” American Economic Review 90(1): 30-45.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan. 1994. “The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence
from Small Business Data, ”The Journal of Finance 49(1): 3-37.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 2011. “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 25(1): 29-48.

Walls, Donald W. 2007. “National Establishment Time-Series Database: Data Overview.” Presented
at the 2007 Kauffman Symposium on Entrepreneurship and Innovation Data. Available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1022962.




                                                 ! #'!
!
!"#$%&'(




                   '




           ! "#!
!
!"#$%&'('

                                                                                             3,#(,++)"'4&561+.,5$5)7,(,'2,$)'$%'8%"&'$"()#)'&*"'+9$:,.;,,'$."/$01&(*%,$&'5$
                                                                                                                        %";,($01&(*%,$2"1'*,+$$
                                                                              $#
                                                                                         "&&'#       "&&&#      -$$$#     -$$"#   -$$-#      -$$,#      -$$+#   -$$*#   -$$)#     -$$(#      -$$'#    -$$&#   -$"$#
  !"#$%"&'$"()#)'&*"'+$(,%&*-,$."$."/$01&(*%,$2"1'*,+$




                                                         !$%"#


                                                         !$%-#


                                                         !$%,#


                                                         !$%+#


                                                         !$%*#


                                                         !$%)#


                                                         !$%(#


                                                         !$%'#                                               ./0/1#2345678#9/3:68;#


                                                         !$%&#                                               <=>>78!*$#

                                                                              !"#

                                                                                         ?/@8;A#B=C358#=;#D4;8>#/:#8;6146/:#/E#82346/:#F*G%##H345678;#458#D4;8>#/:#@I8#J4738#/E#@I8#-$$(!-$$&#K58>=9@8>#
                                                                                         78:>=:C#;I/9L%##M88#@8N@#E/5#E35@I85#>8@4=7;%#



!"#$%&')'

                                                                                                              !"#$%&'(&3-#,/$%#,&4#*,/*2&+1'$7&'*&4')*&'-/2/*)0'*+&89&9#)-&
                                                                                !#'"
  !"#$%&'(&)&'*#&+%)*,)-,&,#./%)0'*&$1)*2#&/*&3-#,/$%#,&4'2&4#*,/*2&'*&4'2&




                                                                              !#&$"
                        4')*&'-/2/*)0'*+&/*&%&)*,&%56&&




                                                                                !#&"




                                                                              !#%$"




                                                                                !#%"




                                                                              !#!$"




                                                                                    !"
                                                                                             &!!!"            &!!%"       &!!&"      &!!'"           &!!("      &!!$"     &!!)"           &!!*"      &!!+"     &!!,"

                                                                                    -./012"345670"41"8910:".;"01<=9<.;".>"0?69<.;"@+A"BC070"/C0":0D0;:0;/"E97498F0"41"F;"1=9FF"8614;011"F.9;".7454;9<.;1#""G00"
                                                                                    /0H/">.7">67/C07":0/94F1#"




                                                                                                                                                                  "#!
!"#$%&'('

                                                                                                   !"#$%&'(&3-#,/$%#,&4#*,/*2&+1'$<&'*&+5)44&67+/*#++&#534'85#*%&2-'9%1&68&8#)-&

                                                                                           "#"$&
  !"#$%&'(&)&'*#&+%)*,)-,&,#./%)0'*&$1)*2#&/*&3-#,/$%#,&4'2&4#*,/*2&'*&+5)44&67+/*#++&




                                                                                         "#""%&
                           #534'85#*%&2-'9%1&/*&%&)*,&%:;&




                                                                                              "&
                                                                                                    '"""&      '""$&       '""'&       '""(&       '"")&      '""%&       '""*&       '""+&       '"",&      '""-&




                                                                                         !"#""%&




                                                                                          !"#"$&




                                                                                         !"#"$%&


                                                                                             ./0123&456781&52&9:21;&/<&12=>:=/<&/?&1@7:=/<&A,B&CD181&0D1&;1E1<;1<0&F:85:9G1&52&0D1&1>EG/H>1<0&68/C0D&8:01&?/8&2>:GG&
                                                                                             20:<;:G/<1&I8>2J&;1I<1;&:2&25<6G1&7<50&120:9G52D>1<02&C50D&?1C18&0D:<&'"&1>EG/H112#&&K11&01L0&?/8&?780D18&;10:5G2#&




                                                                                                                                                             "#!
             !"#$%&'(&)*"+,%-&.+&$%+/.+,&#%01%%+&233452336&789&-%$%:0%/&$"9,%&#"+;&*8$/.+,&:8<="+.%-
                                                  !"#                   !$#                      !%#
                                       &'()'*+,)-.*/',0*,12.33,                       &'()'*+03',*'+,78,)75*+9,
                                          4510*'11,3'*60*/          &'()'*+03'              80:'6,'88')+1
    ;.*<,78,='>,?7(<,@'337*                     ABCDC                    $                        %
    E&,@7(/.*,F-.1',                            ABBDG                    $                        $
    F0+0/(75H                                   AB%DI                    J                        I
    ;.*<,78,K2'(0).                             ALLD$                     I                       C
    M.)-7N0.                                    AGLDO                    "B                      $$
    F.H0+.3,P*',Q0*.*)0.3                       ALCDG                    G                        G
    R5*+(51+,;.*<1                              AJ"DB                    %J                      %I
    S'/07*1,Q0*.*)0.3                           A%LDL                    %B                      %J
    M'331,Q.(/7                                 A%%D"                    JJ                      GC
    TR;F                                        A%"DC                    JG                      L"
    ;;UV,                                       A"CDG                    IO                      GB
    &=F,Q0*.*)0.3                               A%%D$                    J%                      JJ
    WR,;.*)7(H                                   A%D%                    LI                      LB

    @'60.*,.)(711,.33,FSK,('H7(+0*/,
    4.*<1                                             A%$
    K33,4.*<1,)7240*'6                                AJB

    =7+'X,,F7352*,!"#,01,+-',H'()'*+,)-.*/',0*,3'*60*/,+7,80(21,>0+-,3'11,+-.*,Y"2,0*,/(711,('N'*5',4'+>''*,$OOLA$OOC,.1,
    ('H7(+'6,0*,FSK,601)3715('1,H54301-'6,49,+-',QQZ[FD,,F7352*,!$#,01,+-',H'()'*+03',78,+-',)-.*/',0*,FSK,3'*60*/,.)(711,.33,
    -7360*/,)72H.*0'1,+-.+,2''+,+-',)(0+'(0.,87(,FSK,601)3715(',!.,37>'(,H'()'*+03',01,>7(1'#D,,F7352*,!%#,01,+-',H'()'*+03',
    0*,+-',)-.*/',0*,FSK,3'*60*/,.8+'(,H.(+0.30*/,75+,)75*+9,80:'6A'88')+1D,,,,                                                !




                                                              ! "#!
!
                                                         !"#$%&'(&)*+,-.&/0"1"/-%123-2/3
                                         !"#                   !$#              !%#                       !&#                    !'#
                                                                                               -()*+,-.,/012->-<,7*=-
                                 ()*+,-.,/012-02- <,7*=-.,/012-02-                               .,/012-02-34,/056,/-
                                 34,/056,/-7,2/028- 34,/056,/-7,2/028-         3>+17?,-*2-      7,2/028-9:*5;-!=06:02> 3>+17?,-*2-=06:02>9616,-
                                       9:*5;              9:*5;                /0@@,4,25,               9616,#               /0@@,4,25,
A.37*B.,26-84*=6:-$CC$>                CDC&$              CDC&$                   CDEFC                 CDCC'                   CD%'"
$CCG-H2I%""FJ                         HCD""&J            HCD"%$J                                       !CDCC'#

K18,-84*=6:-$CC$>$CCG                   CD"&$                 CD"'&                 CDCCC                CDCCC                      CDEG'
H2I%""FJ                               HCDCFLJ               HCDCLFJ                                    !CDCC%#

M*.,-3405,-1334,50160*2-                CD%$F                 CD&&E                 CDCCC                >CDC"&                     CD%$"
$CC$>$CCG-H2I'F"J                      HCDC$CJ               HCD$C%J                                    !CDC"&#

N-5:128,-6*617-)12;-7,2/028-            CDC$$                 CD"CL                 CDCC"                >CDC%E                     CD"GL-
$CC$>$CCG-H2I%"%LJ                     HCDGCEJ               HCDFF$J                                    !CDC$L#

O*8-.,/012-3,4-513061-                 "CD'L'                "CD'LC                 CDG$&                CDC"$                      CD"F$
025*.,-$CCG-H2I%"&CJ                   HCD$$CJ               HCD$FCJ                                    !CDCCE#

P*+,46B-416,-$CCG-H2I%"&"J             "'D%G%                "'D'CF                 CD'''                >CDCG&                     CDFGF
                                       H'DE'CJ               HGDF$LJ                                    !CD$"F#

Q*2964?560*2-9:14,-$CCG-                CDCGG                 CDCG&                 CD&L&                CDCC$                      CD%%'
H2I%""'J                               HCDC&%J               HCDC'"J                                    !CDCC$#

R12?@156?4028-9:14,-$CCG-               CD"LC                 CD"&E                 CDCCC                CDCCG                      CD$CL
H2I%CF%J                               HCD"$EJ               HCD"%GJ                                    !CDCC'#

72!/,2906B-02-$CCG#-H2I%""%J           >"CDLGC               >""D"EC                CDCCC                CD%CE                      CDCCC
                                       H"D'GFJ               H"DE$EJ                                    !CDC''#

72!3*3?7160*2-02-$CCG#--               "CD%&F                "CDCEL                 CDCCC                CD%&C                      CDCCC
H2I%""&J                               H"D%C%J               H"DGFCJ                                    !CDC'$#

S,)6>6*>025*.,-4160*-$CCG-              "D'&C                 "DG'"                 CDCCC                >CDCEC                     CDCCC
H2I$$"EJ                               HCD'$EJ               HCDGLEJ                                    !CDC$'#
T*6,9U--V612/14/-/,+0160*29-02-)415;,69D---A.37*B.,26-84*=6:W-=18,-84*=6:W-5*2964?560*2-9:14,W-12/-.12?@156?4028-9:14,-14,-@4*.-6:,-XQAKD--
Q:128,-02-7,2/028-09-@4*.-6:,-YYZAQD--P,4-513061-025*.,W-3*+,46B-416,9W-3*3?7160*2-12/-/,2906B-14,--@4*.-6:,-Q,29?9D--M*.,-+17?,9-14,-@4*.-[077*=D--
Q*?26B-/,)6>6*>025*.,-4160*9-14,-@4*.-6:,-Y,/,417-\,9,4+,-<12;-*@-T,=-]*4;D--Q*7?.2-&-09-*)6102,/-@4*.-1-4,84,990*2-*@-6:,-5*?26B-5:14156,409605-*2-
12-02/0516*4-@*4-1)*+,-.,/012-=06:-9616,-@0^,/-,@@,569D--                                                                                              !

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!


                                                                            ! "#!
!
                           !"#$%&'(&!%)*+,-&./0&)1"*+"$&)/0*+,-&+,&#",2&$%,3+,-&)4/52)
                                                              !"#                               !$#

                                                       %&'()*+,-.-,/01)1                 21(3+,-.-,/01)1

                                                  4-5-(0-()/.16718,-9/:7;-0+
                                                  -<<-=)/&</)>-/81(3/?7)>/)>-/
                                                  ,16@-A)/B163-)A>16-/7(/)>-/       4-5-(0-()/.16718,-9/21(3/
                                                             =&'()*//                    <7;-0+-<<-=)

    %&(A)1()                                                  CDEFG                            CDH"I
                                                             !CDCEE#                          !CDCG"#

    :7;-0+-<<-=)/&</)>-/81(3/?7)>/)>-/A-=&(0//                +CDCEG
    ,16@-A)/B163-)A>16-/7(/)>-/=&'()*                        !CDCHF#

    J.-61@-/=&B5-)7)&6/81(3/<7;-0+-<<-=)/7(/                                                   CDCKI
    =&'()7-A/?>-6-/)>-/81(3/&5-61)-A                                                          !CD"""#

    L8A-6.1)7&(A                                              $GM$                             HME

    N+AO'16-0                                                CDCC$M                            CDCC"
    P&)-A9//N&8'A)/A)1(0160/-66&6A/7(/516-()>-A-AD//Q&0-,/"/7A/1(/LRS/6-@-AA7&(/&</)>-/<7;-0+-<<-=)/&</)>-/81(3/
    ?7)>/)>-/,16@-A)/B163-)/A>16-/7(/)>-/=&'()*/&(/)>-/<7;-0+-<<-=)/&</)>-/81(3/?7)>/)>-/A-=&(0/>7@>-A)/B163-)/
    A>16-T/?-7@>)-0/8*/)>-/('B8-6/&</-A)18,7A>B-()A/7(/)>-/=&'()*/7(/$CCHD//U>-/81(3/<7;-0+-<<-=)A/16-/-A)7B1)-0/
    <6&B/1/6-@6-AA7&(/&</)>-/,&@/=>1(@-/7(/AB1,,/8'A7(-AA/,-(07(@/8*/=&'()*/1(0/81(3/8-)?--(/$CCK/1(0/$CCF/&(/
    =&'()*/1(0/81(3/>&,07(@/=&B51(*/<7;-0/-<<-=)A/?-7@>)-0/8*/$CCK/,-(07(@D//Q&0-,/$/7A/1/6-@6-AA7&(/&</-1=>/
    81(3/>&,07(@/=&B1(*VA/<7;-0+-<<-=)/&(/)>-/1.-61@-/81(3/<7;-0+-<<-=)/7(/=&'()7-A/?>-6-/)>-/81(3/&5-61)-AD/U&/
    =&B5')-/)>-/1.-61@-/81(3/<7;-0+-<<-=)/7/?-/=1,=',1)-/)>-/0&,,16/?-7@>)-0/1.-61@-/81(3/<7;-0+-<<-=)/7(/-.-6*/
    =&'()*/-;,='07(@/81(3/7T/1(0/)>-(/?-/1@@6-@1)-/'5/)>-A-/1.-61@-A/)&/)>-/81(3/>&,07(@/=&B51(*/,-.-,/
    ?-7@>)7(@/8*/)>-/A>16-/&</81(3/7VA/,-(07(@/7(/)>-/=&'()*D////                                                 !




                                                           ! "#!
!
!


           !"#$%&'(&)%$"*+,-./+0&#%*1%%-&02%3+4*%3&$%-3+-5&./,46&"-3&$-7$,"-&,2+5+-"*+,-.8
                                              !"#                 !$#                  !%#
    $&&'()*+,-(.($&"&                       &/&011              &/&2"$               &/&2$$
                                           !&/&&2'#            !&/&&'&#             !&/&&'3#

    $&&'()*+,-(.($&&'                               &/&2&'                  &/&20'                 &/&22$
                                                   !&/&&20#                !&/&&22#               !&/&&'"#

    $&&2()*+,-(.($&"&                               &/&41'                  &/&2'%                 &/&'%0
                                                   !&/&"&2#                !&/&"&4#               !&/&""0#

    $&&2()*+,-(.($&&'                               &/&1'3                  &/&033                 &/&2"4
                                                   !&/&"&3#                !&/&"""#               !&/&"$%#

    $&&2()*+,-(.($&&2                               &/&102                  &/&0%4                 &/&210
                                                   !&/&&'$#                !&/&&2'#               !&/&&'%#

    567689:;<=(=>>=,:(+>($&&2()*+,-                 &/"4$%                  &/$%'1                 &/$4''
                                                   !&/&$42#                !&/&$1'#               !&/&$0%#

    567689:;<=(=>>=,:(+>($&&'()*+,-                 &/"44%                  &/"3'"                 &/"0&1
                                                   !&/&"31#                !&/&"33#               !&/&"04#

    ?@:=):(+>(A+;B:();CB;>;,9B,=(+>()*+,-(
    ;B:=D9,:;+B)(!E@<986=#                          &/&&&                   &/&&&                  &/&&&


    FG)=D<9:;+B)                                    1%%42                   1$$$1                  %&221

    H:9:=@GI@I=9D(>;J=K(=>>=,:)                        L                      L                       L
    M9)=8;B=(,+B:D+8)                                                         L                       L
    N=G:@:+@;B,+7=(D9:;+                                                                              L
    O+:=)P(QB:D;=)(9D=(G9)=K(+B(=):;79:;+B(+>(QR69:;+B(!3#(S*=D=(:*=(K=E=BK=B:(<9D;9G8=(;)(8+C(8+9B(
    +D;C;B9:;+B)/((H:9BK9DK(=DD+D)(,86):=D=K(+B(,+6B:I(;B(E9D=B:*=)=)/((TB(+G)=D<9:;+B(;)(9(,+6B:I@GI@I=9D(,=88/((
    H*+,-)(D=>=D(:+(ED=K;,:=K(8+9B(+D;C;B9:;+B)(9)()E=,;>;=K(;B(QR69:;+B(!1#/((M9)=8;B=(,+B:D+8)(9D=($&&3(8+C(
    K=B);:IU(,+B):D6,:;+B()*9D=U(79B6>9,:6D;BC()*9D=U(9BK(8+C(E=D(,9E;:9(;B,+7=/((T88(,+B:D+8)(9D=(;B:=D9,:=K(
    S;:*(I=9D(K677;=)/((T88(79;B(=>>=,:)(9D=(;B,86K=K/((H==(:*=(:=J:(>+D(>6D:*=D(K=:9;8)/                          !

!




                                                           ! ""!
!
                      !"#$%&'(&)**%+,&-*&./%01+,%0&$%20123&45-+6&-2&%7.$-87%2,&"20&%4,"#$1457%2,&3/-9,5&/",%4&*-/&47"$$&%4,"#$1457%2,4
                                                                         O8F9.I8>C;+DE.P;-+E:;>+                     O,;:H9<,-8>C;+DE.P;-+E:;>+
                                                                     !"#          !$#            !%#            !&#              !'#            !(#
    $))*+,-./0+1+$)")                                              )2))$%       )2))$(         )2))$3         )2))3$           )2))4%         )2))4%
                                                                  !)2))""#     !)2))")#       !)2))"$#       !)2))&(#         !)2))&$#       !)2))&(#

    $))*+,-./0+1+$))*                                                       )2))"3           )2))%)          )2))%)              )2))4'            )2))((             )2))()
                                                                           !)2))"$#         !)2))""#        !)2))"%#            !)2))'%#          !)2))&*#           !)2))''#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$)")                                                       )2)))&           5)2))$&         5)2))$3             )2))4)            5)2))%4            5)2))()
                                                                           !)2))"'#         !)2))"%#        !)2))"%#            !)2))'"#          !)2))&(#           !)2))'"#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))*                                                       )2))))           )2)))%          5)2)))*             )2))4)            5)2))('            5)2)")$
                                                                           !)2))"3#         !)2))"'#        !)2))"(#            !)2))(&#          !)2))()#           !)2))(4#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))3                                                       5)2))"*          )2)))%          5)2)))%             5)2))4'           5)2)"")            5)2)"&"
                                                                           !)2))"&#         !)2))""#        !)2))"$#            !)2)"**#          !)2)$)"#           !)2)$$%#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))3+@-./0                                         5)2))"'          5)2))"3         5)2))&"             )2))((            5)2)$"$            5)2)%)&
                                                                           !)2))&$#         !)2))%&#        !)2))%'#            !)2)$(&#          !)2)$'*#           !)2)$34#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))*+@-./0                                         )2))&$           )2))'(          )2))'3              )2)"'(            )2)"%*             )2)"%%
                                                                           !)2))"*#         !)2))"3#        !)2))$%#            !)2))*'#          !)2))33#           !)2))*4#

    A5;>,;+.?+B.<C;+,<DC<?</:C/>+.?+,-./0+<C;>E:/;<.C,+!F5=:97>#             )2)"                )2)"         )2)'                )2")              )2''               )2&4

    GH,>E=:;<.C,                                                            &%'&)            &$&$)            %)3&$              &%'&)             &$&$)              %)3&$

    @;:;>5HI5I>:E+?<J>K+>??>/;,                                                L                  L             L                   L                 L                  L
    M:,>9<C>+/.C;E.9,                                                                             L             L                                     L                  L
    N>H;5;.5<C/.8>+E:;<.                                                                                        L                                                        L
    Q.;>R+OC;E<>,+:E>+H:,>K+.C+>,;<8:;<.C+.?+OS7:;<.C+!(#+P->E>+;->+K>F>CK>C;+=:E<:H9>+<,T+E>,F>/;<=>9IT+;->+>8F9.I8>C;+.E+>,;:H9<,-8>C;+DE.P;-+E:;>+?.E+,8:99+
    >,;:H9<,-8>C;,2++@8:99+>,;:H9<,-8>C;,+:E>+K>?<C>K+;.+H>+;-.,>+P<;-+9>,,+;-:C+$)+>8F9.I>>,2++@;:CK:EK+>EE.E,+/97,;>E>K+.C+/.7C;I+<C+F:E>C;->,>,2++UC+.H,>E=:;<.C+<,+:+
    /.7C;I5HI5I>:E+/>992++@-./0,+E>?>E+;.+FE>K</;>K+9.:C+.E<D<C:;<.C,+:,+,F>/<?<>K+<C+OS7:;<.C+!&#2++M:,>9<C>+/.C;E.9,+:E>+$))(+9.D+K>C,<;IT+/.C,;E7/;<.C+,-:E>T+8:C7?:/;7E<CD+
    ,-:E>T+:CK+9.D+F>E+/:F<;:+<C/.8>2++U99+/.C;E.9,+:E>+<C;>E:/;>K+P<;-+I>:E+K788<>,2++U99+8:<C+>??>/;,+:E>+<C/97K>K2++@>>+;->+;>J;+?.E+?7E;->E+K>;:<9,2                          !



                                                                                         ! "#!
!
       !"#$%&'(&)**%+,&-*&./%01+,%0&$%20123&45-+6&-2&%7.$-87%2,&3/-9,5&/",%4&*-/&47"$$&%4,"#$1457%2,4&,5",&"/%&."/,&-*&7:$,1;:21,&*1/74

                                             OMNP+Q,;:G9<,-8>B;,+;-:;+:D>+R:D;+.?+S79;<5TB<;+          UQVHP+Q,;:G9<,-8>B;,+;-:;+:D>+R:D;+.?+S79;<5
                                                                 @<D8,                                                 H;:;>+@<D8,
                                                  !"#              !$#              !%#                   !&#              !'#              !(#
    $))*+,-./0+1+$)")                           )2))$%          )2))"'            )2))"3
                                               !)2))"4#        !)2))"&#          !)2))"(#

    $))*+,-./0+1+$))*                           )2))""            )2))"$            )2))"$               )2))%3            5)2))%&           5)2))$3
                                               !)2))""#          !)2))""#          !)2))"$#             !)2))')#          !)2))%'#          !)2))%4#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$)")                           )2))"4            5)2))$*           5)2))%&
                                               !)2))"(#          !)2))"'#          !)2))"(#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))*                           )2))$)            )2))))            5)2)))%              )2)"'"            5)2)))'           5)2))"'
                                               !)2))"&#          !)2))"%#          !)2))"%#             !)2))%*#          !)2))%%#          !)2))%(#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))3                           5)2)))%           5)2))")           5)2)))*              5)2))&"           5)2)"))           5)2)"))
                                               !)2))"'#          !)2))"&#          !)2))"'#             !)2))()#          !)2))'4#          !)2))()#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))3+,-./0             )2))%&            5)2))%*           5)2))&4              )2)"")            5)2)")'           5)2)""'
                                               !)2))%&#          !)2))%)#          !)2))%"#             !)2))4)#          !)2))(%#          !)2))(4#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))*+,-./0             )2))%'            )2))$3            )2))%)               )2))%3            5)2))%&           5)2))$3
                                               !)2))$%#          !)2))$"#          !)2))$&#             !)2))')#          !)2))%'#          !)2))%4#

    @5;>,;+.?+A.<B;+,<CB<?</:B/>+.?+,-./0+
    <B;>D:/;<.B,+!E5=:97>#                       )2"3             )2$(               )2$*                 )2))              )2$'              )2$*

    FG,>D=:;<.B,                                &%')%             &$&)(             %)3&$                &)"3&             %*"&$             $3(43

    H;:;>5GI5I>:D+?<J>K+>??>/;,                    L                 L                 L                    L                 L                 L
    M:,>9<B>+/.B;D.9,                                                L                 L                                      L                 L
    N>G;5;.5<B/.8>+D:;<.                                                               L                                                        L
    U.;>,P+QB;D<>,+:D>+G:,>K+.B+>,;<8:;<.B+.?+QW7:;<.B+!(#+X->D>+;->+K>E>BK>B;+=:D<:G9>+<,+;->+>8E9.I8>B;+CD.X;-+D:;>+?.D+,8:99+>,;:G9<,-8>B;,+;-:;+
    :D>+E:D;+.?+879;<57B<;+?<D8,2++H8:99+>,;:G9<,-8>B;,+:D>+K>?<B>K+;.+G>+;-.,>+X<;-+9>,,+;-:B+$)+>8E9.I>>,2+6.978B,+!"#5!%#+7,>+;->+OMN+K:;:Y+X-</-+
    >J;>BK,+;-D.7C-+$)")2++6.978B,+!&#5!(#+7,>+;->+UQVH+K:;:Y+X-</-+>J;>BK,+.B9I+;-D.7C-+$))*2++H;:BK:DK+>DD.D,+/97,;>D>K+.B+/.7B;I+<B+E:D>B;->,>,2++
    ZB+.G,>D=:;<.B+<,+:+/.7B;I5GI5I>:D+/>992++H-./0,+D>?>D+;.+ED>K</;>K+9.:B+.D<C<B:;<.B,+:,+,E>/<?<>K+<B+QW7:;<.B+!&#2++M:,>9<B>+/.B;D.9,+:D>+$))(+9.C+
    K>B,<;IY+/.B,;D7/;<.B+,-:D>Y+8:B7?:/;7D<BC+,-:D>Y+:BK+9.C+E>D+/:E<;:+<B/.8>2++Z99+/.B;D.9,+:D>+<B;>D:/;>K+X<;-+I>:D+K788<>,2++Z99+8:<B+>??>/;,+:D>+
    <B/97K>K2++H>>+;->+;>J;+?.D+?7D;->D+K>;:<9,2
                                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                            ! "#!
!
                                      !"#$%&'(&)**%+,&-*&./%01+,%0&$%20123&45-+6&-2&+-72,8&"33/%3",%&-7,+-9%4&&&&&&
                                                          O8E9.I8>B;+CD.P;-                               O,;:G9<,-8>B;+CD.P;-
                                                 !"#               !$#            !%#               !&#               !'#         !(#
    $))*+,-./0+1+$)")                          )2)))(            )2)))3         )2)))4            )2)))(            )2))"$      )2))"%
                                              !)2)))*#          !)2)))*#       !)2))")#          !)2)))'#         !)2)))&#     !)2)))'#

    $))*+,-./0+1+$))*                          )2))$4             )2))$(            )2))$4               )2)))4            )2))"'            )2))"(
                                              !)2))""#           !)2))""#          !)2))"$#             !)2)))'#          !)2)))'#          !)2)))(#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$)")                          )2))"4             )2)))$            )2)))&               5)2))"$           5)2))"%           5)2))"'
                                              !)2))""#           !)2))")#          !)2))""#             !)2)))4#          !)2)))'#          !)2)))(#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))*                          5)2))"$            5)2)))%           5)2))")              5)2)))$           5)2)))%           5)2)))4
                                              !)2))"&#           !)2))"$#          !)2))"%#             !)2)))3#          !)2)))4#          !)2)))4#

    $))3+,-./0+1+$))3                          5)2)))$            )2))"$            )2)))4               5)2)))$           )2)))(            )2)))&
                                              !)2))")#           !)2)))*#          !)2))")#             !)2)))'#          !)2)))&#          !)2)))'#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))3+,-./0            )2)))&             )2))"$            )2)))"               5)2))"(           5)2))""           5)2))"3
                                              !)2))$3#           !)2))$&#          !)2))$(#             !)2))"3#          !)2))"&#          !)2))"'#

    67879:;<=>+>??>/;+.?+$))*+,-./0            )2))%%             )2))%&            )2))%&               )2))"%            )2))$4            )2))$3
                                              !)2))"4#           !)2))"4#          !)2))"*#             !)2))")#          !)2)))*#          !)2))")#

    @5;>,;+.?+A.<B;+,<CB<?</:B/>+.?+,-./0+
    <B;>D:/;<.B,+!E5=:97>#                      )2)"4             )2"4(             )2%"%                )2"""             )2))"             )2)")

    FG,>D=:;<.B,                                &$*&4             &"*4%             %)3%)                &$*&4             &"*4%             %)3%)

    H;:;>5GI5I>:D+?<J>K+>??>/;,                   L                 L                  L                    L                 L                 L
    M:,>9<B>+/.B;D.9,                                               L                  L                                      L                 L
    N>G;5;.5<B/.8>+D:;<.                                                               L                                                        L
    Q.;>,R+OB;D<>,+:D>+G:,>K+.B+>,;<8:;<.B+.?+OS7:;<.B+!(#+P->D>+;->+K>E>BK>B;+=:D<:G9>,+:D>T+D>,E>/;<=>9IT+/.7B;I59>=>9+>8E9.I8>B;+:BK+>,;:G9<,-8>B;+
    CD.P;-2++U>+7,>+;->+:=>D:C>+.?+;->+CD.P;-+D:;>,+?D.8+;->+6MV+:BK+W6OU2++H;:BK:DK+>DD.D,+/97,;>D>K+.B+/.7B;I+<B+E:D>B;->,>,2++XB+.G,>D=:;<.B+<,+:+
    /.7B;I5GI5I>:D+/>992++H-./0,+D>?>D+;.+ED>K</;>K+9.:B+.D<C<B:;<.B,+:,+,E>/<?<>K+<B+OS7:;<.B+!&#2++M:,>9<B>+/.B;D.9,+:D>+$))(+9.C+K>B,<;IT+/.B,;D7/;<.B+
    ,-:D>T+8:B7?:/;7D<BC+,-:D>T+:BK+9.C+E>D+/:E<;:+<B/.8>2++X99+/.B;D.9,+:D>+<B;>D:/;>K+P<;-+I>:D+K788<>,2++X99+8:<B+>??>/;,+:D>+<B/97K>K2++H>>+;->+;>J;+
    ?.D+?7D;->D+K>;:<9,2
                                                                                     ! "#!
!
                !"#$%&'(&)**%+,&-*&./%01+,%0&$%20123&45-+6&-2&47"$$&#8412%44&%7.$-97%2,&#9&9%"/
                                                                                       +,(--$      6--$7%&8()1$
                                                                       !"#$       .*)(/-&*0,1')*$ 1,9-":,1')$
                                                                  "%&#&'()&"'*         2!345      2;37<=;.>5
                                                                       2?5              2@5            2A5
    +0"BC$2)5                                                        DEDFG@           HDEDDDI        DEDDDJ
                                                                    2DEDDAD5         2DEDDDG5       2DEDDDF5

    +0"BC$2)H?5                                                        DEDAAK         HDEDDD?            DEDDDK
                                                                      2DEDDA?5       2DEDDDJ5           2DEDDDA5

    +0"BC$2)5$L@DDI                                                    DED@IJ         DEDD?A             HDEDD?D
                                                                      2DEDDIA5       2DEDD?J5           2DEDD?D5

    +0"BC$2)H?5$L@DDG                                                  DEDF?D         DEDDDM             HDEDDDI
                                                                      2DED?DG5       2DEDD?M5           2DEDDDI5

    +0"BC$2)5$L@DDG                                                    DEDFMJ         DEDDAI             DEDDDG
                                                                      2DEDDII5       2DEDD?A5           2DEDD?D5

    +0"BC$2)H?5$L@D?D                                                  DEDIMD         DEDD?I             HDEDDDI
                                                                      2DEDDG?5       2DEDD?D5           2DEDD?@5

    N")(-$1OO1B)$"O$@DDI$*0"BC                                         DE?J@F         DEDDDG             HDEDDDM
                                                                      2DED?FF5       2DEDD@?5           2DEDD?F5

    N")(-$1OO1B)$"O$@DDG$*0"BC                                         DE@?JF         DEDDFM             DEDD?A
                                                                      2DED?J@5       2DEDD?K5           2DEDD?I5

    .PB1**$1OO1B)$"O$)01$@DDI$*0"BC                                    DEDMGJ         DEDD?G             HDEDD?I
                                                                      2DED?JI5       2DEDD@K5           2DEDD?F5

    .PB1**$1OO1B)$"O$)01$@DDG$*0"BC                                    DE?A@M         DEDDJM             DEDDD?
                                                                      2DED?MD5       2DEDD@D5           2DEDD?I5

    QH)1*)$O"%$R"&')$*&#'&O&B('B1$"O$&')1%(B)&"'*$29H8(-S15            DEDD            DEDJ               DE@F

    T/*1%8()&"'*                                                      AD?MD            ADADD             @GGFJ
    U")1*V$.')%&1*$(%1$/(*1W$"'$1*)&,()&"'$"O$.XS)&"'$2K5E$$+)('W(%W$1%%"%*$B-S*)1%1W$"'$B"S'):$(%1$&'$9(%1')01*1*E$$
    6'$"/*1%8()&"'$&*$($B"S'):$/:$:1(%$B1--E$$+0"BC*$%1O1%$)"$9%1W&B)1W$-1'W&'#$*0"BC*$(*$B(-BS-()1W$&'$.XS()&"'$2F5E$$
    N01$)")(-$1OO1B)$"O$)01$@DDI$*0"BC$&*V$*0"BC2)5$Y$*0"BC2)H?5$Y$*0"BC2)5L@DDI$Y$*0"BC2)H?5L@DDGE$$N01$)")(-$1OO1B)$
    "O$)01$@DDG$*0"BC$&*V$*0"BC2)5$Y$*0"BC2)H?5$Y$*0"BC2)5L@DDG$Y$*0"BC2)H?5L@D?DE$$N01$1PB1**$1OO1B)$"O$)01$@DDI$
    *0"BC$&*V$*0"BC2)5L@DDI$Y$*0"BC2)H?5L@DDGE$$N01$1PB1**$1OO1B)$"O$)01$@DDG$*0"BC$&*V$*0"BC2)5L@DDG$Y$*0"BC2)H
    ?5L@D?DE$$$6--$,"W1-*$&'B-SW1$/(*1-&'1$B"')%"-*$2@DDM$-"#$W1'*&):Z$B"'*)%SB)&"'$*0(%1Z$,('SO(B)S%&'#$*0(%1Z$
    ('W$-"#$91%$B(9&)($&'B",15$&')1%(B)1W$[&)0$:1(%$WS,,&1*E$$6--$,(&'$1OO1B)*$(%1$&'B-SW1WE$$+11$)1P)$O"%$OS%)01%$
    W1)(&-*E




                                                              ! "#!
!
    !"#$%&'(&!)*&+,"-%&.%"/,&+01"2%/&3*4%$/&*5&,6%&7%$",8*9/68:&;%,)%%9&<=*9*>8=&?=,8@8,A&
                              "94&+>"$$&;1/89%//&.*"9&B28-89",8*9/
                                                                      !"#       $"%&'$()
                                                                      *+,           *-,
    ./*.01/203454/1640/7,2*6,                                       898+:;        898-8<
                                                                   *8988=>,      *8988?8,

    ./*.01/203454/1640/7,2*6@+,                                     @8988;<       @898+><
                                                                   *8988?>,      *8988;;,


    %04/62A764B16AC2DEEA32F0D/G24BE1H620I2-88?@-88=2H3AG462
                                                                    @8988:        @8988<
    7DEE.J23AGDH640/20/2-88?@-8+82ABE.0JBA/62530K6L


    MEEA32=:N2$OC2DEEA32F0D/G24BE1H620I2-88?@-88=2H3AG462
                                                                    @898+<         @8988=
    7DEE.J23AGDH640/20/2-88?@-8+82ABE.0JBA/62530K6L

    P/534762%47HLQA2R4376@S615A2R@76162*6,                           :-9-<         :+9??
    P/534762%47HLQA2R4376@S615A2R@76162*6@+,                         ;;988         ;;9>8

    TF7A3U1640/7                                                    <=<:=          <=88+
    V06A7C2(/634A727L0K26K027615A2.A17627WD13A72A764B16A720I26LA23A.1640/7L4E2FA6KAA/27B1..2
    FD74/A772.A/G4/521/G2ABE.0JBA/6922XLA2GAEA/GA/62U1341F.A24/2$0.DB/2*+,24727B1..2
    FD74/A772ABE.0JBA/62530K6L922XLA2GAEA/GA/62U1341F.A24/2$0.DB/2*-,2472H0D/6J@.AUA.2
    ABE.0JBA/62530K6L9222P..2B0GA.724/H.DGA27616A@FJ@JA132I4YAG2AIIAH6721.0/52K46L2F17A.4/A2
    H0/630.72*-88Z2.052GA/746J[2H0/763DH640/27L13A[2B1/DI1H6D34/527L13A[21/G2.052EA32H1E4612
    4/H0BA,24/6A31H6AG2K46L2JA132GDBB4A7922P..2B14/2AIIAH67213A24/H.DGAG922XLA2DEEA32F0D/G2
    4BE1H620I26LA2-88?@-88=2H3AG4627DEE.J23AGDH640/20/2-88?@-8+82ABE.0JBA/62530K6L2472
    0F614/AG2FJ2177DB4/526LA2A/643A2GAH.4/A24/27B1..2FD74/A772.A/G4/520F7A3UAG20UA326L472
    EA340G2K1727DEE.J@G34UA/922SAA26AY62I032ID36LA32GA614.79                                 !




                                                    ! "#!
!
                                       !"#$"%&'%($)*+&',-.'"%$

Appendix

Assumptions Underlying Modified Instrument

Our estimating equation of interest is of the form:

    (a1)                        !!!"!!!! ! ! !! ! !!"!!! ! ! !! ,

where i indicates a county and Yi is a county-level outcome variable. The outcome is a function of
covariates, !! , and loan originations in county i, !"!!! !. A standard formulation of the Bartik
instrument is:

(a2)                            !! !   ! !!"!"   ! !!" !! ! ! !!"!!!!,

where county i's value of the instrument is the product of the beginning of period market shares of
banks in its county and the difference between those banks' national change in lending and the
economy-wide change in lending.

The exclusion restriction for this instrumental variables identification strategy requires that
!"#!!! !! ) = 0. In other words, a bank's national change in lending, relative to the national average,
does not covary with factors that determine the county-level outcomes. To understand the
implications of this assumption, it is helpful to decompose Q into the contribution of demand and
supply shifters:

(a3)                            !!"!!!! ! !      ! !"!"   ! !! ! !! ,

where !! is a county-specific demand shifter and by definition !! is a bank-level supply shifter that is
unrelated to the local economic conditions of the markets where it operates. For example, !! might
reflect a bank holding company's decisions about what to hold on its balance sheet or trading
decisions. Applying (a3) to (a2), the instrument can be expressed as:

(a4)                            !! !   ! !"!"    ! !! !      ! !"!" !!   ! ! !" ! !

where !! is bank j’s total exposure to the local demand shifters in the markets where it operates.
For county i, ! !"!" ! !! is the average of these total bank-level demand-shifters weighted by the
bank’s market share in the county. Analogously for county i, ! !"!" !! !is the weighted average of
the bank-level supply shifters, where the weights are the bank's market share in the county and by
definition this variation in !! .

The validity of the exclusion restriction can now be considered in terms of the separate components
of !! . Specifically, it is necessary to assume that both ! !"!" ! !! and ! !"!" ! !! are uncorrelated
with !! . With respect to the latter, this condition implies that markets with worse than average labor
market shocks do not have disproportionate representation of banks with greater than average
exposure to negative demand-side shocks nationally. It is immediately evident that !! is a function

                                                     ! "#!
!
of !! so local demand shocks enter directly and are a possible threat to validity. For example, banks
that operate in markets that were especially hard hit by the recession (e.g., Florida, Nevada, and
Arizona) may make fewer loans than banks with branches in other areas simply because of the larger
negative demand shocks in these areas. The traditional approach to addressing this problem is to
exclude the own state or county when constructing the instrument; but, this is unlikely to be useful in
this setting, because there are regional economies of scale in banking and there is spatial correlation
in demand shocks.

We instead employ a shift-share approach that is purged of local demand shocks for lending as a
partial solution to this problem. Specifically, we estimate an equation that attempts to divide the
contribution of demand and supply to bank lending:

(a5)                           !!"!!!!" ! ! !! ! !! ! !!" ,

where the outcome variable is the percentage change in small business lending by bank j in county i.
The vector !! is a full set of county fixed effects that capture the variation in lending due to the
condition of the local economy, which we interpret as measuring local demand. The parameters of
interest are those associated with the vector of bank fixed effects, !! . They are estimates of banks’
supply response to the financial crisis that are purged of banks’ differential exposure to regional
variation in demand for small business loans. We complement the standard shift-share (Bartik)
approach by replacing the change in aggregate bank lending, !!" !! , in the construction of !! in
equation (a2) with these estimated bank-specific supply shocks as a safeguard against confounding
demand and supply shocks.

If this approach is successful, the identification assumption is now weaker and requires only that
!"#! ! !"!" ! !! ,!!! ! ! !. It implies that banks with above or below average supply-shifters do not
systematically sort into counties with worse than average shocks to outcomes.

!

!                              !




                                                 ! "#!
!
"##$%&'(!)'*+,$!-

                                                                      345%1'*6!"*71%!"#$%"&'('$#)"$*%8"%9&,*%:'8;%!7**%8;#$%<=%
                                                                                 ,'!!'"$%'$%#$$>#!%&7?7$>7%@7&%A7#&%

                                                        !)'$%$$$!!
         !"#$%"&'('$#)"$*%+,'!!'"$*%"-%.//0%1"!!#&*2%




                                                        !)&$%$$$!!

                                                        !)#$%$$$!!

                                                        !)$$%$$$!!

                                                         !($%$$$!!

                                                         !'$%$$$!!

                                                         !&$%$$$!!

                                                         !#$%$$$!!

                                                                  !"!!!!
                                                                             )**+!   )**(!   )***!   #$$$!   #$$)!   #$$#!   #$$,!   #$$&!   #$$-!   #$$'!   #$$+!   #$$(!   #$$*!   #$)$!

                                                                             ./01234!5067/189!2:;20;:</=!>1/?!@@ABC!C/??0=D6E!F3D=G386?3=6!526!HD82;/8013!H:6:!
                                                                                                                                                                                             !

"##$%&'(!)'*+,$!.!

                                                                        Kernel Density Estimate of the Log Change in Small Business Loan Originations, 2008-2009
                                                                  1.5
                                                                  1
                                                            Density
                                                                  .5
                                                                  0




                                                                            -2                   -1                0                   1                               2
                                                                                             ln(originations in 2009) - ln(originations in 2008)
                                                                           kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0569




                                                                                                                       "#!
!""#$%&'()&*+,#(-(

                                                    !"#!$%"&$'()("%*$"+,&'-!%*.-&/$&0112&

       &#$%




          &%
                  "**'%      "***%     $&&&%      $&&"%       $&&$%   $&&+%      $&&)%     $&&,%      $&&(%     $&&-%      $&&'%     $&&*%     $&"&%



       !&#$%




       !&#)%




       !&#(%




       !&#'%



                                     ./0/1%2345678%9/3:68;%
         !"%
                                     <=>>78!,&%

                                     ?/@%A345678%9/3:68;%


       !"#$%

               B/C8;D%E=F358%;G/H;%;1477%I3;=:8;;%7/4:%/5=F=:46/:;%=:%9/3:68;%>=J=>8>%499/5>=:F%C/%CG8%J4738%/K%CG8=5%$&&-!$&&*%@58>=9C8>%78:>=:F%
               ;G/9L#%M88%E//C:/C8%$,%=:%CG8%C8NC%K/5%K35CG85%>8C4=7;#%




                                                                               "#!
                      !""#$%&'()*+,#(-.(/*&$(#00#123(40(25#("6#%&12#%(,#$%&$7(354183
                                                !"#                    !$#                          !%#
                                                         !"#$%&'(&%#)%*"#&*+,-,#".,*#/0
    $&&'()*+,-(                               .&/%&%%                &/$012                       &/$0$2
                                             !&/&01%#               !&/&"'&#                     !&/&"33#

    $&&3()*+,-                                     .&/"&22                   &/&"$'               &/&&44
                                                  !&/&4"$#                  !&/&"0"#             !&/&"'1#

                                                         !"#$%&1(&23"%%&$/."4%,/53$#./&)6170
                                                                839%*:3$#.&-+*;.5
    $&&'()*+,-                                     .&/&&"%             .&/&&&"              &/&&&$
                                                  !&/&&"4#            !&/&&"%#             !&/&&"$#

    $&&3()*+,-                                     &/&&&%                    .&/&&&2              .&/&&&%
                                                  !&/&&&3#                  !&/&&&0#             !&/&&&3#

                                                                      8/."4%,/53$#.&-+*;.5
    $&&'()*+,-                                     .&/&&''                    &/&&$3              &/&&1&
                                                  !&/&&1$#                   !&/&&24#            !&/&&1"#

    $&&3()*+,-                                     .&/&&'"                   .&/&&0&              .&/&&4'
                                                  !&/&&21#                  !&/&&2"#             !&/&&21#

                                                           !"#$%&<(&<*=#.:>%$?$%&"--+$-".$/
                                                                 839%*:3$#.&-+*;.5
    $&&'()*+,-                                     .&/&&&2              &/&&&1               &/&&&1
                                                  !&/&&&4#             !&/&&&1#             !&/&&&4#

    $&&3()*+,-                                     .&/&&&$                   .&/&&&0              .&/&&&0
                                                  !&/&&&1#                  !&/&&&1#             !&/&&&1#

                                                                      8/."4%,/53$#.&-+*;.5
    $&&'()*+,-                                     .&/&&"&                    &/&&&"              &/&&&"
                                                  !&/&&&1#                   !&/&&&1#            !&/&&&1#

    $&&3()*+,-                                     .&/&&&4                   .&/&&&0              .&/&&&0
                                                  !&/&&&1#                  !&/&&&2#             !&/&&&2#

    56768.9:.:87;(<=>8?(8<<8,6)                       @                        @                     @
    A7)8B=C8(,+C6;+B)                                                          @                     @
    D896.6+.=C,+E8(;76=+                                                                             @
    F+68)G(HC6;=8)(7;8(97)8?(+C(8)6=E76=+C(+<(HIJ76=+C(!4#/((K*8(?8L8C?8C6(M7;=79B8)(7;8N(;8)L8,6=M8B:N(B+O(
    )E7BB(9J)=C8))(B+7C(+;=O=C76=+C)N()E7BB(8)679B=)*E8C6(8ELB+:E8C6(7C?(8)679B=)*E8C6(O;+P6*(;768)N(7C?(
    ,+JC6:.B8M8B(7OO;8O768(8ELB+:E8C6(7C?(8)679B=)*E8C6(O;+P6*(;768)/(((567C?7;?(8;;+;)(,BJ)68;8?(+C(,+JC6:(
    =C(L7;8C6*8)8)/((QC(+9)8;M76=+C(=)(7(,+JC6:.9:.:87;(,8BB/((5*+,-)(;8<8;(6+(L;8?=,68?(B+7C(+;=O=C76=+C)(7)(
    )L8,=<=8?(=C(HIJ76=+C(!2#/((A7)8B=C8(,+C6;+B)(7;8($&&4(B+O(?8C)=6:N(,+C)6;J,6=+C()*7;8N(E7CJ<7,6J;=CO()*7;8N(
    7C?(B+O(L8;(,7L=67(=C,+E8/((QBB(,+C6;+B)(7;8(=C68;7,68?(P=6*(:87;(?JEE=8)/((QBB(E7=C(8<<8,6)(7;8(=C,BJ?8?/((
    588(6*8(68>6(<+;(<J;6*8;(?867=B)/                                                                             !

                                                              ! "#!
!
    !""#$%&'()*+,#(-.(/#,*0&1$23&"(+#04##$("5#%&60#%(,#$%&$7(23168(*$%(
                 ,$9,1*$(15&7&$*0&1$2:(;15($1$<=/!(+*$82
                                                     !"#!$%"&$'()("%*($"+,
    -../&+0$12&3&-../                                        .4.-5
                                                            #.4.-5,

    -..6&+0$12&3&-../                                          7.4.-8
                                                              #.4.9.,

    -..6&+0$12&3&-..6                                          7.4.::
                                                              #.4.9;,

    <=+>'?%*($"+                                              -/-68
    @$*>+A&B0(+&*%=!>&*>+*+&C0>*0>'&%'>%+&C(*0&!%')>'&1'>D(*&+0$12+&
    >EF>'(>"1>D&("1'>%+>D&!>"D(")&G'$H&=%"2+&"$*&1$?>'>D&=I&*0>&JKL4&&
    B0>&M"(*&$G&%"%!I+(+&(+&1$HH>'1(%!&=%"2+&*0%*&%'>&=>!$C&*0>&JKL&%++>*&
    *0'>+0$!D4&&B0>&D>F>"D>"*&?%'(%=!>&(+&+H%!!&!$%"&=%!%"1>+&G'$H&NOPJ&
    1%!!&'>F$'*+4&&Q*%"D%'D&>''$'+&1!M+*>'>D&("&1$M"*I&%'>&("&F%'>"*0>+>+4&&
    Q>>&*>E*&G$'&GM'*0>'&D>*%(!+                                             !

!

!




                                                      ! ""!
!
         !""#$%&'()*+,#(-.(/00#12(30("4#%&12#%(,#$%&$5(67318(3$(#9",3:9#$2(*$%(#62*+,&679#$2(543;27(4*2#6(034(69*,,(
                                                   #62*+,&679#$26<(=/)>(%*2*
                                                                O6F7,I6<C9)DE,P9+)E89<)     O*98H7:*+6<C9)DE,P9+)E89<)
                                                                    !"#         !$#              !%#            !&#
    $''()*+,-.)/)$''(                                              '0''%       '0''$           1'0''2          '0''%
                                                                  !'0''"#     !'0''"#         !'0''&#         !'0''"#

    $''3)*+,-.)/)$''(                                                   '0''(           '0''2              '0'$"             '0''2
                                                                       !'0''$#         !'0''"#            !'0''&#           !'0''$#

    $''3)*+,-.)/)$''3                                                   1'0''"          '0''$              1'0''2            '0''$
                                                                       !'0''"#         !'0''"#            !'0''$#           !'0''"#

    4565789:;<)<==<-9),=)$''3)>+,-.                                     '0''3           '0''?              '0'"@             '0''?
                                                                       !'0''$#         !'0''$#            !'0''&#           !'0''$#

    4565789:;<)<==<-9),=)$''()>+,-.                                     '0''%           '0''$              1'0''2            '0''%
                                                                       !'0''"#         !'0''"#            !'0''&#           !'0''"#

    A19<*9),=)B,:C9)*:DC:=:-8C-<),=)*+,-.):C9<E8-9:,C*)!F1;875<#         '0''            '0''              '0''              '0''

    GH*<E;89:,C*                                                       &'$3?             $3@?3             &'$3?            $3@?3

    >989<1HI1I<8E)=:J<K)<==<-9*                                             L               L                L                 L
    M8*<7:C<)-,C9E,7*                                                                       L                                  L
    N<H919,1:C-,6<)E89:,                                                                    L                                  L
Q,9<R)OC9E:<*)8E<)H8*<K),C)<*9:689:,C),=)OS589:,C)!@#)P+<E<)9+<)K<F<CK<C9);8E:8H7<):*T)E<*F<-9:;<7IT)9+<)<6F7,I6<C9),E)
<*98H7:*+6<C9)DE,P9+)E89<)=,E)*6877)<*98H7:*+6<C9*0))>6877)<*98H7:*+6<C9*)8E<)K<=:C<K)9,)H<)9+,*<)P:9+)7<**)9+8C)$')<6F7,I<<*0))
U+<*<)<*9:689<*)5*<)9+<)QOU>)K898T)P+:-+),C7I)<J9<CK*)9+E,5D+)$''(0))>98CK8EK)<EE,E*)-75*9<E<K),C)-,5C9I):C)F8E<C9+<*<*0))VC)
,H*<E;89:,C):*)8)-,5C9I1HI1I<8E)-<770))>+,-.*)E<=<E)9,)FE<K:-9<K)7,8C),E:D:C89:,C*)8*)*F<-:=:<K):C)OS589:,C)!&#0))M8*<7:C<)-,C9E,7*)8E<)
$''@)7,D)K<C*:9IT)-,C*9E5-9:,C)*+8E<T)68C5=8-95E:CD)*+8E<T)8CK)7,D)F<E)-8F:98):C-,6<0))V77)-,C9E,7*)8E<):C9<E8-9<K)P:9+)I<8E)K566:<*0))
V77)68:C)<==<-9*)8E<):C-75K<K0))><<)9+<)9<J9)=,E)=5E9+<E)K<98:7*0                                                                        !

!


      !""#$%&'()*+,#(-.(/01(23%#,4(35(67#(8#,*6&3$47&"(9#6:##$(;<3$3=&<(
                 !<6&>&6?(*$%(1=*,,(9@4&$#44(03*$(/A&B&$*6&3$4
                                                                 !"#            $"%&'$()
                                                                 *+,                *-,
    ./*.01/203454/1640/7,2*6,                                  8988+:             8988+8
                                                              *8988+8,           *89888:,

    ./*.01/203454/1640/7,2*6;+,                                ;8988<=            ;8988->
                                                              *8988+<,           *89888>,

    ?@7A3B1640/7                                               <:<C:             <:88+
    D06A7E2(/634A727F0G2?!H2A764I16A720J26FA23A.1640/7F4K2@A6GAA/27I1..2
    @L74/A772.A/M4/521/M2AIK.0NIA/6922OFA2MAKA/MA/62B1341@.A24/2$0.LI/2*+,2
    4727I1..2@L74/A772AIK.0NIA/62530G6F922OFA2MAKA/MA/62B1341@.A24/2$0.LI/2
    *-,2472P0L/6N;.ABA.2AIK.0NIA/62530G6F9222Q..2I0MA.724/P.LMA27616A;@N;NA132
    J4RAM2AJJAP6721.0/52G46F2@17A.4/A2P0/630.72*.155AM2.052MA/746NS2P0/763LP640/2
    7F13AS2I1/LJ1P6L34/527F13AS21/M2.052KA32P1K46124/P0IA,24/6A31P6AM2G46F2
    NA132MLII4A7922Q..2I14/2AJJAP67213A24/P.LMAM9222HAA26AR62J032JL36FA32MA614.79 !


                                                                    ! "#!
!
