                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      EXTENDED FAMILIES AND CHILD WELL-BEING

                                           Daniel LaFave
                                           Duncan Thomas

                                        Working Paper 20702
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20702


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




Financial support from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and the Hewlett
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daniel LaFave and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Extended Families and Child Well-being
Daniel LaFave and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 20702
November 2014
JEL No. D1,I0,J13

                                              ABSTRACT

Whereas studies have established the intra-household distribution of resources affects allocation decisions,
little is known about how these decisions are affected by the distribution of resources among co-resident
and non co-resident extended family members. Drawing on theoretical models of collective decision-making,
we use extremely rich data from Indonesia to establish that child health- and education-related human
capital outcomes are affected by resources of extended family members who co-reside with the child
and those who are not co-resident. Extended family members are not completely altruistic but their
allocation decisions are apparently co-ordinated in a way that is consistent with Pareto efficiency.


Daniel LaFave
5243 Mayflower Hill
Colby College
Waterville, ME 04901
drlafave@colby.edu

Duncan Thomas
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
d.thomas@duke.edu
1. Introduction
Several studies have established that the distribution of resources among household members is
predictive of spending and savings patterns, with females typically allocating more resources to
investments in the future – including their children – relative to resources allocated by males. (Thomas,
1990; Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales, 1997; Duflo, 2003; Ashraf, 2009; Rubalcava, Teruel and Thomas,
2009, Bobonis, 2009). In contrast with studies of individuals who co-reside in a household, the
relationship between the well-being of individual family members and the distribution of resources
within an extended family, including members who are not co-resident, is not well understood. Given the
central role that extended families play in many models of behavior, this is an important gap in the
literature.
        It is not straightforward to draw conclusions from evidence on household behavior about how
variation in the distribution of resources among non co-resident family members affects spending and
savings choices within the family. Yet, this is a question of substantial importance for both science and
policy. To wit, a large literature has investigated inter-generational transfers from, for example, adults to
their elderly non co-resident parents or from parents (and grand-parents) to young adults as they establish
their own households. (See, for example, Lee (2003) for a recent review). Other research has examined
the relationship between transfers from non-coresident fathers and the well-being of their children (Knox,
1996; Aizer and McLanahan, 2006) in studies of transfers between migrants – including international
migrants – and those left behind (Antman, 2013). A challenge that is common to much of this work is
that living arrangements of family members and, therefore, household composition potentially depends
on the distribution of resources within that family. This substantially complicates inferences about
family-wide behavior based on information about decision made by those members who choose to co-
reside in a single household (Hamoudi and Thomas, 2014).
        This research examines the impact of resources of both co-resident and non co-resident family
members on child well-being by exploiting unusually rich longitudinal survey data that contains
information on resources at the individual level of family members, irrespective of whether they co-
reside with the child. We examine whether, and how, resources under the control of parents,
grandparents, and other family members contribute to child human capital outcomes in Indonesia. The
empirical model is motivated by a relatively general model of family behavior that has been a powerful
resource in studies of household behavior and provides a natural framework to examine how human
capital formation is influenced by intergenerational exchange and resource allocation.
        There is a growing body of literature on the importance of the extended family in economic
models of decision making. The evidence is, perhaps, especially salient in lower income settings,
including developing countries, in which nuclear, two adult households are less common than in higher
                                                      1
income settings (Cox, 2003; Bianchi et al., 2008). Living arrangements in lower income settings
frequently consist of multi- or skip- generation households, and it has been argued that extended families
often fill gaps created by the absence of formal social safety nets, access to financial markets and access
to market-based insurance.1 The importance of the question is apparent in the large body of evidence that
has established the key role played by additional resources in early life on child development and human
capital accumulation when resources are constrained (Heckman, 2006; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach,
2010).
         Using data from the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) we examine three markers of human
capital of young children: first, height, conditional on age and gender, a measure of health and nutrition;
second, performance on a non-verbal cognitive assessment and, third, age the child started school. The
theoretical foundation for our empirical tests is provided by an extension of the collective model of
household decision-making (Chiappori, 1988, 1992) to the context of decisions made by non co-resident
family members. This model is ideally suited to the application: it makes no assumptions about co-
residence choices, does not impose a specific structure for how family members bargain with one
another, and yields empirical tests about the nature of resource sharing within the family. The key
assumption in the model is that allocations within the extended family are Pareto efficient in the sense
that no family member can be made better off without another family member being made worse off. In
the context of a household, failure of efficiency may be difficult to rationalize since living arrangements
are properly treated as endogenous. However, in the context of family decision-making, it is not obvious
that Pareto efficiency will hold. It is, therefore, a substantively interesting test of family behavior that
places plausible, testable restrictions on the behavior of individual family members who likely have
heterogeneous preferences.
         A special case of the collective model arises when families are completely altruistic and behave
as if all members share the same preferences (or, one family member makes all decisions). The unitary or
complete altruism model is tested and rejected by Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992) and Hayashi,
Altonji and Kotlikoff (1996) using consumption data from the U.S. and by Witoelar (2013) using IFLS
who examine whether household expenditures are affected by the expenditures of non co-resident family
members. One important advantage of this research is that our investigation of the relationship between
variation in the distribution of resources within the family and human capital outcomes of young children
has direct welfare implications and speaks to investments in and the well-being of the next generation. In
contrast, interpretation of variation in consumption behavior is more ambiguous. Second, we reach
beyond a model of complete altruism of the family and test more general models of family decision-
1
 Evidence on extended family interaction in developing countries can be found in many settings. For example: Botswana
(Lucas and Stark, 1985); India (Rosenzweig and Stark, 1989); South Africa (Duflo, 2003); and Indonesia (Thomas and
Frankenberg, 2007) among many others.
                                                         2
making. See, also Dalton, Hotz and Thomas (2014) who examine spending on education in the U.S.
        We show that child human capital outcomes are affected not only by the resources under control
of their parents, but also resources of extended family members. We reject the unitary model of family
behavior, but cannot rule out that family members co-ordinate actions in such as way as to allocate
resources that affect child human capital outcomes in a manner that is consistent with Pareto efficiency.
        The next section describes the theoretical and empirical model; we then describe the data and
present our results. A conclusion summarizes our results.


2. Theoretical and Empirical Framework
Extending the model of household behavior of Chiappori (1988, 1992) and Chiappori and Browning
(1994) with home production (Chiappori, 1997) to the family context, let the welfare of an extended
family, W, depend on the utility of each of its M members, where m = 1, ..., M. Each individual's sub-
utility, Um, is allowed to depend on their own consumption and that of all other extended family members
as well as the output of home production by the family. The vector of goods and services is θkm, k =
1,…,K, where k indexes goods and services including home-produced goods such as health and
education, and θ0m which represents leisure of member m. We focus on the human capital of children
which depends on time and goods inputs as well as endowments, with output, θ, being constrained by the
technology of the production function. Examining child human capital outcomes is of substantial interest
in models of family behavior for two reasons. First, non co-resident family members have been shown to
invest in the health and well-being of the next generation and, second, child human capital outcomes are
readily observed. While the model does not specify the functional form of the sub-utility functions, it is
necessary for each sub-utility function to be quasi-concave, non-decreasing, and strictly increasing in at
least one argument.
        Individual sub-utility is allowed to vary depending on individual, household, and family specific
characteristics. Some of these characteristics, µ, are observed and include age, household demographic
structure, anthropometrics, and socioeconomic status. Characteristics that are not observed, ε, include, for
example, attitudes toward human capital investments, altruism towards family members and human
capital endowments. Each individual's sub-utility function is, therefore, Um(θ, µ, ε).
        The extended family welfare function, W, is a weighted sum of individual sub-utilities with the
weight associated with each individual, λm, depending on the characteristics of both that individual and
all other family members. Some of these characteristics, π, are observed and include, for example,
marriage market opportunities, prices (including the price of labor), age, education and the economic
resources of each family member. Other characteristics, ξ, that are not observed might include, for


                                                      3
example, time preferences and altruism.2 Intuitively, the weighting function λm(π, ξ) reflects the influence
of member m in the family decision-making process and can be interpreted as indicative of the bargaining
power of that member. A key advantage of this model over many of the models in the literature is that
there is no need to specify an equilibrium concept for the bargaining process.
           Family welfare is maximized subject to the family-level budget constraint so that, in a static
framework, expenditures of all family members is no more than total family income:
                maxθ W [U1 (θ , µ , ε ), …, U M (θ , µ , ε ), λ (π , ξ )]                                   [1]

                subject to pθθ ≤ ∑m [ Am + p0 m (T − θ0m )] + A0                                            [2]

where Am are assets controlled by family member m, and A0 are assets jointly controlled by multiple
family members. Individual labor income is the product of an individual's wage, p0m, and labor hours, T-
θ0m, where T is the time endowment. Family expenditure is equal to spending on all goods and services
including those that are used in the production of human capital, pθθ.


2.1 Unitary Model
In this context, family decisions will be unitary if all family members are completely altruistic, if all
family members have the same preferences or if the preferences of only one family member (a dictator)
determines resource allocations (Samuelson, 1956 and Becker, 1981). Under this assumption, conditional
demand for k by family member m depends only on total family resources, ∑m ym, and not on its
distribution within the family:
                θkm = θkm (∑m ym , p, µ, ε )                                                                [3]

where ym is resources of member m, p is a vector of prices, and µ and ε are observed and unobserved
individual, household and family characteristics, respectively that affect demand. Since demand depends
on pooled family resources, conditional on total family resources, the distribution of those resources
within the family has no impact on resource allocations:

                ∂θ k
                                    = 0 ∀ k, m                                                              [4]
                ∂ym      M
                       ∑ n=1   yn


for each family member, m. For example, conditional on total family resources, child human capital
outcomes will not depend on the distribution of those resources between the child’s parents,
grandparents, aunts, uncles or other relatives.
           While this model provides a useful starting place, it has been rejected in a large number of studies
of household behavior at least since Horney and McElroy (1988), Schultz (1990) and Thomas (1990). It


2
    In principle, π and ξ may include factors that influence preferences through µ and ε.
                                                                4
is, therefore, unlikely to be a satisfactory model of decision-making that includes non co-resident family
members. We turn, therefore, to the substantially more general collective model.


2.2 Collective Model
The collective model allows both total family resources and the distribution of resources within the
family to affect resource allocations, but restricts allocations to be Pareto efficient. This is not an
innocuous restriction, particularly in the context of decision-making by non co-resident family members.
Rejection of this restriction provides important insights into understanding family behavior.
        Chiappori (1988, 1992) and Browning and Chiappori (1998) establish that the collective model is
formally equivalent to a model of family income sharing in which decisions are made in two stages. First,
all resources are pooled and then shared among family decision-makers. Second, each decision-maker
allocates his or her share of the pooled resources to maximize own sub-utility without reference to
allocations by other family members.
        Each decision-maker’s share of pooled resources is determined by a sharing rule that depends on
the utility weights that aggregate sub-utility functions, λ, and so is related to that member’s influence
over decisions. The rule, α( y1 , … y M , p, π , ξ ) , depends on resources of each family member, ym,

prices, p, along with observed, π, and unobserved, ξ, characteristics that affect the utility weights or,
intuitively, affect bargaining power of that family member in allocation decisions. These might include,
for example, marriage market opportunities or altruism. Letting pooled family resources be Y=∑m ym, the
share of pooled family resources that each decision-maker m is allocated in the first stage, Ym, is:
        Ym = α ( y1 ,… yM , p, π , ξ )Y                                                                     [5]

        In the second stage, each family decision-maker, m, maximizes his or her own utility subject to a
budget constraint that limits m’s spending to be no more than m’s share of resources Ym. Conditional
demand for θk by member m is:
            θ km = θ k m (Ym ( y1 ,… yM , p, π , ξ ), p, µ , ε )                                            [6]

which can be rewritten as
            θ km =θ km ( y1 ,… yM , p, µ , ε )                                                            [7]

where µ includes all observed characteristics that affect demand directly, µ, as well as those that affect
demand through the sharing rule, π, many (but not all) of which are common. Similarly, ε includes all
unobserved characteristics that affect demand directly, ε, and those that affect the sharing rule, ξ .
        Whereas in the unitary model, allocations depend only on total family resources, in the collective
model, the resources of each decision-maker affects allocations and so the distribution of resources

                                                            5
within the family matters. The weakly separable sharing rule function [6] plays a key role in deriving
empirical tests of the collective model (Bourguignon et al., 1993, and Browning and Chiappori, 1998).
        The marginal impact of income in the hands of family member p, yp, on demand for θk is:
             ∂θk ∂θk ∂Ym
                 =                                                                                        [8]
             ∂y p ∂Ym ∂y p
where the first term on the right hand side reflects the impact of m’s income share on demand which,
because of weak separability in [6] is the same no matter what drives variation in m’s income share. The
impact of yp on m’s income share is captured in the second term. The marginal impact of member q’s
income, yq, on the same θk is:
             ∂θ k ∂θ k ∂Ym
                 =                                                                                        [9]
             ∂yq ∂Ym ∂yq

where the first term is the same as in [8]. Thus, yp and yq affect the share of resources that each member,
m, receives in the first stage but neither has a direct impact on demand for θ. It is immediate that the ratio
of these marginal effects is independent of θk for all outcomes k,
             ∂θ k   ∂θ k        ∂Ym        ∂Ym
             ∂y p   ∂Ym         ∂y p       ∂y p
                  =                      =                      ∀ k , p and q, p ≠ q                     [10]
             ∂θ k   ∂θ k        ∂Ym        ∂Ym
             ∂yq    ∂Ym         ∂yq        ∂yq
for all pairs of family decision-makers, p and q. Put another way, the ratio of the marginal propensity to
consume from each pair of family member’s resources, yp and yq, is constant across all goods, services
and outcomes, θ.
        This is a powerful result for at least two reasons. First, there is no reason a priori to expect the
ratio of marginal propensities to be the same across all goods for a pair of family members and, second, it
is straightforward to test with survey data. The next sub-section describes the empirical implementation
of the implications of the theoretical models described above.


2.3. Empirical Implementation
                                                       k
Taking a linear approximation of [7], the demand for θihf , the human capital outcome k of child i in

household h and family f, depends on ym, resources of each family member, m, some of whom are
members of households h and some are not, in addition to a set of demographic controls for the index
child, Xif, and all other family members, Xmf:

        θihfk = α k + ymf βmk + X if γ ik + X mf γ mk + ε ifk                                            [11]

        Exploiting the fact that IFLS collects information on resources at the individual level, we

                                                                  6
estimate [11] identifying individual family members, m, who are likely to be the most salient to the index
child: the father, mother, grandfather, grandmother and other family members (which includes siblings,
aunts and uncles). Allocations are collectively rational if the ratio of the marginal effect of resources of
one family member, m, to the marginal effect of resources of another family member, n, is the same for
all pairs of child outcomes, j and k:

            βmk βmj
               =    ∀ j≠k                                                                                          [12]
            βnk βnj
In some cases, the value of a resource is well-known and assignment to an individual is straightforward;
gold is a good example. In other cases, respondents may have difficulty valuing the resource and
apportioning ownership among family members. This is likely to be most difficult within couples and
possibly within households. In an effort to address these concerns, we put aside dynamics within
households and compare the impact on child outcomes of resources of those family members who live in
the same household, h , as and index child with resources of those who do not co-reside, h , with the
child:
           θihfk = α k + yhf β hk + yhf β hk + X if γ ik + X mf γ mk + ε ifk                                       [13]

In this special case of [11], allocations between co-resident and non co-resident family members will be
collectively rational if the ratio of income effects are the same for each pair of child outcomes:

            β hk β hj
                =          ∀j≠k                                                                                    [14]
            β hk β hj
Moreover, families behave as if they are unitary if child outcomes are invariant to whether resources are
in the hands of household members or in the hands of family members outside the household, implying
that the income effects would then be equal, β hk = β hk . A test that is robust to measurement error in total

family resources replaces yhf in [13] with a family-specific fixed effect, µ kf

           θihfk = α k + yhf βhk + X if γ ik + X mf γ mk + µ kf + ε ifk                                            [15]

which effectively controls total family resources. In this case, household resources should have no
additional impact on child outcomes and family behavior is unitary if β hk =0.

           Since the test for collective rationality involves cross equation restrictions, the child outcome
models are estimated jointly to construct nonlinear Wald test statistics. All variance-covariances are
estimated allowing for intra-family correlation at the family level.3 This is potentially important as we are
comparing human capital outcomes of children in the same family who not only share genes but are


3
    Inferences do not change if they are based on bootstrapped estimates that are clustered at the family level.
                                                                       7
likely to have shared environments.


3. Data
Data are drawn from IFLS, a large-scale, ongoing longitudinal survey that collects detailed information
on individuals, households and families. The 1993 baseline enumerated about 22,000 members of 7,224
households in 306 rural or urban communities (desa) spread across 13 of the Indonesian provinces.
Individuals were re-interviewed in IFLS2 in 1997 and in IFLS3 in 2000. We use data collected in IFLS4,
conducted in late 2007 and early 2008, which interviewed over 43,500 individuals living in 13,500
households in 3,650 desa.4 The fact that the number of communities in which respondents were
interviewed increases by over 12-fold between baseline and IFLS4 follow-up 15 years later reflects a key
strength of IFLS for this research: baseline respondents and their children born after baseline who move
are tracked and interviewed in their new location. Specifically, as children age, strike out on their own
and form new households, they, their spouses and their children are interviewed. In IFLS4, 90.6% of all
surviving IFLS respondents were re-interviewed (Thomas et al., 2012). This far exceeds the recontact
rates in any other large-scale population-based survey including, for example, the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics in which attrition was around 50% after 15 years. Following Altonji et al. (1992), we construct
extended families that include non co-residents by linking individuals in IFLS4 who have split off from
their baseline households with all IFLS respondents that have been spawned by the baseline household.
        An example is illustrated in Figure 1. Consider a baseline household with two parents and their
two children. Four years later in IFLS2, the two children have grown and split-off to form their own
households. These households are located and interviewed and we construct a family consisting of three
households. In IFLS3, the baseline children have married, and their spouses become part of the IFLS
sample. The spouses are administered the same individual interview as the original panel members. The
light gray individuals indicate parents and siblings of joiners about whom information is collected from
the joiner regarding vital status, age, gender education and transfers. As shown in Figure 1, by IFLS4,
each of the original children now has two children. Our empirical models examine the outcomes of these
four children and relate those outcomes to the resources of their parents, their grandparents and other non
co-resident family members.
        In a household-based survey, the full genealogical family tree is not observed; the implications
for our analyses are discussed in detail below. The key point for this research is that, by design, IFLS
enables the construction of families of related kin who are not co-resident. Appendix Table 1 reports the
number of children, parents and grand-parents as well as households and families included in our sample.

4
  See Frankenberg and Karoly (1995), Frankenberg and Thomas (2000), Strauss et al. (2004), and Strauss et al. (2009)
for descriptions of the waves of IFLS.
                                                         8
There are slightly over 15,00 age-eligible children (age 0-16 yrs) with about 1.7 per household and 2.9
per family.


Child Outcomes The analyses examine three indicators of child health and human capital that are related
to well-being in later life: height-for-age, cognition, and participation in kindergarten. Height has been
established as an informative indicator of nutritional status during early childhood (Waterlow et al., 1977;
Martorell and Habicht, 1986) that reflects both the influence of genes and the environment – including
parental time and financial resources – during early life (Silventoinen et al., 2000; Alderman et al., 2006;
Hoddinott et al., 2013). Child height is a powerful predictor of attained height as an adult which is
associated with reduced mortality and morbidity as well as greater economic prosperity (Fogel, 2004;
Strauss and Thomas 1998). Height or length of each child is measured by a trained enumerator and
standardized for age and gender using the 2000 Center for Diseases Control growth tables which are
normed to a representative, well-nourished child in the United States. As shown in Table 1, the average
child in our sample is between 1.2 and 1.5 standard deviations shorter than this norm.
        The second child outcome is a measure of cognitive function. It comprises performance on a non-
verbal cognitive battery, the Raven's Colored Progressive Matrices (CPM) pattern recognition assessment
and answers to five simple arithmetic questions that involve addition, subtraction, multiplication and
division. The CPM assessment has been interpreted as a measure of general intelligence and is thought to
be a good measure of Spearman's general intelligence factor g (e.g. Raven, 2000 and Kaplan and
Saccuzzo, 1997). Each child completed a booklet with 12 question from the CPM battery. We combine
the CPM and arithmetic questions to increase precision and use the percentage of questions answered
correctly for children age 7 through 16. Since older children are more likely to answer correctly than
younger children, we flexibly control for age in the models. The average score is 69.6% with the average
Ravens score being 74.6% and the average arithmetic score being 61.4%.
        Whereas height and cognition are outputs of investments by family members, our third indicator
is an input into the education process, whether or not the child participated in kindergarten. Only about
half the sample children attended kindergarten although school readiness is thought to be an important
contributor to learning in primary school. More generally, early education programs have been shown in
rigorous studies to have a positive impact on socio-emotional development, cognition and school
readiness and, in some studies, on school attainment and later life outcomes (Knudsen et al, 2006; Gertler
et al., 2014). In our data, attending kindergarten is positively and significantly associated with subsequent
school outcomes, even after controlling parental education and resources.




                                                      9
Family Resources The distribution of resources within the family plays a central role in the theory and
empirical models. Child outcomes are invariant to this distribution in the unitary model, but are
influenced by the distribution among family members through intra-family bargaining in the collective
model. It is, however, a substantial challenge to translate the theory to an empirical specification of
resources that reflects an individual’s capacity to assert his or her own preferences over allocation
decisions. Intuitively, one might think of resources as being indicative of an individual’s bargaining
power within a family say, for example, because the individual would retain control over those resources
if all links with the family were severed.
         Earnings are one potential candidate for individual-specific resources under the control of each
family member. However, earnings reflect decisions about time allocation which is likely to be the
outcome of a within-family bargaining process. Moreover, as a result of that process, income is typically
shared with other household members and possibly also non co-resident family members through inter-
household transfers.
         Rather than rely on earnings, we assume that the distribution of assets within the family are the
outcome of a less proximate bargaining process and, from the perspective of investments in young
children, can be treated as pre-determined in the models. Exploiting an unusual feature of IFLS designed
to test these models, we draw on information collected from each respondent age 15 or older about the
value of assets the respondent owns in each of ten asset groups. Three of the asset groups are relatively
illiquid – owner-occupied houses, other houses, and land – whereas the other seven are relatively liquid –
livestock; vehicles; household appliances; financial assets; gold and jewelry; household furniture; and
other assets. When assets are jointly owned with others inside or outside the family, the respondent
estimates the value of the share of the asset that he or she owns.5
         From the perspective of bargaining, it is not clear that more and less liquid assets will be treated
the same. If a family member threatens to not co-operate, it may be difficult to withdraw his or her share
of the value of the house from decision-making without evicting family members. Moreover, it is
plausible that more and less liquid assets will have different impacts on child outcomes. Whether the
value of more and less liquid assets should be combined is an empirical question that we will explore
below using the value of assets owned by each respondent as the measure of resources, ym, in the models.
         While individual-specific assets have considerable appeal in these models since individuals are
likely to take the assets they own with them if they sever ties with the family, the assumption that the
distribution of assets within the family is unrelated to unobserved factors that affect child outcomes is not
without controversy. An alternative strategy would be to use characteristics that affect marriage market

5
  Ninety-four percent of respondents provide their own estimate of the value of their assets. For the other 6%, the value
reported by the spouse or household head is used.
                                                            10
outcomes. In fact, given that we focus on young children and, therefore, most of the parents are young, a
substantial fraction of the assets are likely to have been provided at the time of marriage. Of course, one
might argue that marriage outcomes are also potentially correlated with unobserved characteristics that
affect child outcomes.
         A step towards addressing this concern is to estimate [13] and compare the impact on child
outcomes of assets of members of the child’s household with assets of other non co-resident family
members. To the extent that it is the distribution of assets within the household that is correlated with
unobserved factors that affect child outcomes, these estimates should not be contaminated by unobserved
heterogeneity. Moreover, household-level assets may be measured with less error and so there will be
gains in precision relative to estimating model [11] with individual-specific resources.
         This approach is more directly comparable with Altonji et al. (1992) and Hayashi et al. (1996)
and others in this literature who have not examined the impact of individual-level family resources but,
instead, examined the impact of household expenditures relative to the impact of expenditures of other
family members who are not co-resident. This approach does not have a strong link to theory as the
distribution of expenditure within the family is clearly endogenous in the model.
         The distribution of assets within families is reported, along with other summary statistics in Table
1. Since the samples vary across outcomes (because age-eligibility varies), the statistics are reported for
each sample. Overall, the average family has Rp206 million between illiquid and liquid assets (which is
about $20,000) with the average household in which a target child lives accounting for about forty
percent of the total. Wealth is split between liquid holdings, approximately twenty-two percent of total
assets, and illiquid holdings. Within couples, husbands tend to report slightly higher levels of liquid
assets than wives. Child characteristics, Xi, and characteristics of other family members, Xm, are reported
in the rest of Table 1; those controls are included in the models.6


4. Empirical Results
Regression results of the effects of resources on child outcomes are reported in Table 2 for the models
with resources measured at the household level using the logarithm of household and other family assets
(in Rp10,000s).7 Results for models with individual-specific resources are reported in Table 3.


6  Controls include gender and age of the child, using indicator variables for each age, and whether the child lives with
their mother and father. At the household, and family level when appropriate, we include demographic controls including
household size and composition, and age and education of the household and family head. Factors common at the
province level are controlled for with province fixed effects, and we include an indicator for whether the household is
located in an urban or rural region. In regressions examining child height, both mother's and father's height is included to
capture the genetic component of height as well as additional factors not controlled for by parental education and age.
7
  The 0.8% of households that report no assets are assigned the sample mean and an indicator for zero assets is included
in the models for these households.
                                                            11
          To begin, columns 1 through 3 of Table 2 presents results of estimating [15], the model with a
family fixed effect that measures assets at the household level for each of the three child outcomes. The
fixed effect absorbs family-level characteristics that have a linear and additive impact on child outcomes.
As this includes total family resources, an increase in household resources can be interpreted as an
increase in the share of total family resources attributed to the household. If the unitary model of family
decision-making is correct, the distribution of resources within the family should have no impact on child
outcomes and so the resources of the household in which the child resides should not be significantly
related to any of the child outcomes.
          The empirical model distinguishes assets that are more liquid from those that are less liquid (or
illiquid) and includes the logarithm of the value of household assets in each class. Liquid assets have a
statistically significant positive impact on each of the child outcomes at a 5% size of test; in contrast,
illiquid assets are not predictive of child outcomes. As shown in panel B1, taken together, liquid and
illiquid assets are significantly associated with height for age and kindergarten attendance. If illiquid
assets are not included in the model, then the estimated coefficients and standard errors for liquid assets
are essentially the same. The evidence in these models is not consistent with the unitary model of the
family.
          A key advantage of the model with a family fixed effect is that it is not necessary to measure total
family resources. Columns 4 through 6 of Table 2 present results from estimating model [13] which
includes both the logarithm of household assets, yhf , and the logarithm of assets of family members who

are not co-resident with the target child, yhf , again distinguishing liquid from illiquid assets. Holding

family resources constant, the logarithm of liquid household assets has a significant positive impact on
each of the three child outcomes but illiquid household assets affect only kindergarten attendance. Taking
household liquid and illiquid assets together, household resources are significant predictors of child
outcomes (as shown in panel B1 of the table). In all cases, the impact of family resources is smaller and
not significant in all but the case of illiquid assets which affect kindergarten attendance.
          If family behavior is unitary, the effect on child outcomes of household resources and resources
of non co-resident family members will be the same. Tests of equality of the estimated effects are shown
in panel B2. Whereas there are no significant differences in the impacts of illiquid assets of households
and the rest of the family for height-for-age and cognitive scores, for liquid assets, and also for all assets
taken together, the unitary model is rejected at a 5% size of test for each of the child outcomes.
          It is not obvious how family boundary should be delineated. As a practical matter, we have
defined families as related biological kin of the parents of the target child. However, our empirical
measure of family resources includes only the resources of the kin of one of those parents, the parent who

                                                       12
was a member of the baseline household and whose parents and siblings have been interviewed. For all
but a handful of children, the other parent is a new entrant into the IFLS sample and other members of
that person’s family are not interviewed. This is a function of the fact that the data are collected as part of
a household-based rather than family-based survey. Measuring resources for only one side of the target
child’s family should not bias our results since whether resources are from the maternal or paternal side
is essentially random. Moreover, including a control for whether we observe the maternal or paternal side
of a child’s family tree does not affect the results.
        A related concern is that family resources are measured only for those kin who are members of
households that are included in IFLS. One measure of the importance of this concern is provided by
comparing the estimated difference between the impact of household assets in the models that control
family assets (in columns 4 through 6) with the impact of household assets in the models that include a
family fixed effect (in columns 1 through 3) and so are not contaminated by measurement in family
assets. For child height for age, the difference between the impact of the logarithm of household and
family liquid assets is 6.06 and the fixed effects estimate of this difference is 6.67; for illiquid assets the
difference in the model that includes measures of family resources is 1.56 and in the fixed effects model
it is 1.59. Neither of these differences is statistically significant nor economically meaningful. The
estimates for the cognitive score and kindergarten attendance are also not statistically significant. We
conclude that measurement error in family resources is not an empirically important issue in these
models.
        The impacts of household and family assets that are illiquid are small in magnitude relative to
liquid assets and statistically significant in only one case indicating that, conditional on liquid assets,
variation in illiquid assets is not an important determinant of child outcomes. Individuals and households
who have more liquid assets tend to have more illiquid assets which likely affects the precision of the
estimated effects of resources. The models are, therefore, re-estimated dropping illiquid assets. The
results are reported in columns 7 through 9. The coefficient estimates are slightly larger and better
determined than the models with illiquid assets. All of the estimated effects of household and family
liquid assets are statistically significant and household assets have a significantly bigger effect on each
child outcome than family assets indicating unambiguous rejection of the unitary model.
        The ratios of the effects of own household resources to resources of non co-resident family
members, [14], are presented in columns 7 through 9 of panel B3 of the table along with p-values of non-
linear Wald tests of the equality of those ratios in panel C. The ratios for each child outcome are all very
close and indicate that resources of those who co-reside with the child have about 2.6 times the impact
relative to resources of non co-resident family members. Given the similarity of all three ratios, it is not
surprising that none are different for any pair of outcomes or for all three taken together as shown by the

                                                        13
test statistics in column 9 of panel C. Whereas the unitary model of the family has been rejected by these
data, we cannot reject the collective model of family behavior: with respect to child investments, co-
resident and non co-resident family members appear to co-ordinate resource allocations Pareto
efficiently. The same conclusion is drawn for the models with liquid and illiquid assets although in those
cases the ratios are not as well determined.
         An advantage of a model of the family rather than the household to better understand resource
allocations is that the family model does not need to take into account either potentially endogenous
living arrangements or make strong assumptions about selection of household members. We turn,
therefore, to the family-based model [11] and report estimates of the effects of resources of parents and
grandparents on the three child outcomes in Table 3. Since the power of the Pareto efficiency tests is a
function of the precision of the estimated resource effects, we include only liquid assets in these models.
         Maternal resources have the largest impact on the child outcomes and the estimated effects are
statistically significant in all three cases, a result that is consistent with a large literature (Thomas, 1990).
The effects of paternal resources are also positive and while they are only significant in the case of
kindergarten attendance, taken together maternal and paternal resources are significant predictors of each
child outcome (with a p-value < 0.01 in each case). The effects of resources of grandparents are smaller
in magnitude, none are statistically significant individually or taken together. The effects of grandparents
resources are significantly different from maternal resources for all three child outcomes. The resources
of other household members are significant predictors of each child outcome, the estimated effects are
larger (albeit insignificantly) than paternal resources for child height but significantly smaller than the
effects of maternal resources on cognition and kindergarten attendance. The same pattern is apparent in
the final row of panel A of the table which reports the effects of resources of other, non co-resident
family members. There are no substantively important or statistically significant differences between the
effects of other family members who do or do not co-reside with the child.8 These family members are
aunts and uncles of the target child and, in some cases, older siblings.
         The evidence in Table 3 demonstrates that, in terms of allocating resources for child human
capital, the unitary model is rejected not only for the family but also for the household. While those are
not novel conclusions, the results in Table 3 also demonstrate that the relationships between resources of
different family members and child outcomes is extremely complex and not driven by living
arrangements, and points to the likely value-added of designing studies that reach beyond parents and
household members to more fully understand family dynamics, at least in a low income setting like


8
  In models that include both illiquid and liquid assets, we find that illiquid assets of the father and grandparents are
significant predictors of kindergarten attendance but neither height nor cognition. This may reflect the fact that
kindergarten attendance is readily observed and its timing is known at child birth.
                                                              14
Indonesia.
        With six demographic groups, there are 15 resource effect ratios for each outcome. Given the
centrality of maternal resources in the estimates reported in panel A of the table, we report the ratios
relative to the effect of maternal assets for each child outcome as an illustration in panel B. As the impact
of maternal resources is the largest for each outcome, all of the ratios are less than one. Following [11], if
family decisions are Pareto efficient, these ratios will not be different from each other. Appendix Table 2
reports p-values for the equality of each pair of ratios and the p-values for the equality of all the ratios for
each child outcome pair are repeated in panel C of Table 3. None of the ratios is significantly different
from another in pairwise tests nor tested jointly.
        Taken together, the evidence in Tables 2 and 3 indicates that it is not possible reject the
hypothesis that family behavior is consistent with Pareto efficiency. Apparently, non co-resident family
members successfully navigate information asymmetries, market imperfections and barriers to exchange
so that, at least with regard to child human capital investments, resources are allocated efficiently. This is
a remarkable result.


Sensitivity analysis and robustness. In order to ensure the validity of the results, numerous robustness
checks were conducted to examine the failure to reject efficiency and rejection of the unitary model in a
number of subsamples and alternative specifications to address various hypothesis concerning the sharing
habits of extended families. Our conclusion that family behavior is consistent with the collective model
when we allow nonlinearities in the impact of resources, consider other child outcomes or examine
specific subsamples of children.
        We have tested whether the effects of resources on child outcomes are non-linear by estimating
models with splines and models with polynomials; the linearity assumption is not rejected. Moreover, our
conclusion that families are co-operative is not changed in these non-linear models. The conclusions also
extend to other child outcomes including weight for age, body mass index and school enrolment.
        It is possible that some sub-populations do not behave efficiently. For example, families with
more wealth may be able to afford to deviate from efficiency; co-ordination failures may be more likely
in larger or more dispersed families. To explore whether Pareto efficiency describes the behavior of these
population sub-groups, we stratified the sample based on total family wealth, on family size, the number
of children within a family and whether families were geographically dispersed. In none of these sub-
samples was Pareto efficiency rejected.
        While the IFLS is an extremely rich resource for this research, it and every other household-
based data collection effort is limited in that resources of all extended family members is not recorded.
We established that our estimates in models that control family resources and models that treat family

                                                       15
resources as an unobserved characteristics are very similar and not statistically significantly different.
This gives us some comfort. We have also exploited the fact that, by design, there is variation in the
branch of the family tree included in IFLS: for some children, the mother’s family was selected for the
baseline and so the resources of her family are measured; for other children, it is the paternal side of the
family that has been interviewed. To assess whether it matters if the root household is on the maternal or
paternal side of the family, we separately estimated models for families where the mother in a new
household is an IFLS panel member compared with those where the father is an IFLS panel member.
Again, we found no significant differences. In addition, IFLS collects demographic information about all
parents and siblings of each respondent; we can control for whether the entire (paternal or maternal)
family has been enumerated in IFLS and we can restrict our sample to those families in which the
majority of family members have been interviewed. Our conclusions are not changed.


5. Conclusion
The family plays a central role in many models of behavior in economics and both implicit and explicit
transfers between non co-resident family members have been shown to play an important role in many
societies, particularly in lower income settings. Whereas understanding of household behavior has been
substantially enriched by recent advances in the theoretical and empirical literatures on decision-making
at the household level, relatively little is known about the behavior of extended family members who are
not co-resident. Extending theoretical models of household decision-making to the family context, we
draw on extremely rich survey data from Indonesia that was designed to collect individual-level measures
of economic resources of extended family members in order to empirically discriminate among different
models of family behavior.
        We examine the relationship between the distribution of assets within a family and three child
outcomes that are related to human capital: height for age, cognition and kindergarten attendance. Not
only are parents likely to care about the human capital of their children but other family members are also
likely to value higher levels of human capital among the next generation. Indeed, we find parental
resources – particularly maternal resources – as well as resources of adults who co-reside with the target
child have a positive impact on human capital outcomes. We also find these investments are greater if,
conditional on household resources, non co-resident family members have more assets although these
effects are significantly smaller in magnitude than the effects of parental and household assets. This
behavior is not consistent with family members pooling all resources and behaving as a single unit.
However, we cannot rule out that extended families behave cooperatively and that their allocation
decisions are Pareto efficient, at least with respect to investments in children.


                                                      16
        The results are important for two reasons. First, they establish that resources of the extended
family play a role in early life human capital accumulation and underscore the centrality of the
distribution of those resources among individuals within the family. Second, in a low income context
where information asymmetries and liquidity constraints are likely to be important, geographically
dispersed families behave as it resource allocations are coordinated (Pareto) efficiently. Taken together,
these results suggest that there are likely to be substantial benefits to moving beyond surveys of
households and develop studies that systematically collect data on family members in order to better
understand the roles that families actually play in societies today.




                                                      17
References
Aizer, A., S. McLanahan, “The impact of child support enforcement on fertility, parental investments and
       child well-being,” Journal of Human Resources, 2006, 41.1:28-45.

Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, and B. Kinsey, “Long Term Consequences of Early Childhood Malnutrition,"
      Oxford Economic Papers, 2006, 58, 450-474.

Altonji, J., F. Hayashi, and L. Kotlikoff, “Is the Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using
       Micro Data," American Economic Review, 1992, 82.5, 1177-1198.

Antman, F., “The impact of migration on family left behind,” in A. F. Constant and K.F. Zimmerman (eds.)
     International Handbook on the Economics of Migration, Edward Elgar, Northampton, MA, 2013.

Ashraf, N. “Spousal control and intra-household decision-making: An experimental study in the Philippines,”
       2009, American Economic Review, 99.4:1245-77.

Becker, G. A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1981.

Bianchi, S., J. Hotz, K. McGarry, and J. Seltzer, “Intergenerational Ties: Alternative Theories, Empirical
      Findings and Trends, and Remaining Challenges," in A. Booth, N. Crouter, S. Bianchi, and J. Seltzer,
      eds., Intergenerational Caregiving, Urban Institute, 2008, pp. 3-44.

Bobonis, G. “Is the allocation of resources within the household efficient? New evidence from a randomized
      experiment,” Journal of Political Economy, 2009. 117.3:453-503.

Bourguignon, F., M. Browning, and P. A. Chiappori and V. Lechene, “Intra Household Allocation of
      Consumption: a Model with some evidence from French data," Annales D'Economie et de Statistique,
      1993, 29, 137-156.

Browning, M. and P. A. Chiappori, “Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: A General Characterization and
      Empirical Tests," Econometrica, 1998, 66.6, 1241-1278.

Browning, M., F. Bourguignon, P. A. Chiappori, and V. Lechene, “Incomes and Outcomes: A Structural
      Model of Intra-Household Allocation," Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102.6, 1067-1096.

Chiappori, P. A., “Rational household labor supply," Econometrica, 1988, 56.1, 63-89.

Chiappori, P. A., “Collective Labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100.3, 437-
      467.

Chiappori, P.A. “Introducing household production in collective models of labor supply.” Journal of
      Political Economy, 1997, 105:191–209.

Cunha, F., J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach. “Estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill
      formation.” Econometrica, 2010, 78.3: 883-931

Cox, D., “Private Transfers within the Family: Mothers, Fathers, Sons and Daughters," in A. Munnell and A.
      Sunden, eds., Death and Dollars: The Role of Gifts and Bequests in America, Washington, D.C.:
      Brookings Institution Press, 2003, pp. 168-217.

Dalton, M., J. V. Hotz, and D. Thomas, “Resources, Composition, and Family-Decision Making,” Working
       Paper, 2014.

                                                     18
Duflo, E., “Grandmother and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and Intrahousehold Allocations in South
       Africa," World Bank Economic Review, 2003, 17.1, 1-25.

Fogel, R. The escape from hunger and premature death, 1700-2010: Europe, America and the Third World,
       2004. Chicago:University of Chicago Press.

Frankenberg, E. and L. Karoly, “The 1993 Indonesia Family Life Survey: Overview and Field Report,"
      Technical Report, Rand Corporation November 1995.

Frankenberg, E. and D. Thomas, “The Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS): Study Design and Results from
      Waves 1 and 2," Technical Report, Rand Corporation March 2000.

Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A Zanolinim C. Vermeersh, S. Walker, S. Chang, S. Grantham-McGregor,
       “Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation intervention in Jamaica,” Science, 2014,
       344.6187:998-1001.

Hamoudi, A. and D. Thomas, “Endogenous coresidence and program incidence: South Africa’s old age
     pension.” Journal of Development Economics, 2014, 109:30–37.

Hayashi, F., J. Altonji, and L. Kotlikoff. “Risk-sharing between and within families.” Econometrica, 1996,
      64.2:261–294.

Heckman, J., “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged Children,” Science, 2006,
     312.5782: 1900-1902.

Hoddinott, J., J. Behrman, J. Maluccio, P. Meglar, A. Quisumbing, M. Ramirez-Zea, A. Stein, K. Yount and
      R. Martorell. “Adult consequences of growth failure in early childhood,” American Journal of
      Clinical Nutrition, 2013, 98.5:1170-78.

Horney, M. J. and M. McElroy, “The Household Allocation Problem: Empirical Results from a Bargaining
      Model," Research in Population Economics, 1988, 6, 15-38.

Kaplan, R. and D. Saccuzzo, Psychological testing: Principles, Applications, and Issues, 4th ed., Pacific
      Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1997.

Knox, V. “The effects of child support payments on developmental outcomes for elementary school-age
      children,” Journal of Human Resources, 1996, 31.4:816-40.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. L. Cameron, J. P. Shonkoff, “Economic, neurobiological and behavioral
      perspectives on building America’s future workforce,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
      Sciences, 2006, 103:10155-62.

Lee, R. “Demographic change, welfare, and intergenerational transfers: a global overview.” Genus, 2003,
       59.3/4:43–70.

Lucas, R. E. B. and O. Stark, “Motivations to Remit: Evidence from Botswana," Journal of Political
       Economy, October 1985, 93 (5), 901-918.

Lundberg, S., R. Pollak, and T. Wales. “Do husbands and wives pool their resources? Evidence from the
      United Kingdom child benefit.” Journal of Human Resources, 1997, 32.3: 463–480.




                                                     19
Martorell, Reynaldo and Jean-Pierre Habicht, “Growth in early childhood in developing countries,” in: F.
      Falkner and J. Tanner, eds., Human growth: A comprehensive treatise, Vol. 3, 2nd ed. New York:
      Plenum Press.

Raven, J., “The Raven's Progressive Matrices: Change and stability over culture and time," Cognitive
      Psychology, 2000, 41, 1, 48.

Rosenzweig, M. and O. Stark, “Consumption smoothing, migration and marriage: evidence from rural
      India," Journal of Political Economy, August 1989, 97.4, 905-926.

Rubalcava, L., G. Teruel and D. Thomas, “Investment, time preferences and public transfers paid to women,”
      Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2009, 57.3:307-38.

Samuelson, P., “Social Indifference Curves," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1956, 70.1, 1-22.

Schultz, T. Paul, “Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility," Journal of Human
       Resources, Fall 1990, 25.4, 599-634.

Silventoinen, K., J. Kaprio, E. Lahelma, and M. Koskenvuo, “Relative effect of genetic and environmental
       factors on body height: differences across birth cohorts among Finnish men and women," American
       Journal of Public Health, 2000, 90, 627-630.

Strauss, J., F. Witoelar, B. Sikoki, and A.M. Wattie, “The Fourth Wave of the Indonesia Family Life Survey
       (IFLS4): Overview and Field Report," Technical Report, Rand Corporation, April 2009.

Strauss, J., K. Beegle, B. Sikoki, A. Dwiyanto, Y. Herawati, and F. Witoelar, “The Third Wave of the
       Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS): Overview and Field Report," Technical Report, Rand
       Corporation March 2004.

Strauss, J. and D. Thomas, “Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development," Journal of Economic
       Literature, 1998, 36.2, 766, 817.

Thomas, D., “Intrahousehold Resource Allocation: an Inferential Approach," Journal of Human Resources,
     1990, 25.4, 635-664.

Thomas, D. and E. Frankenberg, “Household Responses to the Financial Crisis in Indonesia: Longitudinal
     Evidence on Poverty, Resources and Well-Being," in Ann Harrison, ed., Globalization and Poverty,
     University of Chicago Press, 2007.

Thomas, D., F. Witoelar, E. Frankenberg, B. Sikoki, J. Strauss, C. Sumantari, and W. Suriastini, “Cutting the
     costs of attrition: Results from the Indonesia Family Life Survey,” Journal of Development
     Economics, 2012, 98, 108–123.

Waterlow, J., R. Buzina, W. Keller, J. Lane, M. Nichman, and J. Tanner, “The Presentation and Use of
      Height and Weight Data for Comparing the Nutritional Status of Groups of Children Under the Age
      of Ten Years," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 1977, 55, 489-498.

Witoelar, F. “Risk sharing within the extended family: Evidence from the Indonesia Family Life Survey,"
      Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2013, 62.1:65–94.




                                                     20
Figure 1: Constructing Extended Families in the Indonesia Family Life Survey




Notes: This figure depicts how extended families are identified in the IFLS. Each box represents an IFLS household. Starting from a baseline
household in the first wave of IFLS in 1993, when children split-off and form their own households they are followed and become part of the IFLS
sample, as shown in Panel B. When spouses join the newly formed households, as in Panel C, we obtain information on the spouses and their new
non-IFLS relatives, but only the spouse is part of the IFLS sample. Our analytical sample consists of the young children shown in Panel D and
their families in IFLS4.
                            Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                            Sample
                                                                                 Attended
                               All Children Height-for-Age Cognitive Score
                                                                               Kindergarten
                              (Birth - 16 yrs) (Birth - 6 yrs)    (7 - 16 yrs)
                                                                                (6 - 14 yrs)
Outcomes
Height-for-Age (z-score)                           -1.14
                                                  (0.02)
Cognitive Score (%)                                                69.6
                                                                  (0.21)
Attended Kindergarten (%)                                                          50.8
                                                                                  (0.58)
Illiquid Assets of […]*
Household                        6660.5          6376.0           6946.2          6801.4
                                 (110.9)         (165.8)          (151.3)         (151.4)
Family                           9431.8          11312.4          7845.2          8774.0
                                 (184.8)         (297.5)          (231.8)         (256.1)
Liquid Assets of […]*
Household                        1928.8           1949.1          1902.7          1854.7
                                 (38.9)           (60.3)          (51.5)          (49.7)
Family                           2579.5           3027.9          2148.9          2355.9
                                 (47.3)           (74.6)          (59.5)          (64.7)
Mother                            762.8            680.6           831.3           822.4
                                 (17.7)           (22.1)          (27.1)          (26.8)
Father                            872.2            821.5           904.2           907.9
                                 (22.9)           (37.1)          (28.2)          (29.9)
Grandmother                       616.7            697.4           480.5           510.8
                                 (19.9)           (29.4)          (23.7)          (22.7)
Grandfather                       799.8            885.6           657.9           658.3
                                 (35.3)           (51.5)          (42.2)          (37.7)
Additional Controls
Age                                7.37            2.88           11.26            9.79
                                  (0.04)          (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)
Female                             0.48            0.48            0.49            0.48
                                  (0.00)          (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)

Co-reside with Mother              0.90            0.96            0.85            0.87
                                  (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)
Co-reside with Father              0.81            0.87            0.76            0.78
                                  (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)          (0.00)
Household Size                     4.98            4.86            5.08            5.06
                                  (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)
Family Size                       11.16           11.94           10.45           10.86
                                  (0.05)          (0.08)          (0.07)          (0.07)
Age of […]
Mother                             34.1            29.8            37.9            36.4
                                  (0.07)          (0.08)          (0.08)          (0.08)
Father                             38.7            34.4            42.5            41.0
                                  (0.08)          (0.09)          (0.10)          (0.10)
Grandmother                        58.5            55.9            62.1            61.2
                                  (0.11)          (0.14)          (0.17)          (0.16)
Grandfather                        62.0            59.9            65.5            64.7
                                  (0.13)          (0.16)          (0.21)          (0.19)
Years of Education of […]
Mother                             8.03            8.96            7.26            7.56
                                  (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)
Father                             8.52            9.15            7.96            8.22
                                  (0.04)          (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)
Grandmother                        3.71            4.30            3.16            3.38
                                  (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.04)
Grandfather                        4.89            5.47            4.33            4.54
                                  (0.03)          (0.05)          (0.04)          (0.04)

Maternal Height (cm)              162.0           162.6           161.6           162.0
                                  (0.05)          (0.07)          (0.06)          (0.06)
Paternal Height (cm)              151.1           151.5           150.9           151.0
                                  (0.04)          (0.06)          (0.06)          (0.06)

Urban Household                    0.51            0.53            0.49            0.50
                                  (0.00)          (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.01)

N. Observations                   14881           6567             7727            7493
* In Rp0,000 (~ 1 USD)
                                                                                     Table 2: Empirical Results
Panel A: Model Estimates                           Family Fixed Effects                                   Household and Family Resources                            Household and Family Resources
                                                 Liquid and Illiquid Assets                                 Liquid and Illiquid Assets                                      Liquid Assets
                                            (1)             (2)               (3)                     (4)              (5)               (6)                    (7)              (8)               (9)
                                         Height-        Cognitive         Attended                 Height-         Cognitive         Attended                Height-         Cognitive        Attended
                                         for-Age          Score        Kindergarten                for-Age           Score        Kindergarten               for-Age           Score       Kindergarten
Liquid Household Assets                    6.67            0.90              3.87                    8.35             1.12              4.24                   9.07             1.17              5.02
                                           (3.06)             (0.42)              (0.98)             (1.62)             (0.20)              (0.49)             (1.52)             (0.18)              (0.45)
Liquid Family Assets                                                                                  2.29               0.36               1.45                3.43               0.45               1.93
                                                                                                     (1.74)             (0.23)              (0.57)             (1.62)             (0.22)              (0.52)

Illiquid Household Assets                  1.59               -0.40               0.90                3.42               0.28               2.38
                                           (3.22)             (0.44)              (1.01)             (1.81)             (0.23)              (0.55)
Illiquid Family Assets                                                                                1.86               0.27               0.56
                                                                                                     (1.28)             (0.16)              (0.46)
Family Fixed Effects                        Y                  Y                   Y                  N                   N                  N                  N                   N                  N
N. Observations                            6567               7727                7493               6567                7727               7493               6567                7727               7493
Panel B
B1. Combined Effects
Household liquid plus illiquid             8.25                0.49               4.77               11.77               1.40               6.63
  coefficient (std. error)                 (3.62)             (0.55)              (1.26)             (1.98)             (0.25)              (0.59)

B2. Equality of Asset Effects (p-values)
Household liquid and illiquid       0.32                       0.05               0.05                0.08               0.02               0.03
Liquid Assets                                                                                         0.02               0.02               0.00                0.02               0.02               0.00
Illiquid Assets                                                                                       0.51               0.97               0.01
All Liquid and Illiquid                                                                               0.01               0.01               0.00

B3. Coefficient Ratios: Household to family […]
Liquid Assets                                                                                         3.64               3.07               2.92                2.65               2.60               2.60
                                                                                                     (2.92)             (2.09)              (1.23)             (1.41)             (1.40)              (0.78)
Illiquid Assets                                                                                       1.84               1.03               4.24
                                                                                                     (1.68)             (1.06)              (3.64)

Panel C: Collective Model Nonlinear Wald Tests (p-values)                                          p-values                                                                                          p-values
                                         Test of equality of ratios between […] and […] Liquid Assets Illiquid Assets                                                                            Liquid Assets
                                         Height-for-Age Cognitive Score                     0.86            0.66                                                                                     0.98
                                         Height-for-Age Attend Kindergarten                 0.79            0.50                                                                                     0.97
                                         Cognitive Score Attend Kindergarten                0.96            0.26                                                                                     0.99

                                                                           All Ratios                                    0.99               0.68                                                      0.99
Notes: Panel A: All regressions include assets in log form, as well as controls for gender, age, household and family size and composition, parental education, age and gender of the household and family head
and location as described in the text. Standard errors in parenthesis account for clustering at the family level. Panel B1 reports the sum of household liquid and illiquid assets effects and its standard error;
panel B2 reports p-values for tests of the equality of asset effects in each row; panel B3 reports ratios and their standard errors calculated using the delta method. Panel C: The p-values correspond to results
from nonlinear Wald tests where the null is Pareto efficiency. These tests compare the equivalence of the ratios shown in Panel B3 for the outcome pairs in each row.
                               Table 3: Individual Level Results
Panel A: Model Estimates                                    Individual Resources - Liquid Assets
                                                 (1)                        (2)                           (3)
                                                                                                       Attended
                                        Height-for-Age               Cognitive Score                 Kindergarten

Mother's Assets                                 4.65                          0.82                          2.76
                                                (1.82)                       (0.21)                        (0.58)
Father's Assets                                 2.81                          0.31                          2.12
                                                (1.80)                       (0.21)                        (0.57)

Grandmother's Assets                            2.18                          0.10                          1.10
                                                (1.92)                       (0.31)                        (0.75)
Grandfather's Assets                            0.20                          0.05                         -0.23
                                                (2.01)                       (0.34)                        (0.87)

Rest of Household Assets                        3.28                          0.29                          0.99
                                                (1.51)                       (0.16)                        (0.43)
Rest of Family Assets                           3.06                          0.38                          1.99
                                                (1.71)                       (0.21)                        (0.51)

N. Observations                    6567                                       7727                         7493
Panel B: Coefficient Ratios relative to Mothers
Mother                             1.00                                       1.00                          1.00
                                                   -                            -                             -
Father                                          0.60                          0.38                          0.77
                                                (0.56)                       (0.33)                        (0.33)

Grandmother                                      0.47                         0.12                          0.40
                                               (0.46)                        (0.38)                        (0.28)
Grandfather                                      0.04                         0.06                         -0.08
                                               (0.43)                        (0.42)                        (0.32)

Rest of Household                               0.71                          0.36                          0.36
                                                (0.45)                       (0.21)                        (0.17)
Rest of Family                                  0.66                          0.47                          0.72
                                                (0.46)                       (0.29)                        (0.25)

Panel C: Collective Model Nonlinear Wald Tests (p-values)

                                     Equality of all ratios between […] and […]                            p-value
                                     Height-for-Age          Cognitive Score                                0.99
                                     Height-for-Age          Attend Kindergarten                            0.99

                                     Cognitive Score              Attend Kindergarten                       0.99

                                                                  All Ratios                                0.96
Notes: Each regression includes log liquid assets at the individual level and controls for the age and gender of the child,
household and family size and composition, age and education of parents and grandparents, and location as described in the
text. Standard errors in parentheses account for clustering at the family level. Panel B reports coefficient ratios and their
standard errors with the effect of mother's liquid assets serving as the denominator. Panel C reports p-values from nonlinear
Wald tests across all ratio combinations of the outcome pairs in each row.
            Appendix Table 1
             Sample Description

Number of unique […]
Children (birth - 16 yrs)         14881

Households                        8480

Families                          5283

Mothers                           8438

Fathers                           7809

Grandmothers                      5448

Grandfathers                      4386
  Appendix Table 2: Individual Level Tests of the Collective Model (p-values)
                                                                   Outcome Pair
                                                       Height-for-Age and Cognitive Score
                                         Father        Grandmother Grandfather Rest of HH Rest of Fam
Mother                                    0.81             0.89       0.81        0.41        0.91
Father                                                     0.77       0.83        0.33        0.87
Grandmother                                                           0.80        0.70        0.85
Grandfather                                                                       0.76        0.82
Rest of Household                                                                             0.38
Equality among parents
and grandparents (6                                                             0.99
ratios)
Equality among all ratios
                                                                                                                     0.99
(15 ratios)


                                               Height-for-Age and Attended Kindergarten
                                         Father Grandmother Grandfather Rest of HH Rest of Fam
Mother                                    0.72       0.56        0.97        0.45       0.71
Father                                               0.74        0.95        0.86       0.93
Grandmother                                                      0.91        0.80       0.70
Grandfather                                                                  0.93       0.95
Rest of Household                                                                       0.76
Equality among parents
and grandparents (6                                                             0.99
ratios)
Equality among all ratios
                                                                                                                     0.99
(15 ratios)


                                                   Cognitive Score and Attended Kindergarten
                                         Father      Grandmother Grandfather Rest of HH Rest of Fam
Mother                                    0.41            0.55        0.76        0.99       0.51
Father                                                    0.86        0.81        0.49       0.78
Grandmother                                                           0.82        0.57       0.76
Grandfather                                                                       0.77       0.79
Rest of Household                                                                            0.63
Equality among parents
and grandparents (6                                                             0.97
ratios)
Equality among all ratios
                                                                                                                     0.99
(15 ratios)

Overarching Test
Equality across all ratios,
                                                                                                                     0.96
all outcomes (45 ratios)

Notes: Table reports p-values from nonlinear Wald tests of Pareto efficiency. Each cell is the p-value comparing the ratio of
marginal effects for assets owned by the individual listed in the row with the individual in the column. For example, 0.81 is the
p-value for the test of equivalence between the ratio of effects of assets controlled by a child's mother to their father for
height-for-age and cognitive scores. Also included in each panel are tests of equivalence of ratios for parents and
grandparents, and the test of equality of all fifteen ratios in the panel. Rest of HH and Rest of Fam stand for Rest of
Household and Family. The overarching test at the bottom of the table is for equality of all ratios across all outcomes (45 total
ratios). Tests are conducted allowing for clustering at the family level.
