                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        GOVERNMENT SPENDING MULTIPLIERS IN GOOD TIMES AND IN BAD:
                  EVIDENCE FROM U.S. HISTORICAL DATA

                                          Valerie A. Ramey
                                           Sarah Zubairy

                                        Working Paper 20719
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20719


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




We are grateful to Roy Allen, Alan Auerbach, Graham Elliott, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Jim Hamilton,
Òscar Jordà, Michael Owyang, Garey Ramey, Tatevik Sekhposyan, Harald Uhlig, participants at the
Hallfest and the NBER EFG conference, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Bocconi, EUI, EIEF,
Rice, University of Arizona, LSE, University of Kentucky and University of Houston for very helpful
suggestions. We thank Kate Vermann and Michelle Ramey for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Valerie A. Ramey and Sarah Zubairy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Government Spending Multipliers in Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from U.S. Historical
Data
Valerie A. Ramey and Sarah Zubairy
NBER Working Paper No. 20719
November 2014
JEL No. E52,E62,N12

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether U.S. government spending multipliers differ according to two potentially
important features of the economy: (1) the amount of slack and (2) whether interest rates are near
the zero lower bound. We shed light on these questions by analyzing new quarterly historical U.S.
data covering multiple large wars and deep recessions. We estimate a state-dependent model in which
impulse responses and multipliers depend on the average dynamics of the economy in each state.
We find no evidence that multipliers differ by the amount of slack in the economy. These results are
robust to many alternative specifications. The results are less clear for the zero lower bound. For
the entire sample, there is no evidence of elevated multipliers near the zero lower bound. When World
War II is excluded, some point estimates suggest higher multipliers during the zero lower bound state,
but they are not statistically different from the normal state. Our results imply that, contrary to recent
conjecture, government spending multipliers were not necessarily higher than average during the Great
Recession.


Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
VRAMEY@UCSD.EDU

Sarah Zubairy
Texas A&M University
szubairy@tamu.edu
1 Introduction
What is the multiplier on government purchases? The policy debates during the Great Reces-
sion led to an outpouring of research on this question. Most of studies have found estimates
of modest multipliers in aggregate data, often below unity. If multipliers are indeed this low,
they suggest that increases in government purchases are unlikely to stimulate private activity
and that fiscal consolidations that involve spending decreases are unlikely to do much harm
to the private sector.
    Most of the estimates are based on averages for a particular country over a particular his-
torical period. Because there is no scope for controlled, randomized trials on countries, all
estimates of aggregate government multipliers are necessarily dependent on historical hap-
penstance. Theory tells us that details such as the persistence of spending changes, how they
are financed, how monetary policy reacts, and the tightness of the labor market can signifi-
cantly aﬀect the magnitude of the multipliers. Unfortunately, the data do not present us with
clean natural experiments that can answer these questions. While the recent U.S. stimulus
package was purely deficit financed and undertaken during a period of high unemployment
and accommodative monetary policy, it was enacted in response to a weak economy and
hence any aggregate estimates are subject to simultaneous equations bias.
    During the last several years, the literature has begun to explore whether estimates of
government spending multipliers vary depending on circumstances. One strand of this liter-
ature considers the possibility that multipliers are diﬀerent during recessions (e.g. Auerbach
and Gorodnichenko (2012), Bachmann and Sims (2012), Baum et al. (2012), Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2013), Fazzari et al. (2013) and Riera-Crichton et al. (2014)). Another
strand of the literature considers how monetary policy aﬀects government spending multipli-
ers. New Keynesian DSGE models show that when interest rates are stuck at the zero lower
bound, multipliers can be higher than in normal times (e.g. Cogan et al. (2010), Christiano
et al. (2011), Coenen and et al. (2012)).
    This paper contributes to the empirical literature by investigating whether government
spending multipliers diﬀer according to two potentially important features of the economy:
(1) the amount of slack in the economy and (2) whether interest rates are near the zero lower
bound.1 Extending the initial analysis in Owyang et al. (2013), we exploit the fact that the
entire 20th Century contains potentially richer information than the post-WWII data that has
been the focus of most of the recent research. We create a new quarterly data set for the U.S.

   1. We will use government "spending" and "purchases" interchangeably. It should be noted that our multi-
pliers apply only to government purchases, not government transfers.


                                                    2
extending back to 1889. This sample includes episodes of huge variations in government
spending, wide fluctuations in unemployment, prolonged periods near the zero lower bound
of interest rates, and a variety of tax responses.
    This paper extends the small, but growing, literature on state dependence of multipliers
in two other ways. First, none of the existing papers that estimate state dependent models
consider the zero lower bound on interest as a state.2 Thus, our paper is the first to analyze
state-dependence involving the zero lower bound. Second, we contribute to state-dependent
multiplier literature by highlighting some key methodological issues that arise. In particular,
we show that some of the most widely-cited findings of higher multipliers during recessions
are due to special details of the calculation of multipliers and are not robust to plausible
generalizations.
    Using Jordà’s (2005) local projection method, which we find to be a more robust method-
ology, we find no evidence that the multiplier on government purchases is higher during high
unemployment states. Most estimates of the multiplier are between 0.6 and 1. We perform
extensive robustness checks with respect to our measures of state, sample period, identifi-
cation method and the behavior of taxes and find little change in the estimates. We demon-
strate that most of the diﬀerences in conclusions between our work and that of Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko (2012) lie in subtle, yet crucial, assumptions underlying the construction of
impulse response functions on which the multipliers are based. In contrast to linear mod-
els, where the calculation of impulse response functions is a straightforward undertaking,
constructing impulse response functions in nonlinear models is fraught with complications.
    We also find little evidence that the multiplier is higher at the zero lower bound. The
only case in which the multiplier noticeably exceeds unity in the zero lower bound state is
when we exclude the rationing periods of WWII. However, the estimates are imprecise and
not robust to simple generalizations of the specification.
    The paper proceeds as follows. We begin by discussing the data construction in Sec-
tion 2. In Section 3 we introduce the econometric methodology. In Section 4, we present our
measures of slack and then present estimates of a model in which multipliers are allowed to
vary according to the amount of slack in the economy. We first present baseline results using
our new data and methodology. We next conduct various robustness checks and explain why
our results are diﬀerent from the leading estimates in the literature. We also explore possi-
ble explanations for our results, such as the behavior of taxes. Section 5 tests theories that

  2. Only two papers have investigated the aggregate multiplier at the zero lower bound, Ramey (2011) for
the U.S. and Crafts and Mills (2012) for the U.K. Both of these papers simply estimated multipliers over an
episode of the zero lower bound rather than estimating state-dependent models.


                                                    3
predict that multipliers should be greater when interest rates are at the zero lower bound and
the final section concludes.


2 Data Description
A key contribution of the paper is the construction of a new data set that spans historical
periods that involve potentially informative movements of the key variables. In particular,
we construct quarterly data from 1889 through 2013 for the U.S. We choose to estimate
our model using quarterly data rather than annual data because agents often react quickly
to news about government spending and the state of the economy can change abruptly.3
The historical series include real GDP, the GDP deflator, government purchases, federal
government receipts, population, the unemployment rate, interest rates, and defense news.
    The data appendix contains full details, but we highlight some of the features of the data
here. For the post-WWII sample, we use available published quarterly series. For the earlier
periods, we follow Gordon and Krenn (2010) by using various higher frequency series to
interpolate existing annual series.4 In most cases, we use the proportional Denton procedure
which results in series that average up to the annual series.
    The annual real GDP data combine the series from Historical Statistics of the U.S. (Carter
et al. (2006)) for 1889 through 1928 and the NIPA data from 1929 to the present. The annual
data are interpolated with Balke and Gordon’s (1986) quarterly real GNP series for 1889-
1938 and with quarterly NIPA nominal GNP data adjusted using the CPI, for 1939-1946.
We use similar procedures to create the GDP deflator.5
    Real government spending is derived by dividing nominal government purchases by the
GDP deflator. Government purchases include all federal, state, and local purchases, but
exclude transfer payments. We splice Kendrick’s (1961) annual series starting in 1889 to
annual NIPA data starting in 1929. Following Gordon and Krenn (2010), we use monthly
federal outlay series from the NBER Macrohistory database to interpolate annual govern-
ment spending from 1889 to 1938. We use the 1954 quarterly NIPA data from 1939-1946 to
interpolate the modern series. We follow a similar procedure for federal receipts.


  3. For example, the unemployment rate fell from over 10 percent to 5 percent between mid-1941 and mid-
1942.
  4. Gordon and Krenn (2010) use similar methods to construct quarterly data back to 1919. We constructed
our own series rather than using theirs in order to include WWI in our analysis.
  5. We also checked the robustness of our results by using alternative series constructed by Christina Romer.
See Romer (1999) for a discussion of her data.


                                                      4
    Figure 1 shows the logarithm of real per capita government purchases and GDP. We in-
clude vertical lines indicating major military events, such as WWI, WWII and the Korean
War. It is clear from the graph that both series are quite noisy in the pre-1939 period. This
behavior stems from the interpolator series, especially in the case of government spending.
Part of this behavior owes to the fact that the monthly data used for interpolation include gov-
ernment transfers and are on a cash (rather than accrual) basis. Fortunately, the measurement
errors are less of an issue for us because we identify the shocks using narrative methods.6
    The unemployment series is constructed by interpolating Weir’s (1992) annual unem-
ployment series, adjusted for emergency worker employment.7 Before 1948 we use the
monthly unemployment series available from the NBER Macrohistory database back to April
1929 to interpolate. Before 1929, we interpolate Weir’s (1992) annual unemployment series
using business cycle dates and the additive version of Denton’s method. Our comparison
of the series produced using this method with the actual quarterly series in the post-WWII
period reveal that they are surprisingly close.
    Because it is important to identify a shock that is not only exogenous to the state of
the economy but is also unanticipated, we use narrative methods to extend Ramey’s (2011)
defense news series. This news series focuses on changes in government spending that are
linked to political and military events, since these changes are most likely to be independent
of the state of the economy. Moreover, changes in defense spending are anticipated long
before they actually show up in the NIPA accounts. For a benchmark neoclassical model,
the key eﬀect of government spending is through the wealth eﬀect. Thus, the news series
is constructed as changes in the expected present discounted value of government spending.
The narrative underlying the series is available in Ramey (2014). The particular form of the
variable used as the shock is the nominal value divided by one-quarter lag of nominal GDP.
We display this series in later sections when we construct the states so that one can see the
juxtaposition.




   6. Because our shock is constructed independently from news sources and we regress both government
spending and GDP on the shock and use the ratio of sums of coeﬃcients, our method is much less sensitive
to measurement error in any of the series. See the appendix of Ramey (2011) and footnote 14 of Mertens and
Ravn (2013) for a discussion.
   7. Because we use the unemployment series to measure slack, we follow the traditional method and include
emergency workers in the unemployment rate.


                                                    5
3 Econometric Methodology

3.1 Model Estimation Using Local Projection
We use Jordà’s (2005) local projection method to estimate impulse responses and multipliers.
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013) were the first to use this technique to estimate state-
dependent fiscal models, employing it in their analysis of OECD panel data.8 The Jordà
method simply requires estimation of a series of regressions for each horizon h for each
variable. The linear model looks as follows:



(1)        xt+h = αh + ψh (L)yt−1 + βh shockt + quartic trend + εt+h , for h = 0, 1, 2, ...

x is the variable of interest, y is a vector of control variables, ψh (L) is a polynomial in the
lag operator, and shock is the identified shock. The shock is identified as the defense news
variable scaled by lagged nominal GDP. Our vector of baseline control variables, y, contains
logs of real per capita GDP and government spending. In addition, y includes lags of the
news variable to control for any serial correlation in the news variable. ψ(L) is a polynomial
of order 2.9 As discussed in Francis and Ramey (2009), it is potentially important to include
a quadratic trend in the post-WWII period because of slow-moving demographics. Since
our current sample is twice as long, we include a quartic trend. The coeﬃcient βh gives the
response of x at time t + h to the shock at time t. Thus, one constructs the impulse responses
as a sequence of the βh ’s estimated in a series of single regressions for each horizon. This
method stands in contrast to the standard method of estimating the parameters of the VAR for
horizon 0 and then using them to iterate forward to construct the impulse response functions.
    The local projection method is easily adapted to estimating a state-dependent model. For
the model that allows state-dependence, we estimate a set of regressions for each horizon h
as follows:


                    [                                  ]
(2)      xt+h = It−1 αA,h + ψA,h (L)yt−1 + βA,h shockt
                            [                                 ]
                +(1 − It−1 ) αB,h + ψB,h (L)yt−1 + βB,h shockt + quartic trend + εt+h .

   8. Stock and Watson (2007) also explore the properties of this method for forecasting.
   9. BIC favors 2 lags for both the government spending and GDP equations. AIC also favors 2 lags for the
GDP equation, but favors 4 lags for government spending. We decided to go with 2 lags for both since the
results are similar to those with 4 lags.


                                                    6
I is a dummy variable that indicates the state of the economy when the shock hits. We allow
all of the coeﬃcients of the model (other than deterministic trends) to vary according to the
state of the economy. Thus, we are allowing the forecast of xt+h to diﬀer according to the
state of the economy when the shock hit. The only complication associated with the Jordà
method is the serial correlation in the error terms induced by the successive leading of the
dependent variable. Thus, we use the Newey-West correction for our standard errors (Newey
and West (1987)).
     Apart from the advantages specific to estimating state-dependent multipliers that we will
discuss in the next section, the Jordà method has the advantage that it does not constrain
the shape of the impulse response function, so it is less sensitive to mis-specification of the
SVAR. Second, it does not require that all variables enter all equations, so one can use a
more parsimonious specification. A third advantage is that the left-hand-side variables do
not have to be in the same form as the right-hand-side variables. As we will explain below,
this is an important advantage over a standard SVAR in this particular context.
     The Jordà method does not uniformly dominate the standard SVAR method for calculat-
ing impulse responses, though. First, because it does not impose any restrictions that link
the impulse responses at h and h + 1, the estimates are often erratic because of the loss of
eﬃciency. Second, as the horizon increases, one loses observations from the end of the sam-
ple. Third, the impulse responses sometimes display oscillations at longer horizons. Ramey
(2012) compares impulse responses estimated using Jordà’s method to both a standard VAR
and a dynamic simulation (such as the one used by Romer and Romer (2010)), based on mil-
itary news shocks. The results are qualitatively similar for the first 16 quarters, though the
responses using the Jordà method tend to be more erratic. However, at longer horizons, the
Jordà method tends to produce statistically significant oscillations not observed in the other
two methods. Since we are interested in the shorter-run responses, the long-run estimates are
not a concern for us.


3.2 Pitfalls in Calculating Multipliers
We now highlight two potential problems that aﬀect multipliers computed not only from
nonlinear VARs but also from all of the standard linear SVARs used in the literature.
    The first problem concerns the the conversion of elasticities to multipliers. The usual
practice in the literature is to use the log of variables, such as real GDP, government spend-
ing, and taxes. However, the estimated impulse response functions do not directly reveal
the government spending multiplier because the estimated elasticities must be converted to

                                              7
dollar equivalents. Virtually all analyses using VAR methods obtain the spending multiplier
by using an ex post conversion factor based on the sample average of the ratio of GDP to
government spending, Y/G.
     We first noticed a potential problem with this method when we extended our sample back
in time. In the post-WWII sample, Y/G varies between 4 and 7, with a mean of 5. In our full
sample from 1889-2013, Y/G varies from 2 to 24 and with a mean close to 8. We realized
that we could estimate the same elasticity of output with respect to government spending,
but derive much higher multipliers simply because the mean of Y/G was so much higher.
     To determine whether using ex post conversion factors can lead to inflated multipliers,
we conducted a test based on the following point made by Ramey (2013). If the multiplier
exceeds one, then it must be the case that private spending Y − G rises when G rises. Thus,
one can compare the multipliers estimated the standard way to the response of real private
spending to see if there is a contradiction.
     To conduct this test, we first estimate a trivariate SVAR with military news, log real per
capita government spending, and log real GDP, using four lags and quartic trend, on data
from 1889 - 2013. The estimated elasticity at 2 year horizon is around 0.20 (based on the
ratio of the cumulative response of ln(Y) to the cumulative response of ln(G)). We then
multiply the estimated elasticity by the average of Y/G for the full sample, and obtain an
implied multiplier of 1.56. To conduct the comparison, we next estimate a model in which
we substitute the log of real private spending for log real GDP, and compute the impulse
response functions (using the standard method). These responses show that private spending
falls when government spending rises, and specifically has a negative response at the 2 year
horizon. Thus, these results imply a multiplier that is less than unity. It appears that the
practice of backing out multipliers using ex post conversion factors can lead to upward biased
multiplier estimates in some situations.
     In order to avoid this bias, we follow Hall (2009) and Barro and Redlick (2011) and
convert GDP and government spending changes to the same units before the estimation. In
particular, our x variables on the left-hand-side of Equation 2 are defined as (Yt+h − Yt−1 )/Yt−1
and (Gt+h − Gt−1 )/Yt−1 . The first variable can be rewritten as:

                                 Yt+h − Yt−1
                                             ≈ (lnYt+h − lnYt−1 )
                                    Yt−1
and hence is analogous to the standard VAR specification. The second variable can be rewrit-
ten as:



                                                8
                            Gt+h − Gt−1                        Gt−1
                                        ≈ (lnGt+h − lnGt−1 ) .
                               Yt−1                            Yt−1
Thus, this variable converts the percent changes to dollar changes using the value of G/Y at
each point in time, rather than using sample averages. This means that the coeﬃcients from
the Y equations are in the same units as those from the G equations, which is required for
constructing multipliers.
    It would be diﬃcult to use this transformation in a standard SVAR, since all the variables
on the left and right must be of the same form. It is easy to use it in the Jordà framework
since the variables on the right side of the equation are control variables that do not have to
be the same as the left-hand-side variables.
    An alternative transformation is the one used by Gordon and Krenn (2010). Instead of
taking logarithms of the variables, they divide all variables by an estimate of potential GDP.
The advantage of their transformation is that the variables can be used in a VAR. We will test
the robustness of our results to this alternative transformation.
    The second pitfall concerns the definition of the multiplier in a dynamic setting. The
original Blanchard and Perotti (2002) paper defined the multiplier as the ratio of the peak of
the output response to the initial government spending shock. Numerous papers have used
this same definition, or variations, such as the average of the output response to the initial
government shock (e.g. Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2013)). As argued by Mountford and Uhlig (2009), Uhlig (2010) and Fisher and Peters
(2010), multipliers should instead be calculated as the integral of the output response divided
by the integral government spending response. The integral multipliers address the relevant
policy question because they measure the cumulative GDP gain relative to the cumulative
government spending during a given period. As we will discuss later, the Blanchard-Perotti
method tends to bias up the estimates of multipliers relative to the cumulative method.


4 Multipliers During Times of Slack
The original Keynesian notion that government spending is a more powerful stimulus during
times of high unemployment and low resource utilization permeates undergraduate textbooks
and policy debates. Other than the zero lower bound papers, which make a distinct argument
that we will discuss below, there is only a limited literature analyzing rigorous models that
produces fiscal multipliers that are higher during times of high unemployment. Michaillat
(2014) is one of the few examples, but his model applies only to government spending on

                                              9
public employment.10 Thus, there is still a gap between Keynes’ original notion and modern
theories.
    In this section, we analyze the issue empirically. Section 4.1 discusses our measure of
slack and shows graphs of the data and periods of slack. Section 4.2 presents the main
results. The later sections conduct robustness checks and analyzes in detail why our results
are diﬀerent from Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012).


4.1 Measurement of Slack States
There are various potential measures of slack, such as output gaps, the unemployment rate,
or capacity utilization. Based on data availability and the fact that it is generally accepted
as a key measure of underutilized resources, we use the unemployment rate as our indicator
of slack. We define an economy to be in a slack state when the unemployment rate is above
some threshold. For our baseline results, we use 6.5 as the threshold based on the U.S.
Federal Reserve’s choice of that value as a threshold in its recent policy announcements. We
also conduct various robustness checks using diﬀerent thresholds.
    Note that our use of the unemployment rate to define the state is diﬀerent from using
NBER recessions or Auerbach and Gorodnichenko’s (2012) moving average of GDP growth.
The latter two measures, which are highly correlated, indicate periods in which the economy
is moving from its peak to its trough. A typical recession encompasses periods in which
unemployment is rising from its low point to its high point, and hence is not an indicator of
a state of slack. Only half of the quarters that are oﬃcial recessions are also periods of high
unemployment.
    Figure 2 shows the unemployment rate and the military spending news shocks. The
largest military spending news shocks are distributed across periods with a variety of un-
employment rates. For example, the largest news shocks about WWI and the Korean War
occurred when the unemployment rate was below the threshold. In contrast, the initial large
news shocks about WWII occurred when the unemployment rate was still very high.
    How informative are our military news shocks for changes in government spending?
Because our method for estimation can be reinterpreted as an instrumental variables regres-
sion, we can answer this question by conducting tests for weak instruments. According to
Staiger and Stock (1997), a first-stage F-statistic below 10 can indicate that the instrument
   10. Numerous papers explore theoretically the possibility of state-dependent multipliers that depend on
alternative states, such as the debt-to-GDP ratio, the condition of the financial system, and exchange rate
regimes. For example, see Corsetti et al. (2012) for a brief survey of this literature, as well as Canzoneri et al.
(2013) and Sims and Wolﬀ (2013).


                                                       10
may have low relevance.11 Figure 3 shows the first-stage F-statistics.12 The figure shows
these for the full historical sample, the historical sample excluding World War II, and the
post-WWII sample, and splits each of these according to whether the unemployment rate is
above 6.5 percent. In all cases, the F-statistics are very low at short horizons. This is to be
expected since the entire point of Ramey (2011) is that the news about government spending
occurs at least several quarters before the government spending actually rises. For the linear
model, the F-statistic is high for many horizons in the post-WWII period, but for only several
horizons in the historical samples. In contrast, the F-statistic is above 10 for the high unem-
ployment state for most horizons in the full historical sample, but is low at most horizons in
the historical sample that excludes WWII, and is always very low for the post-WWII period.
The results for the low unemployment rate state look similar to the linear case, although the
F-statistics are lower in the full historical sample. These results support our initial conjec-
ture that the post-WWII sample was not suﬃciently rich to be able to distinguish multipliers
across states using the military news instrument.13 They also suggest caution about estimates
of multipliers during slack states when World War II is excluded.


4.2 Baseline Results for Slack States
We now present the main results of our analysis using the full historical sample and the local
projections method. We first consider results from the linear model, which assumes that
multipliers are invariant to the state of the economy. The top panel of Figure 4 shows the
responses of government spending and output to a military news shock in the linear model
using the U.S. data. The bands are 95 percent confidence bands and are based on Newey-
West standard errors that account for the serial correlation induced in regressions when the
horizon h > 0. After a shock to news, output and government spending begin to rise and
peak at around 12 quarters.
    In the linear model, the multipliers are derived from the estimated βh ’s from the set of Y
and G regressions. We compute multipliers over two horizons: the ratio of the cumulative

   11. Olea and Pflueger (2013) show, however, that the thresholds can be higher when the errors are serially
correlated.
   12. The F-statistics are based on the exclusion of current news (scaled by the previous quarter’s nominal
GDP) in the regression of the government spending variable at horizon h on current news, and two lags each of
news, log GDP and log government spending and a quartic trend.
   13. In contrast, the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) identification scheme is almost guaranteed to produce
shocks with high F-statistics at the first few horizons since the shock is identified as the part of current govern-
ment spending not explained by the other lagged variables in the SVAR. However, we find that the F-statistics
for this shock fall to very low values for horizons beyond the first year.


                                                        11
responses of GDP and government spending through two years, and the cumulative responses
through four years.14 It should be noted, however, that by focusing on the shorter horizons,
we are most likely neglecting the negative eﬀects due to the eventual increase in distortionary
tax, as highlighted by Drautzburg and Uhlig (2011). As indicated in the first column of the
top panel of Table 1, the implied multipliers are below one and range from 0.7 to 0.96. The
estimates are not statistically diﬀerent from one at the five percent significance level.15
    The main question addressed in this paper is whether the multipliers are state-dependent.
The impulse response functions and multipliers in the state-dependent case are derived from
the estimated βA,h and βB,h for Y and G in Equation 2. The bottom panel of Figure 4 shows
the responses when we estimate the state-dependent model where we distinguish between
periods with and without slack in the economy. Similar to many pre-existing studies (e.g.
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012)), we find that output responds more robustly during
high unemployment states. Note that government spending also has a stronger response
during those high slack periods. Consequently, the larger output response during the high
unemployment state does not imply a larger government spending multiplier. In fact, as
shown in the second and third columns of Table 1, the implied 2 and 4 year multipliers are
slightly lower during the high unemployment state. In no case do we find a statistically
diﬀerent multiplier across states.
    One might worry that the multipliers are diﬀerent at other horizons. Figure 5 shows the
cumulative multiplier for each horizon from impact to 5 years out. The top graph shows
the linear model multipliers and the bottom graph shows the state dependent multipliers. In
the linear case, the cumulative multiplier in the first year is above one but then falls. The
reason for the higher initial multipliers after a news shock is given by Ramey (2011): output
responds immediately to news about future government spending increases. Since output
rises more quickly than government spending, the calculated multiplier looks large.16 The
bottom graph shows that whatever the values, the multipliers in the high unemployment state
are below or equal to those in the low unemployment state.
    To summarize, in our linear model we find multipliers that are less than 1 in all cases

                                                                       ∑M
                                                                            ∆Y
  14. To further clarify, the cumulative multipliers are constructed as ∑Mi=1 ∆Gi for M = 8 and 16, where ∆
                                                                         i=1    i
denotes the diﬀerence between the path conditional on the shock versus no shock.
  15. The standard errors are computed by estimating all of the regressions jointly as one panel regression
and using the Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors to account for correlations in the error terms. We
implement this estimation in Stata, using xtscc followed by nlcom, which uses the delta method to analyze
functions of parameters (Hoechle (2007)).
  16. When we instead use Blanchard-Perotti SVAR shocks (which do not account for news), we find that
multipliers are close to zero in the first year.


                                                    12
(beyond the first couple of quarters). Considering state dependence, we find no evidence of
larger multipliers in the periods of slack, and multipliers vary between 0.8 and 1.


4.3 Robustness
Our baseline results suggest that there is no diﬀerence in multipliers across slack states.
These results are potentially sensitive to the numerous specification choices we made that
were not guided by theory. Thus, in this section we explore the sensitivity of our findings to
these choices.
    We first investigate the impact of using a diﬀerent interpolation method for the data.
Recall that our underlying interpolators were quite volatile and led to a lot of jumps in the
early data. To investigate the impact, we create alternative data that uses linear interpolation
of the annual data in the pre-WWII period. When we re-estimate the model, we find slightly
lower multipliers on average, and no diﬀerence in multipliers across states of the economy.
These results are shown in the first panel of Table 2.
    We included the quartic trend in our equations to capture low frequency demographics,
such as the Baby Boom. Since times series estimates can be sensitive to trends, we investi-
gate the impact of omitting the quartic trend in our model. As shown in the second panel of
Table 2, this specification produces slightly lower multipliers, but no diﬀerence in multipliers
across states of the economy.
    We also consider how the results change when we use Gordon and Krenn’s (2010) trans-
formation, which divides all variables by potential GDP.17 This robustness check also tests
whether cyclicality of Yt−1 can lead to biases in the state-dependent estimates when we use
the Hall-Barro-Redlick transformation.18 As the table shows, the results are very similar to
our baseline.
    We chose our threshold unemployment rate as 6.5 percent in the baseline specification,
but it might be a concern that we are not allowing for the possibility of state-dependence
that might arise only for a higher degree of slack in the economy. The third panel in Table
2 shows that when we choose the threshold for the unemployment rate to be higher than
8 percent, our main results are still preserved where there is no evidence of diﬀerence in
multipliers across states.

   17. See the data appendix for details on how real potential GDP was constructed. We divide all variables by
current real potential GDP. The news variable requires a nominal quantity in the denominator, so we multiply
real potential by the lagged actual deflator.
   18. This concern has been expressed by Yuriy Gorodnichenko in private correspondence and in his NBER
discussion.


                                                     13
    We also allow for a time-varying threshold, where we consider deviations from trend for
a Hodrick-Prescott filtered unemployment rate.19 This definition of threshold results in about
50 percent of the observations being above the threshold . As shown in Figure 6, this thresh-
old also suggests prolonged periods of slack both in the late 1890s and during the 1930s.
There is substantial evidence that the "natural rate" of unemployment displayed an inverted
U-shape in the post-WWII period, and this time-varying threshold also helps account for
this. Using this time-varying threshold, we find results in line with our baseline findings,
with multipliers typically less than one for the state-dependent case and no significant dif-
ference between the multipliers in the low unemployment state and the high unemployment
state (see Table 2).
    Next, we consider a threshold based on the moving average of output growth, as in Auer-
bach and Gorodnichenko (2012). We construct a smooth transition threshold, where we
replace the dummy variable It−1 in Equation 2 with the function F(zt ), where z is the normal-
ized 7-quarter centered moving average of output growth.20 Figure 7 shows the function F(z)
along with the NBER recessions for our full sample. Results in the bottom panel of Table 2
show that when we use this weighting function for recessionary regimes in our specification
to construct state-dependent multipliers, we still get multipliers less than one for U.S. across
both recession and expansion regimes, and do not find any evidence of higher multipliers in
expansions versus recessions.
    Another point of departure with the pre-existing literature is the fact that most of the
papers employ a shorter data sample that spans the post World War II period. As a robustness
check we limit our sample to this period, 1947-2013, and employ the Jorda local projection
method on this data set. In this shorter sub-sample too, about 30 percent of the observations
are above our baseline threshold for unemployment rate, signifying state of slack.21 As
shown in the fourth panel of Table 2, in the linear case, the multipliers for U.S. are still
smaller than 1. Looking at state-dependent multipliers, we find that the multiplier in the high
unemployment state jumps around. The 2-year integral multiplier in high unemployment
state is large and negative at -5 and the four year integral multiplier is large and positive
taking a value of 25! The reason for these jumps is that output has a negative response to

   19. We use a very high smoothing parameter of λ = 1, 000, 000, but even with this the Great Depression and
World War II have a big influence. Thus, we fit the HP filter over a split sample, 1889 - 1929 and 1947 - 2013
and linearly interpolate the small gap in trend unemployment between 1929 and 1947.
   20. We use the same definition of F(z) as Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012), which is given by F (zt−1 ) =
 exp(−γzt−1 )
1+exp(−γzt−1 ) and set γ = 3, in order to ensure that F(z) is greater than 0.8 close to 30 percent of the time for the
U.S., which lines up with the total duration of recessions during our full sample starting in 1889.
   21. When conducting this sub-sample analysis we change our baseline specification to use a quadratic trend.


                                                         14
the news shock in the high unemployment state, and the government spending response in
the high unemployment state also becomes negative after 2-3 years. Since the military news
variable has very low instrument relevance during slack periods in the post-WWII period,
the impulse responses in this state are very imprecisely estimated. Thus, it is hard to take
these state-dependent multipliers for the sub-sample seriously.
    Most of the literature that finds evidence of state-dependence in spending multipliers also
identifies government spending shocks diﬀerently. The commonly used approach is to em-
ploy Blanchard and Perotti (2002) identification scheme which is based on the assumption
that within quarter government spending does not contemporaneously respond to macroe-
conomic variables.22 Table 2 shows that when we identify the government spending shock
using Blanchard and Perotti (2002) identification scheme for our full sample, we still find
multipliers less than one in the linear and state-dependent case. Also, the multipliers are not
statistically diﬀerent across the high and low unemployment states.
    Another potential concern is the role of rationing in World War II. If consumers are
constrained in what they can buy, then the traditional Keynesian multiplier might not work
to full eﬀect. While most of the World War II period is characterized as a non-slack state by
our definition, some of the initial news shocks hit during the slack state and rationing could
potentially be depressing the multiplier during the subsequent periods. Oﬃcial rationing
did not start until 1942, but other restrictions were imposed on the U.S. economy starting
in the second half of 1941. For example, the Oﬃce of Production Management asked for
a cutback in automobile production. Gordon and Krenn (2010) carefully document various
other capacity constraints that occurred starting in the second half of 1941. In order to
determine whether our results are sensitive to the rationing period, we exclude observations
when either the dependent variable or the shock occurs in the period 1941q3 through 1945q4.
    When we exclude World War II from the sample, the multipliers are indeed a little higher
overall. In the linear case, they are 1 and 1.26 for the two and four year integral multipliers,
respectively. As the second to last panel in Table 2 shows, the multipliers are larger in the
slack and non-slack state as well, relative to our baseline. The 2-year integral multiplier
is 0.83 in high unemployment and 0.97 in low unemployment. For the four year integral,
the multiplier is slightly higher in the slack state versus low unemployment period, but the
diﬀerence is again not statistically significant. Therefore, our baseline results are robust
to the exclusion of World War II from the sample, where we find no significant diﬀerence

  22. However, this type of shock is much more sensitive to potential measurement errors given our historical
construction of quarterly government spending and GDP series and is subject to the critique that it is likely to
have been anticipated.


                                                      15
between slack and non-slack states.


4.4 Comparison to Auerbach-Gorodnichenko (2012, 2013)
Our finding that multipliers do not diﬀer across slack states stands in contrast to two of the
leading studies of state dependence, the two studies by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012,
2013). In this section, we explain the main source of the diﬀerent results.
    We first compare our results to Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) (AG-12). They use
a smooth transition VAR (STVAR) model, post-WWII data, the Blanchard-Perotti identifi-
cation method, and a function of the 7-quarter centered moving average of normalized real
GDP growth as their measure of the state. They also include four lags of the 7-quarter moving
average growth rate as exogenous regressors in their model.23 They construct their baseline
impulse responses based on two assumptions: (1) the economy remains in an extreme re-
cession or expansion state for at least 5 years; and (2) changes in government spending do
not impact the state of the economy.24 They find multipliers during recessions that are well
above two and these results have been cited by those advocating stimulus during the Great
Recession (e.g. DeLong and Summers (2012))
    To understand the diﬀerence between our results and theirs, we begin by taking only one
step away from what AG-12 did by using all details of their analysis except the method for
estimating and constructing the impulse responses. In particular, we apply the Jordà method
to their post-WWII data, using their exact definition of states, logs of variables, estimated
government spending shocks from their STVAR model, and inclusion of four lagged values
of the centered 7-quarter moving average of output growth as controls. F(z) is the indicator
of the state as a function of the moving average of output (z). It varies between a maximum
of one (extreme recession) and zero (extreme expansion).
    Figure 8 shows the linear responses in the top panel.25 The government spending re-
sponse looks similar to the linear case in AG-12, though the GDP response is more erratic
and the standard error bands are much wider. The state-dependent responses shown in the
lower panel look very diﬀerent. The Jordà method produces impulse responses in which
the response of government spending to a shock is higher in a recession than in an expan-

  23. The published paper does not discuss these additional terms, but the initial working paper version
includes these terms in one equation and the codes posted for the published paper include them.
  24. These results are shown in Table 1 and Figure 2 of their paper.
  25. We have multiplied the log output response by a conversion factor of 5.6, following AG-12. They use a
nonstandard measure of government purchases as their measure of G. As a result their Y/G ratio used to convert
multipliers is higher than the usual one based on total government purchases.


                                                     16
sion, similar to our earlier results, but in opposition to those of AG-12. The response of
output diﬀers little across states, in contrast to AG-12 who find that output rises robustly and
continuously throughout the 5 years in the recession state but quickly falls toward zero and
becomes negative in the expansion state.
    The first panel of Table 3 compares AG-12’s cumulative 5-year and 2-year multipliers
to those we estimated by the Jordà method. For the 5-year horizon, AG find multipliers of
2.24 for recessions and -0.33 for expansions whereas the Jordà method estimates multipliers
of 0.84 in recessions and -0.59 in expansions.26 Thus, the Jordà multipliers are below one
in recessions, but similar to AG-12’s multipliers in expansions. At the 2-year horizon, AG’s
estimates imply a recession multiplier of 1.65 and a gap between states of 1.55. In contrast,
the Jordà method implies a 2-year multiplier in recessions of 0.24 and a gap between states
of -0.12.27
    Thus, even when we use the same sample period, data, variable definitions, definition
of slack, and estimated shocks as AG-12, the Jordà method produces multipliers in reces-
sions that are much lower than those of AG-12. This means that AG-12’s high multipliers
during recessions are likely due to the method for constructing the impulse responses. As
Koop et al. (1996) point out, constructing impulse responses in nonlinear models is far from
straightforward since many complexities arise when one moves from linear to nonlinear sys-
tems. In a linear model, the impulse responses are invariant to history, proportional to the
size of the shock, and symmetric in positive and negative shocks. In a nonlinear model, the
response can depend diﬀerentially on the magnitude and sign of the shock, as well as on the
history of previous shocks. If one estimates the parameters of a nonlinear model and then
iterates on those parameters to construct impulse responses, assumptions on how the econ-
omy transitions from state-to-state, as well as the feedback of the shocks to the state, are key
components of the constructed responses.28
    In the Jordà method, the impulse responses at each horizon are estimated directly by
regressing xt+h on the shock in period t and lagged values of other control variables. Since
separate regressions are estimated for each horizon h, no iteration is involved. The estimated

   26. AG-12 also report a recession multiplier of 2.5, but that is based on comparing the peak response of
output to the initial government spending shock, a practice we critiqued in a previous section.
   27. One should keep in mind, however, that the Jordà estimates are not very precise. We were not able to
estimate the standard errors of the multipliers because the xtscc command in Stata reported that the variance
matrix was nonsymmetric or highly singular.
   28. For instance, Caggiano et al. (2014) employ the STVAR approach of AG-12 for a shorter sample, but
compute impulse response functions using the generalized impulse response approach advocated by Koop et al.
(1996), and find that the spending multipliers in recessions are not statistically larger than in expansions. They
only find evidence of nonlinearities when focusing on deep recessions versus strong expansionary periods.


                                                       17
parameters depend on the average behavior of the economy in the historical sample between t
and t + h, given the shock, the initial state, and the control variables. The parameter estimates
on the control variables incorporate the average tendency of the economy to evolve between
states. Thus, if the duration of State A is typically short relative to State B, the h quarter ahead
forecast will take this into account. Similarly, the estimate of the coeﬃcient on the shock
includes the eﬀects of the shock on the future state of the economy. Thus, the estimates
incorporate both the natural transitions and endogenous transitions from state to state that
occur on average in the data.
    In contrast, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) calculate their baseline impulse re-
sponses under the assumption that the economy stays in its current state for the 20 quarters
over which they compute their multiplier. This assumption turns the problem into a linear
one, but it is potentially inconsistent with the data and the multipliers actually estimated. As
Figure 7 shows, during the post-WWII period the recession states - defined by AG to be quar-
ters when their F(z) exceeds 0.8 - are much shorter than 20 quarters in duration; the mean
duration is only 3.3 quarters. According to their definition of recession, the Great Recession
lasted nine quarters, much longer than the average but substantially less than 20 quarters.
Even the nine-quarter duration is an overestimate, since AG-12 use only the extreme of F(z)
= 1 in their calculations.29 This inconsistency of their assumption with the data means that
the multipliers they calculate for recessions are based on impulse responses that do not rep-
resent any episode ever experienced in their sample. Moreover, the assumptions imply that
a positive shock to government spending during a recession does not help the economy es-
cape the recession. AG-12 relax this second assumption in a second experiment, and we will
describe those results below.
    To see the importance of these assumptions, we conduct several experiments. In these
experiments, we compute alternative impulse responses by iterating on AG’s STVAR param-
eter estimates under diﬀerent assumptions about the dynamics of the state of the economy.
Since the economy is never literally in an extreme recession or expansion, we focus on the
average of "severe" recessions and "severe" expansions, which we define as the few quarters
in which F(z) is above 0.95 or below 0.05, respectively. The few quarters of severe recession
occur during the recessions of 1974-75 (two quarters), 1981-82 (one quarter), and 2008-09
(five quarters).
    The second panel of Table 3 reports these experiments. For reference, the first line of
the second panel shows that AG’s baseline 5-year multipliers do not change much when we
   29. The mean value of AG’s F(z) indicator is 0.81 during NBER recessions and 0.42 during NBER expan-
sions.


                                                  18
change F(z) by a small amount. The second line shows the multiplier calculated assuming a
constant state and no feedback, but looking at the 2-year integral multiplier. This calculation
requires less drastic assumptions because it only assumes that the state remains constant for
2 years rather than 5 years. Here, the multipliers in severe recessions are not as high and
those in severe expansions are not as low, so the diﬀerence across states falls from 2.47 to
1.46.
    The next experiment, "Actual State Dynamics," assumes that instead of staying constant
at an extreme value, the state indicator F(z) is equal to its actual value at each point in
time. In practice the experiment is conducted as follows. We first calculate the paths of
government spending and output, assuming that the shocks to the government spending,
tax, and output equations take their estimated values. This essentially reproduces the actual
path of the economy for all variables including F(z). We then calculate an alternative path
of government spending, taxes, and output assuming that there is an additional one-time
positive shock in the current period to government spending, equal to one standard deviation
of the estimated government spending shock (equal to 1.3 percent of government spending).
We allow the shock to change the path of spending, taxes, and output, but not the state of
the economy, F(z), relative to its actual path. The diﬀerence between this simulation and
the actual values of the variables forms the impulse response functions. Despite the lack of
feedback, this experiment is diﬀerent from AG’s baseline experiment because it allows the
state of the economy to experience its natural dynamics (i.e. F(z) is allowed to vary between
its extremes as it actually does). The third and fourth lines of the lower panel show the
multipliers for this experiment. In severe recessions, the 5-year multiplier is estimated to be
1.4 and the 2-year multiplier is estimated to be 1.1. Thus, allowing the state of the economy
to follow its subsequent natural dynamics reduces the constructed multiplier in recessions.
The eﬀect is not so big on the expansion multipliers, however. This is to be expected since
expansions have a much longer duration than recessions, so the assumption of no change in
state is not so at odds with the data.
    AG-12 relax one of their baseline assumptions in a second experiment by allowing partial
feedback of government spending on the state of the economy, but otherwise not allowing
the state to change. They are not able to allow full feedback, though, because of the nature
of their state variable.30 The fifth and sixth lines of the second panel of the table show
the average of their multipliers in severe recessions and expansions. Their experiment also

  30. Their state variable is a function of a centered moving average of GDP growth. Thus, future values
of GDP enter the current state. This formulation makes it impossible to allow full feedback in a logically
consistent manner.


                                                   19
lowers the estimated multiplier in severe recessions, to 1.36 for the 5-year multiplier and
1.01 for the 2-year multiplier.
    The final two lines of the table show our experiment in which we allow both the natural
dynamics of the economy and partial feedback from the government spending shock. The
experiment is the same as the "Actual State Dynamics, No Feedback" except that it also al-
lows the F(z) indicator to change from its actual path in reaction to current changes of output
resulting from the government spending shock. As shown in the table, both the 5-year and
2-year multipliers during severe recessions are calculated to be 1.07. During severe expan-
sions, the 5-year multiplier is calculated to be 0.14, which is higher than AG’s multiplier of
-0.3. As a result, the gap in multipliers across states shrinks.
    Thus, even when we use AG’s STVAR parameter estimates, we can get very diﬀerent
estimates for the multiplier. Diﬀering assumptions made about transitions between states
and the feedback of government spending to the state lead to very diﬀerent estimates of
multipliers. When we compute multipliers allowing for the natural dynamics of the economy
we find a much smaller gap across states than AG-12. The gap we do find is not because
the multiplier is so high during recessions, but because it is estimated to be so low during
expansions when we use AG’s data and variable definitions.
    As pointed out above, the state variable that AG-12 employ is a function of a centered
moving average of GDP growth. This suggest that future values of GDP are used to construct
the current state of the economy. This formulation not only makes it impossible to allow full
feedback in a logically consistent manner, but it in fact plays an important role in driving
their results as well. In our exploration of the AG-12 results, we found that if we focus only
on the backward moving average terms, and in particular, instead of a 7-quarter centered
moving average growth rate, consider a 4-quarter backward moving average growth rate,
while keeping all the details of the AG set-up the same, the resulting multiplier is much
larger in expansion than in recession.31 Alloza (2014) conducts a much more systematic
analysis of the importance of this two-sided moving average filter and further corroborates
our finding. He finds that using a higher order of centered moving average (i.e. using more
information about future values of GDP) reduces the eﬀect of the spending shock on output
during times of booms and amplifies it during recession periods. He also explores varying
the symmetry of the 7-quarter moving average, and shows that when less information about
the future is used, then the results suggest a more robust response of output to a spending
shock in booms, while the response in recessions becomes negative. This suggests, that the

  31. The 5 year cumulative multiplier is close to 0.7 in recession and 1.8 in expansion.


                                                      20
future information used in constructing the current state variable in AG-12 is also crucial to
their results.
    But why do we obtain diﬀerent results from those of Auerbach-Gorodnichenko’s second
paper? As discussed earlier, the second Auerbach-Gorodnichenko paper (AG-13) also ap-
plies the Jordà method to a panel of OECD countries; in fact, AG-13 were the ones who first
realized the potential of this method for state-dependent fiscal models. Thus, a key ques-
tion is why they find higher multipliers during recessions even with this method. There is,
of course, the obvious diﬀerence in time period and country sample. We believe, however,
the most likely reason for the diﬀerence is in two details of how they calculate multipliers.
First, following the standard practice, they estimate everything in logarithms and then use
the ex post conversion factor based on average Y/G during their sample to convert elasticities
to multipliers. Second, they follow Blanchard and Perotti (2002) by comparing the path or
peak of output to the impact of government spending rather than to the peak or integral of
the path of government spending. This is a big diﬀerence because the eﬀects of a shock to
government usually build up for several quarters. As we argued in a previous section, this is
not the type of multiplier that interests policy makers because it does not count the average
cumulative cost of government spending associated with the path. If we used that same pro-
cedure on our baseline estimates, calculating multipliers by dividing the average response of
output over the 2-year horizon by the the initial shock to government spending, we would
produce multipliers of 4.3 in the linear case, 2.2 in the low unemployment state and 8.8 in
the high unemployment state! Thus, it is clear that even using the same estimation method
and same method for computing impulse responses, details of the calculations of multipliers
can make a big diﬀerence.
    In summary, we have shown that the diﬀerences between our results and those of AG-12
and AG-13 owe little to the diﬀerences in the method for estimating the underlying parame-
ters. Instead, the diﬀerences are due mostly to the details of how those underlying estimates
are translated to impulse response functions and how those impulse response functions are
in turn translated into multipliers. We argue that AG’s methods tend to bias upward the
multipliers in recessions resulting in the large diﬀerences in multipliers in their papers.


4.5 The Behavior of Taxes
Our analysis so far has ignored the responses of taxes. Romer and Romer’s (2010) estimates
of tax eﬀects indicate very significant negative multipliers on taxes, on the order of -2 to
-3. Thus, it is important for us to consider how the increases in government spending are

                                             21
financed in order to interpret our multiplier results.
    To analyze how taxes and deficits behave, we re-estimate our basic model augmented to
include deficits and tax rates so that we can distinguish increases in revenues caused by rising
output versus rising rates. Average tax rates are computed as the ratio of federal receipts to
nominal GDP. The deficit is the real total deficit. We include two lags of these two new
variables along with GDP and government spending as controls in all of the regressions, and
we estimate this system for the full sample using the Jordà method.
    Figure 9 shows the results from the linear case. The responses of government spending
and GDP, as well as the multipliers, are almost identical to the baseline case. The middle
panels show that both average tax rates and the deficit increase in response to news shock.
Taking the ratio of the cumulative response of deficit to cumulative response of government
spending at various horizons, we estimate a sharp rise in the share of government spending
financed with the deficit during the first year. The deficit fraction of government spending
then plateaus at 60 percent .
    From a theoretical perspective, the fact that tax rates increase steadily during the first two
years has significant implications for the multiplier. If all taxes are lump-sum taxes, news
about a future increase in the present discounted value of government spending leads to an
immediate jump in hours and output because of the negative wealth eﬀect. In a neoclassical
model, the eﬀect is the same whether the taxes are levied concurrently or in the future. In
contrast, the need to raise revenues through distortionary taxation can change incentives
significantly. As Baxter and King (1993) show, if government spending is financed with
current increases in tax rates, the multiplier can become negative in a neoclassical model.
    The situation changes considerably when tax rates are slow to adjust, but agents antic-
ipate higher future tax rates. To see this, consider the case of labor income taxes and a
forward-looking household:

                                      [                                ]
                                     un,t+1 (1 − τt )wt
(3)                          1 = βEt                       (1 + rt )
                                      un,t (1 − τt+1 )wt+1

where un is the marginal utility of leisure, τ is the tax on labor income, w is the real wage
rate, r is the real interest rate, and Et is the expectation based on period t information. In
expectation, the household should vary the growth rate of leisure inversely with the growth
rate of after-tax real wages. This means that if τt+1 is expected to rise relative to τt , house-
holds have an incentive to substitute their labor to the present (when it is taxed less) and their
leisure to the future.

                                               22
     It is easy to show in a standard neoclassical model that the delayed response of taxes, such
as we observe in the estimated impulse responses, results in a multiplier that is higher in the
short-run but lower in the long-run relative to the lump-sum tax case. We have also conducted
this experiment in the Gali et al. (2007) model where 50 percent of the households are rule-
of-thumb consumers. We found the same eﬀect in that model as well. Drautzburg and
Uhlig (2011) analyze an extension of the Smets-Wouters model and also find that the timing
of distortionary taxes is very important for the size of the multiplier. Given the impulse
response of tax rates, and with these theoretical results in mind, it is very possible that our
estimated multipliers are greater than we would expect if taxation were lump-sum.
     Nevertheless, our finding that multipliers do not vary across states could be due to dif-
ferential financing patterns. To determine whether this is the case, Figure 10 shows the
state-dependent results. As we showed before, both government spending and GDP rise
more if a news shock hits during a slack state, even after adjusting the initial size of the
shock.32 The bottom panels show that tax rates and deficits also rise more during recessions,
but there are other interesting diﬀerences in the patterns. When we study the ratio of the
cumulative deficit to cumulative government spending at each point in time along the path,
we find that more of government spending is financed with deficits when a shock hits during
a slack state.33 For example, at quarter seven the ratio of the cumulative deficit to cumulative
government spending is 73 percent if a shock hits during a slack state but only 49 percent
if the shock hits during a non-slack state. Thus, on average short-run government spending
is financed more with deficits if the shock hits during a slack state. In addition, tax rates
rise with a delay during the slack state relative to non-slack state. This would imply that the
multiplier should be greater during times of slack. In fact, our estimates imply that it is not.


5 Multipliers at the Zero Lower Bound
We now investigate whether government spending multipliers diﬀer when government in-
terest rates are near the zero lower bound or are being held constant to accommodate fiscal
policy. Some New Keynesian models suggest that government spending multipliers will be
substantially higher (e.g. above 2) when the economy is at the zero lower bound.34 This
  32. The implied multipliers are very similar to the baseline case as well.
  33. This is true with the exception of the second quarter. This can be explained by the fact that initially
government spending and deficits rise slowly in response to a news shock and and for the initial two quarters,
deficits fall very slightly before rising.
  34. See, for example, Eggertsson (2011) and Christiano et al. (2011). The relationship between government
spending multipliers and the degree of monetary accommodation, even outside zero lower bound has been


                                                     23
view has been challenged by a series of new papers, some of which construct models in
which multipliers are lower at the zero lower bound.35 Thus, the literature now provides a
number of plausible theories that predict both higher and lower multipliers at the zero lower
bound. For this reason, it is useful to provide empirical evidence on this issue.
    Very few papers have attempted to test the predictions of the theory empirically in ag-
gregate data. As far as we know, only two examples exist. Ramey (2011) estimates her
model for the U.S. over the sub-sample from 1939 through 1951 and shows that the multi-
plier is no higher during that sample. Crafts and Mills (2012) construct defense news shocks
for the U.K. and estimate multipliers on quarterly data from 1922 through 1938. They find
multipliers below unity even when interest rates were near zero.36


5.1 Defining States by Monetary Policy
The bottom panel of Figure 11 shows the behavior of three-month Treasury Bill rates from
1920 through the present, where the shortened sample is based on data availability. This
interest rate was near zero during much of the 1930s and 1940s, as well as starting again in
the fourth quarter of 2008. To indicate the degree to which interest rates were pegged (either
by design or the zero lower bound), we compare the behavior of actual interest rates to that
prescribed by the Taylor rule. We use the standard Taylor rule formulation:

(4)      nominal interest rate = 1 + 1.5 year-over-year inflation rate + 0.5 output gap

Figure 13 shows the behavior of inflation and the output gap, which were quite volatile during
the early period.37 The last panel of Figure 13 compares the behavior of actual interest rates
to the Taylor rule. This graph makes clear that there were large deviations of interest rates
from those prescribed by the Taylor rule briefly during the early 1920s and in a sustained
way during most of the 1930s and 1940s.
    In many theoretical models, it is not the zero lower bound per se, but rather the fact that
nominal interest rates stay constant rather than following the Taylor rule that amplifies the
stimulative eﬀects of government spending. Thus, to assess whether multipliers are greater

explored by many others, including Davig and Leeper (2011) and Zubairy (2014).
   35. See, for example, Mertens and Ravn (2014), Aruoba and Schorfheide (2013), Braun et al. (2013) and
Kiley (2014).
   36. Bruckner and Tuladhar (2013) focus on local not aggregate multipliers for Japan, and find that the eﬀects
of local spending are larger in the ZLB period, but only modestly.
   37. The output gap for the earlier period is constructed similarly to Gordon and Krenn (2010). See the data
appendix for details.


                                                      24
in these situations we can include periods in which the nominal interest rate is relatively
constant despite dramatic fluctuations in government spending.
    For our baseline, we define ZLB or extended monetary accommodation times to be
1932q2 - 1951q1 and 2008q4 - 2013q4 (the end of our sample). We do not include the
early 1920s as a ZLB episode since the episode was so brief and theory tells us that the
multiplier depends on the (expected) length of the spell. Also, while the deviation from the
Taylor rule widens starting in 1930, we do not include the early 1930s in our ZLB state.
This is because the T-bill rate was fluctuating during this period, potentially responding to
the state of the economy, and was as high as 2.5 percent in 1932q1 before falling to 0.5 per-
cent in 1932q2 and staying low from then onwards. We will call these periods "ZLB states"
for short, recognizing that they also include periods of monetary accommodation of fiscal
policy. We end the early spell in 1951q1 because the Treasury Accord, which gave the Fed
more autonomy, was signed in March 1951.
    The top panel of Figure 11 shows the behavior of our defense news series over the states
defined this way. The main shocks during these states occur after the start of WWII and at
the start of the Korean War (in June 1950). There is essentially no information gained from
the 1930s, unfortunately.38 Figure 12 shows the F-tests for the periods split into ZLB periods
and normal periods. The F-statistics tend to be higher for horizons 4 through 8. For the full
sample, the F-statistics are above 5 but below 10. However, when we exclude WWII, the
ZLB periods have F-statistics above 10 for many horizons. Thus, in contrast to the case in
which the state is defined by the unemployment rate, the first stage F-statistics for the ZLB
state rise when we exclude WWII.


5.2 Results
To determine whether multipliers are diﬀerent in ZLB states, we estimate our baseline state-
dependent model, but now allowing the state to be defined by monetary policy. We consider
our full sample spanning 1889-2013.39 Figure 14 shows the impulse responses. The results
suggest that government spending responds more slowly, but more persistently during ZLB
states than in normal states. The diﬀerence in GDP responses follow this pattern, but in a
muted way. Table 4 shows the cumulative multipliers in each state for the diﬀerent horizons

  38. An advantage of the Crafts and Mills (2012) analysis of UK data is that it has more defense news shocks
during the 1930s.
  39. Even though the 3 month T-bill rate was not available before 1920, we still consider the earlier period
and call it a non-ZLB state, based on narrative evidence and data on commercial paper rate for which monthly
data is available starting 1857.


                                                     25
of two and four years, respectively. For the 2-year integral, the multipliers in the ZLB state
are slightly higher than normal times, and for the 4-year integral, the multiplier is higher
in the normal state. However, the multiplier is less than one in both these cases and in no
case do we find evidence of significantly higher multipliers during periods at the zero lower
bound or constant interest rates. Figure 15 shows the cumulative multiplier for the ZLB and
normal state at various diﬀerent horizons along with 95% confidence bands. The multiplier
for both states is high on impact when the news shock hits the economy and is less than one
after one year, but the multipliers across the two states are never significantly diﬀerent.
    We explore the robustness in several ways. First, we redefined the ZLB state as periods
where the T-bill rate was less than or equal to 50 basis points. We have data for the 3-
month T-bill rate starting in 1920, but we assume that prior to 1920 there was no monetary
accommodation, and classify 1890-1919 as non-ZLB period. As shown in the first lines
of Table 5, this re-definition of the monetary state results in multipliers close to or slightly
above 1 in the non-ZLB state and lower in the ZLB state. Thus again, we do not find any
evidence of higher multipliers in the ZLB state.
    We also check the robustness of our results under Blanchard and Perotti (2002) identi-
fication.40 The next set of results in Table 5 show that under this alternative identification
scheme, the linear multiplier is less than one for both two and four year horizons. The state
dependent multipliers are also less than one: the 2 year multiplier under ZLB is 0.65 and 0.47
in normal times, whereas at four year horizon the multiplier is 0.78 under ZLB and slightly
higher at 0.85 in normal times. Thus, again we do not find any evidence of significantly
higher multipliers near the zero lower bound than normal times.
    We consider the role of financing by controlling for taxes, by adding 2 lags of tax rev-
enues as controls in our baseline specification. In this case, the multipliers are slightly lower
in the ZLB state and higher in the normal state relative to the baseline case, for both 2 and 4
years. The diﬀerence between the multiplier in ZLB and normal states at 2 year is negligible
and at 4 years, if anything, the multiplier is higher when the shock hits during a normal state
than the ZLB state (see third panel of Table 5).
    We also consider the robustness of the results to the addition of inflation as a control, by
adding 2 lags of GDP deflator inflation in our baseline specification. In this case, as shown in
Table 5, we find similar multipliers to the baseline in the ZLB state and slightly higher in the
normal state relative to the baseline. The diﬀerence across the two states is not significant
in this case either. In addition, we consider the response of GDP deflator inflation during
  40. We should note, however, that while the F-statistics for the BP shock are very high for the first four
quarters, they quickly fall toward 0.


                                                    26
the ZLB and normal state. We find no evidence of a larger response for inflation in the ZLB
state, as suggested by new-Keynesian models (not shown).41
    A major concern is that an important part of the ZLB state was during the rationing period
of WWII. If rationing depressed multipliers, and all of the rationing occurred during the
ZLB state, then this could explain why we find no diﬀerences across periods. To determine
whether our results are sensitive to the rationing period, we exclude observations from the
estimation if either the shock or the dependent variable occurred in any quarter from 1941q3
through 1945q4. Table 6 shows that this change results in multipliers slightly higher in the
linear case, somewhat above 1. Considering the state dependent multipliers, it is apparent
that exclusion of World War II does not impact the multiplier in the normal state, but results
in larger multipliers at the 2-year horizon in the ZLB state. The diﬀerence in multipliers
is driven by the impulse response function of government spending across the two diﬀerent
states, where it rises more robustly and faster in normal times than the ZLB state, when
we exclude WWII. The response of output is statistically not diﬀerent across the two states.
Notably, the multiplier at the 2-year horizon in the ZLB state is 1.59 versus 0.57 in the normal
state, and the diﬀerence in the multipliers has a p-value of 0.126. This is one case, however,
where the multipliers calculated for near horizons give diﬀerent answers. During a few of
the quarters of the second year, the cumulative multipliers are 2 or above and the p-value on
the diﬀerences across states are below 0.05. Thus, these results support the notion that the
multiplier is higher at the ZLB.
    We also conduct robustness checks for this sample. The Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
identification also suggests higher multipliers at the ZLB at both the 2-year and 4-year hori-
zons. The diﬀerences across states are not statistically significant, though, because the stan-
dard errors are so much bigger. The third set of results shows the eﬀects of controlling for
taxes. In this case, the multipliers at the 2-year horizon are 1.2 at the ZLB and 0.7 in normal
times. This flips, though, so that at the 4-year horizon, the multipliers are only 0.8 at the ZLB
but 1.36 during normal times. In no case, though, are the multipliers statistically diﬀerent
across states. Thus, the finding of higher multipliers in the ZLB is not robust to including
taxes in the specification. The fourth set of results shows the eﬀects of including inflation
(but not taxes). These results are more similar to the baseline results, indicating elevated
multipliers at the ZLB. However, if we also include taxes, these diﬀerences disappear as
well (not shown).
    Thus, we do not find robust results in support of the New Keynesian model prediction

  41. This evidence is also in line with the findings of Dupor and Li (2013).


                                                     27
that multipliers are greater at the zero lower bound. While the key to those predictions lie in
the behavior of inflationary expectations, we think it unlikely that expectations would have
behaved in a way to change the results. Thus, neither our results nor those of Crafts and
Mills (2012) for the UK are consistent with the predictions of the New Keynesiam model at
the ZLB.42


6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have investigated whether government spending multipliers vary depend-
ing on the state of the economy. In order to maximize the amount of variation in the data,
we constructed new historical quarterly data spanning more than 120 years in the U.S. We
considered two possible indicators of the state of the economy: the amount of slack, as mea-
sured by the unemployment rate, and whether interest rates were being held constant close to
the zero lower bound. Using a more robust method for estimating state-dependent impulse
responses and better ways of calculating multipliers from them, we provided numerous esti-
mates of multipliers across diﬀerent specifications.
    Our results can be summarized as follows. We find no evidence of significant diﬀerences
in multipliers when the U.S. economy is experiencing substantial slack as measured by the
unemployment rate. Most multipliers are slightly below unity with a few slightly above
unity. Our numerous robustness checks suggest that our results are not sensitive to variations
in our specification. We also conducted a detailed analysis of why our results are so diﬀerent
from those of Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012). We found the key source of diﬀerences
are the specialized assumptions Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) use to calculate their
impulse response functions.
    In our analysis of multipliers in zero lower bound interest rate states, we found no ev-
idence that multipliers are greater at the zero lower bound in the full sample. The results
are mixed, however, when we exclude World War II from the sample. Several specifications
suggest that multipliers are higher at some horizons at the ZLB. However, these results are
not robust to simple generalizations, such as the inclusion of taxes. Thus, we cannot claim
that we find definitive evidence for higher multipliers at the zero lower bound.
    Of course, our results come with many caveats. As discussed in the introduction, we
are forced to use data determined by the vagaries of history so we do not have a controlled

  42. In separate work, Wieland (2013) tests the New Keynesian prediction that negative supply shocks are
expansionary at the ZLB, and also finds evidence contrary to that prediction.


                                                   28
experiment. Because we use news about future military spending as our identified shock, our
results do not inform us about the size of multipliers on transfer payments or infrastructure
spending. Moreover, because the episodes we studied were characterized by certain paths
of taxes, the results are not immediately applicable to the case of deficit-financed stimulus
packages or fiscal consolidations.




References
Alloza, Mario, 2014. “Is Fiscal Policy More Eﬀective in Uncertain Times or During Reces-
  sions?” Working paper, University College London.

Aruoba, S. Boragan and Frank Schorfheide, 2013. “Macroeconomic Dynamics Near the
  ZLB: A Tale of Two Equilibria.” NBER Working Paper 19248.

Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2012. “Measuring the Output Responses to
  Fiscal Policy.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(2): 1–27.

Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2013. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
  Expansion.” In Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesian and
  Francesco Giavazzi, pp. 63–98. University of Chicago Press.

Bachmann, Rudiger and Eric R. Sims, 2012. “Confidence and the transmission of gov-
  ernment spending shocks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 59: 235–249.

Balke, Nathan and Robert J. Gordon, 1986. “Appendix B Data Tables.” In The
  American Business Cycle: Continuity and Change, edited by Robert J. Gordon, p.
  http://www.nber.org/data/abc/. University of Chicago Press.

Barro, Robert J. and Charles J. Redlick, 2011. “Macroeconomic Eﬀects from Govern-
  ment Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 51–102.

Baum, Anja, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Anke Weber, 2012. “Fiscal Multipliers and
  the State of the Economy.” Unpublished paper, IMF.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, 1993. “Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium.”
  American Economic Review 83(3): 315–334.

Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti, 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the
  Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117(4): 1329–1368.




                                             29
Braun, R. Anton, Lena Mareen Korber, and Yuichiro Waki, 2013. “Small and orthodox
  fiscal multipliers at the zero lower bound.” Working Paper 2013-13, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Atlanta.

Bruckner, Marcus and Anita Tuladhar, 2013. “Local Government Spending Multipliers
  and Financial Distress: Evidence from Japanese Prefectures.” Economic Journal, forth-
  coming.

Caggiano, Giovanni, Efrem Castelnuovo, Valentina Colombo, and Gabriela Nodari,
  2014. “Estimating Fiscal Multipliers: News from a Nonlinear World.” Working Paper
  179, Universita Degli Studi di Padova.

Canzoneri, Matthew, Fabrice Collard, Harris Dellas, and Behzad Diba, 2013. “Fiscal
  Multipliers in Recessions.” Unpublished paper, Georgetown University.

Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead,
  Richard Sutch, Gavin Wright, and Richard Sutch, 2006. “Table Ca9-19 : Gross do-
  mestic product: 1790-2002 [Continuous annual series].” In Historical Statistics of the
  United States Millennial Edition Online. Cambridge University Press.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011. “When Is the
 Government Spending Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy 119(1): 78 –
 121.

Coenen, Günter and et al., 2012. “Eﬀects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models.” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(1): 22–68.

Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland, 2010. “New Key-
  nesian versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers.” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control 34: 281–295.

Conference Board, The, 1945. The Economic Almanac 1945-46. New York, New York:
  National Industrial Conference Board, Inc.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Andre Meier, and Gernot Mueller, 2012. “What determines govern-
  ment spending multipliers?” Economic Policy 27(72): 521–565.

Crafts, Nicholas and Terence C. Mills, 2012. “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy: Was
  There a ’Free Lunch’ in 1930s’ Britain?” Unpublished paper, University of Warwick.

Davig, Troy and Eric M. Leeper, 2011. “Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal
  Stimulus.” European Economic Review 55(2): 211–227.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers, 2012. “Fiscal Policy in a Depressed
  Economy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 44(1): 233–297.



                                           30
Drautzburg, Thorsten and Harald Uhlig, 2011. “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxa-
  tion.” NBER Working Paper 17111, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Driscoll, John C. and Aart C. Kraay, 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation
  With Spatially Dependent Panel Data.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4):
  549–560.
Dupor, William and Rong Li, 2013. “The Expected Inflation Channel of Government
 Spending in the Postwar U.S.” Technical report.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., 2011. “What Fiscal Policy is Eﬀective at Zero Interest Rates?” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 25: 59–112.
Fazzari, Steven M., James Morley, and Irina Panovska, 2013. “State Dependent Eﬀects
  of Fiscal Policy.” Unpublished paper, Australian School of Business.
Fisher, Jonas D.M. and Ryan Peters, 2010. “Using Stock Returns to Identify Government
  Spending Shocks.” The Economic Journal 120: 414–436.
Francis, Neville and Valerie A. Ramey, 2009. “Measures of per Capita Hours and Their
  Implications for the Technology-Hours Debate.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
  41(6): 1071–1097.
Gali, Jordi, J. David Lopez-Salido, and Javier Valles, 2007. “Understanding the Eﬀects of
 Government Spending on Consumption.” Journal of the European Economic Association
 5(1): 227–270.
Gordon, Robert J. and Robert Krenn, 2010. “The End of the Great Depression: VAR
 Insight on the Roles of Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” NBER Working paper 16380.
Hall, Robert E., 2009. “By How Much Does GDP Rise If the Government Buys More
 Output?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall: 183–236.
Hoechle, Daniel, 2007. “Robust standard errors for panel regressions with cross-sectional
 dependence.” Stata Journal 7(3): 281–312.
Jordà, Òscar, 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections.”
  American Economic Review 95(1): 161–182.
Kendrick, John D., 1961. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton New Jersey:
  Princeton University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kiley, Michael T., 2014. “Policy Paradoxes in the New Keynesian Model.” Finance and
  Economics Discussion Series 2014-29, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
  tem.
Koop, Gary, Hashem M. Pesaran, and Simon M. Potter, 1996. “Impulse Response Anal-
 ysis in Nonlinear Multivariate Models.” Journal of Econometrics 74(1): 119–147.

                                           31
Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, 2013. “The Dynamic Eﬀects of Personal and Cor-
 porate Income Tax Changes in the United States.” American Economic Review 103(4):
 1212Ű1247.

Mertens, Karel and Morten O. Ravn, 2014. “Fiscal Policy in an Expectations Driven
 Liquidity Trap.” Review of Economic Studies forthcoming.

Michaillat, Pascal, 2014. “A Theory of Countercyclical Government Multiplier.” American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(1): 190–217.

Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, 2009. “What are the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy
 Shocks?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 24: 960–992.

Newey, Whitney K and Kenneth D West, 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Het-
  eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica 55(3):
  703–08.

Olea, Jose Luis Montiel and Carolin Pflueger, 2013. “A Robust Test for Weak Instru-
  ments.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 31(3): 358–369.

Owyang, Michael T., Valerie A. Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy, 2013. “Are Government
 Spending Multipliers Greater During Times of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century His-
 torical Data.” American Economic Review 103(2): 129–34.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Tim-
  ing.” Quarterly Journal of Economic 126(1): 51–102.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2012. “Comment on Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? The-
  ory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment.” In NBER Macroe-
  conomics Annual 2012, Volume 27, NBER Chapters, pp. 147–153. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2013. “Government Spending and Private Activity.” In Fiscal Policy
  After the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesian and Francesco Giavazzi, pp. 19–55.
  University of Chicago Press.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2014. “Defense News Shocks, 1889–2013: Estimates Based on News
  Sources.” Unpublished paper, University of California, San Diego.

Riera-Crichton, Daniel, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin, 2014. “Procyclical and
  Countercyclical Fiscal Multipliers: Evidence from OECD Countries.” NBER Working
  Paper 20533, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Romer, Christina D., 1999. “Changes in Business Cycles: Evidence and Explanations.”
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2): 23–44.



                                           32
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, 2010. “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax
  Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic
  Review 100(3): 763–801.

Sims, Eric and Jonathan Wolﬀ, 2013. “The Output and Welfare Eﬀects of Government
  Spending Shocks over the Business Cycle.” NBER Working Paper 19749.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock, 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
  Instruments.” Econometrica 65(3): 557–586.

Stock, James H. and Mark Watson, 2007. “Why Has US Inflation Become Harder to
  Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39(1): 3–33.

Uhlig, Harald, 2010. “Some Fiscal Calculus.” American Economic Review 100(2): 30–34.

Weir, David R., 1992. “A Century of U.S. Unemployment, 1890-1990: Revised Estiamtes
 and Evidence for Stabilization.” In Research in Economic History, edited by Roger L.
 Ransom, pp. 301–346. JAI Press.

Wieland, Johannes, 2013. “Are Negative Supply Shocks Expansionary at the Zero Lower
 Bound?” Working paper, University of California, San Diego.

Zubairy, Sarah, 2014. “On Fiscal Multipliers: Estimates from a Medium-Scale DSGE
  Model.” International Economic Review, 55(1).




                                          33
Data Appendix
GDP and GDP deflator:

     1947 - 2013: Quarterly data on chain-weighted real GDP, nominal GDP, and
     GDP deflator from BEA NIPA (downloaded from FRED, March 27, 2014 revi-
     sion).
     1889 - 1946: Annual data from 1929 - 1946 from BEA NIPA (downloaded from
     FRED, December 20, 2012 version). For 1889 - 1928, series Ca9 and Ca13 from
     Table Ca9-19 in Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the
     Present: Millennial Edition, Carter et al. (2006). These series are based on the
     work of Kuznets, Kenrick, Gallman and Balke-Gordon.
     1939 - 1946: We used seasonally adjusted quarterly nominal data on GNP from
     National Income, 1954 Edition, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business
     and seasonally unadjusted CPI (all items, all urban consumers) from FRED.
     1889 - 1938: Quarterly data on real GNP and GNP deflator. Source: Balke and
     Gordon (1986). Data available at: http://www.nber.org/data/abc/
     Data adjustment: For 1939-1946, we used a simplified version of the procedure
     used by Valerie Ramey, "Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All
     in the Timing", Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2011. We used the
     quarterly nominal GNP series published in National Income, 1954 Edition, A
     Supplement to the Survey of Current Business to interpolate the the modern NIPA
     annual nominal GDP series, and the quarterly averages of the CPI to interpolate
     the NIPA annual GDP price deflator using the proportional Denton method. We
     took the ratio to construct real GDP to use as a second round interpolator. We
     spliced this quarterly real GDP series to the Balke-Gordon quarterly real GNP
     series from 1889 - 1938 and used the combined series to interpolate the annual
     real GDP series (described above) using the proportional Denton method. This
     method insures that all quarterly real GDP series average to the annual series.
     We used the Balke-Gordon deflator to interpolate the annual deflator series from
     1889 - 1938 and combined it with the CPI-interpolated series from 1939-1946.
     Finally, we linked the earlier series to the modern quarterly NIPA series from
     1947 to the present.

   Potential GDP:

     Real potential GDP was constructed by splicing the February 2014 CBO esti-
     mates of real potential GDP from 1949 to the present with an estimated cubic
     trend through real GDP from 1889-1950, excluding 1930 - 1946 from the esti-
     mation. Our method of constructing real potential GDP is similar to the method
     advocated by Gordon and Krenn (2010). They illustrate the problems that arise
     when one uses standard filters to estimate trends during samples that involve the


                                            34
 Great Depression and World War II, and advocate instead using a piecewise ex-
 ponential trend based on benchmark years. Our procedure is a smoothed version
 of theirs. To derive nominal potential GDP, we multiplied real potential GDP by
 the actual price level. To derive the output gap for the Taylor rule, we used the
 diﬀerence between log actual real GDP and log potential.

Government Spending:

 1947 - 2013: Quarterly data on nominal "Government Consumption Expendi-
 tures and Gross Investment," from BEA NIPA (downloaded from FRED, March
 27, 2014 revision).
 1889 - 1946: NIPA annual nominal data from 1929 - 1946 (BEA Table 1.1.5,
 line 21) is spliced to annual data from 1889-1928, Source: Kendrick (1961)
 Table A-II.
 1939 - 1946: Quarterly data on nominal government spending from National
 Income, 1954 Edition, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business is used
 to interpolate the modern annual NIPA values.
 1889 - 1938: Monthly data on federal budget expenditures. Source: NBER
 MacroHistory Database.
 http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter15.html

      m15005a U.S. Federal Budget Expenditures, Total 01/1879-09/1915
      m15005b U.S. Federal Budget Expenditures, Total 11/1914-06/1933
      m15005c U.S. Federal Budget Expenditures, Total 01/1932-12/1938

 Data adjustment: The monthly series are spliced together (using a 12-month
 average at the overlap year) and seasonally adjusted in Eviews using X-12. This
 series includes not just government expenditures but also transfer payments,
 and so the monthly interpolator series is distorted by large transfer payments
 in diﬀerent quarters. Thus, rather than using the series directly, we use it as
 a monthly interpolator for the annual series which excludes transfers. Follow-
 ing Gordon and Krenn (2010), to find these quarters, we calculated the monthly
 log change in the interpolator, and whenever a monthly change of +40 percent
 or more was followed by a monthly change of approximately the same amount
 with a negative sign (and also symmetrically negative followed by positive), we
 replaced that particular observation by the average of the preceding and suc-
 ceeding months. These instances occurred for the following months: 1904:5,
 1922:11, 1931:2, 1931:12, 1932:7, 1934:01, 1936:06, and 1937:06. In addition,
 the first quarter of 1917 was adjusted. The jump in spending was so dramatic in
 1917q2 that the interpolated series showed a decline in spending in 1917q1 even
 though the underlying expenditure series showed an increase of 16 percent in
 that quarter relative to the previous one. Thus, we replaced the value of 1917q1


                                        35
  with a value 16 percent higher than the previous quarter. Note that our use of
  the proportional Denton method creates a bumpier series than an alternative that
  uses the additive Denton method. However, the additive Denton method leads to
  series that behave very strangely around large buildups and builddowns of gov-
  ernment spending, so we did not use it. On the other hand, the alternative series
  gave very similar results for the multiplier.

Military News:

  The narrative underlying the series is available in Ramey (2014).


Population:

  1890-2013: Annual population data, based on July of each year, were taken
  from Historical Statistics of the United States Millennial Edition Online, Carter
  et al. (2006) We used total population, including armed forces overseas for all
  periods where available (during WWI and 1930 and after); otherwise we used
  the resident population. For 1952 through the present we used the monthly series
  available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis FRED database, "POP."
  Data adjustment: For 1890 through 1951, we linearly interpolated the annual
  data to obtain monthly series so that the annual value was assigned to July. We
  then took the averages of monthly values to obtain quarterly series. We did the
  same to convert the monthly FRED data from 1952 to the present.

Tax Revenues:

  1947-2013: Quarterly data on nominal "Federal Government Current receipts,"
  BEA Table 3.2, line 1, March 27, 2014 version. Note that all NIPA BEA data is
  on an accrual basis.
  1879-1938: Monthly data on federal budget receipts. Source: NBER Macro-
  History Database
  http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter15.html . These data
  are on a cash basis.

       m15004a U.S. Federal Budget Receipts, Total 01/1879-06/1933
       m15004b U.S. Federal Budget Receipts, Total 07/1930-06/1940
       m15004c U.S. Federal Budget Receipts, Total 07/1939-12/1962


  1939-1946: Quarterly data on nominal federal receipts from National Income,
  1954 Edition, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business is used to interpo-
  late the modern annual NIPA values. We construct the quarterly federal receipts

                                         36
  interpolator from federal personal taxes + total corporates taxes + total indirect
  taxes.
  1889-1928: Annual data on federal receipts. Source: Historical Statistics - fiscal
  year basis (e.g. fiscal year 1890 starts July 1, 1889).
  1929-1946: Annual data on nominal "Federal Government Current receipts,"
  BEA Table 3.2, line 1, March 27, 2014 version.
  Data adjustment: The monthly series are strung together (with the most recent
  series used for overlap periods) and seasonally adjusted in Eviews using X-12.
  The annual series is interpolated using the monthly data with the Denton pro-
  portional method.

Unemployment rate:

  1948-2013: Monthly civilian unemployment rate. Source: Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis FRED database, UNRATE
  http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/UNRATE
  Data adjustment: Quarterly series is constructed as the average of the three
  months.
  1890-1947: Annual civilian unemployment rate. Source: Weir (1992). We
  adjusted the Weir series from 1933-1943 to include emergency workers from
  Conference Board (1945).
  1890-1929: NBER-based monthly recession indicators. Source: Federal Re-
  serve Bank of St. Louis FRED database, USREC
  http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/USREC.
  1930-1946: Monthly civilian unemployment rate (including emergency work-
  ers). Source: NBER MacroHistory Database
  http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter08.html
  m08292a U.S. Unemployment Rate, Seasonally Adjusted 04/1929-06/1942
  m08292a U.S. Unemployment Rate, Seasonally Adjusted 01/1940, 03/1940-
  12/1946
  1947: Monthly civilian unemployment rate (including emergency workers, sea-
  sonally adjusted) Source: Geoﬀrey Moore, Business Cycle Indicators, Volume
  II, NBER p. 122
  Data adjustment: Monthly NBER recession data are used to interpolate annual
  data using the Denton interpolation from 1890-1929. For 1930-1947 onwards
  we use the monthly unemployment rate series to interpolate annual data using
  the Denton proportional interpolation.

Interest rate:


                                         37
1934-2013: Monthly 3 month Treasury bill. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis FRED database, TB3MS
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/TB3MS.
1920-1933: Monthly 3 month Treasury bill. Source: NBER MacroHistory
Database
http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter13.html

     m13029a U.S. Yields On Short-Term United States Securties, Three-
     Six Month Treasury Notes and Certificates, Three Month Treasury
     01/1920-03/1934
     m13029b U.S. Yields On Short-Term United States Securities, Three-
     Six Month Treasury Notes and Certificates, Three Month Treasury
     01/1931-11/1969

Data adjustment: Quarterly series is constructed as the average of the three
months.




                                    38
Table 1. Estimated Multipliers Across States of Slack
                       Linear    High         Low                             P-value for diﬀerence
                       Model Unemployment Unemployment                         in multipliers across
                                                                                      states
   U.S.
   2 year integral      0.76            0.69                  0.78
                       (0.102)         (0.094)               (0.187)                  0.631

   4 year integral      0.84            0.76                  0.96
                       (0.092)         (0.060)               (0.218)                  0.331


     Note: The values in brackets under the multipliers give the standard errors.




                                                   39
Table 2. Robustness Checks of Multipliers Across States of Slack

                                                                 Linear         High         Low
                                                                 Model      Unemployment Unemployment
 Using linearly interpolated data
 2 year integral                                                  0.64                0.58     0.67
 4 year integral                                                  0.76                0.65     0.84

 Omitting the quartic trend
 2 year integral                                                  0.66                0.52     0.71
 4 year integral                                                  0.74                0.63     0.82

 Using Gordon-Krenn transformation
 2 year integral                                                  0.77                0.62     0.64
 4 year integral                                                  0.85                0.75     0.76

 Considering 8% unemployment rate threshold
 2 year integral                                                  0.76                0.78     0.76
 4 year integral                                                  0.84                0.77     0.96

 HP filtered time-varying threshold (with λ = 106 )
 2 year integral                                                  0.76                0.73     0.78
 4 year integral                                                  0.84                0.82     0.92

 Subsample: 1947-2013
 2 year integral                                                  0.89            -5.52        1.05
 4 year integral                                                  0.47            24.97        0.62

 Blanchard-Perotti identification
 2 year integral                                                  0.54                0.70     0.49
 4 year integral                                                  0.78                0.87     0.75

 Exclude World War II
 2 year integral                                                  1.01                0.83     0.97
                                                                 (0.376)          (1.484)     (0.325)
 4 year integral                                                  1.26                1.25     1.18
                                                                 (0.365)          (1.456)     (0.352)

                                                                 Linear        Recession     Expansion
 7 qtr. moving avg. output growth, F(z)
 2 year integral                                                  0.76                0.55     0.77
 4 year integral                                                  0.84                0.61     0.85
      Note: The values in brackets under some multipliers give the standard errors.
                                                    40
Table 3. Comparison to Auerbach-Gorodnichenko (2012) Multipliers

 Direct Comparisons                                           Extreme             Extreme
                                                             Recession           Expansion
                                                             (F(z)=1)             (F(z)=0)         Diﬀerence
 AG’s Estimates, Constant State
 5 year integral                                                 2.24              -0.33           2.57
                                                                (0.24)             (0.20)
 2 year integral                                                 1.65               0.10           1.55

 Jordà Method Applied to AG Specification
 5 year integral                                                 0.84               -0.59          1.43
 2 year integral                                                 0.24               0.36           -0.12

 Alternative Multipliers                                       Severe             Severe
 using                                                       Recession          Expansion
 AG’s STVAR Estimates                                       (F(z) ≥ 0.95)      (F(z) ≤ 0.05) Diﬀerence

 Constant State, No Feedback
 5 year integral                                                 2.16               -0.31          2.47
 2 year integral                                                 1.56               0.10           1.46

 Actual State Dynamics, No Feedback
 5 year integral                                                 1.41                0.19          1.22
 2 year integral                                                 1.13                0.15          0.97

 AG Partial Feedback
 5 year integral                                                 1.36               -0.04          1.40
 2 year integral                                                 1.01               0.15           0.86

 Actual State Dynamics, Partial Feedback
 5 year integral                                                 1.07                0.14          0.93
 2 year integral                                                 1.07                0.12          0.95


      Note: STVAR denotes the Smooth Transition Vector Autoregression used by AG-12. Impulse
      responses are calculated based on the VAR parameter estimates and auxiliary assumptions. The
      values in brackets under the multipliers give the standard errors. F(z) is AG’s indicator of the
      state of the economy. F(z) = 1 indicates the most severe recession possible and F(z) = 0 indicates
      the most extreme boom possible.
      "Constant state" means that the impulse responses are calculated assuming that the economy
      remains in its current state for the duration of the multiplier. "Feedback" means that the estimates
      allow government spending to change the state of the economy going forward.



                                                      41
Table 4. Estimated Multipliers Across Monetary Policy Regimes
                             Linear      Near Zero  Normal              P-value for diﬀerence
                             Model      Lower Bound                      in multipliers across
                                                                                states
        2 year integral       0.76           0.81            0.57
                             (0.102)        (0.139)         (0.191)                 0.356

        4 year integral       0.84           0.76            0.85
                             (0.092)        (0.073)         (0.501)                 0.860


     Note: The values in brackets under the multipliers give the standard errors.




                                                    42
Table 5. Robustness Checks of Multipliers Across Monetary Policy Regimes

                                            Linear       Near Zero  Normal            P-value for diﬀerence
                                            Model       Lower Bound                    in multipliers across
                                                                                              states
 Defining ZLB as T-bill rate≤ 0.5
 2 year integral                              0.76           0.70            1.02
                                             (0.104)        (0.092)         (0.389)           0.442
 4 year integral                              0.84           0.72            1.30
                                             (0.097)        (0.059)         (0.455)           0.225

 Blanchard-Perotti identification
 2 year integral                              0.54           0.65            0.47
                                             (0.087)        (0.079)         (0.191)           0.411
 4 year integral                              0.78           0.78            0.85
                                             (0.112)        (0.091)         (0.579)           0.897

 Including taxes
 2 year integral                              0.74           0.73            0.71
                                             (0.103)        (0.131)         (0.259)           0.925
 4 year integral                              0.82           0.71            1.36
                                             (0.106)        (0.065)         (0.541)           0.245

 Including inflation
 2 year integral                              0.78           0.80            0.69
                                             (0.090)        (0.129)         (0.144)           0.592
 4 year integral                              0.85           0.76            1.02
                                             (0.088)        (0.063)         (0.383)           0.511



      Note: The values in brackets under the multipliers give the standard errors.




                                                       43
Table 6. Robustness Checks of Multipliers Across Monetary Policy Regimes: Excluding
WWII

                                            Linear      Near Zero  Normal             P-value for diﬀerence
                                            Model      Lower Bound                     in multipliers across
                                                                                              states
 Baseline specification
 2 year integral                             1.01            1.59            0.57
                                            (0.376)         (0.532)         (0.192)           0.126

 4 year integral                             1.26            1.06            0.85
                                            (0.365)         (0.364)         (0.501)           0.790

 Blanchard-Perotti identification
 2 year integral                             0.49            1.88            0.47
                                            (0.190)         (1.078)         (0.193)           0.198
 4 year integral                             0.78            1.70            0.86
                                            (0.461)         (1.084)         (0.573)           0.469

 Including taxes
 2 year integral                             0.98            1.19            0.71
                                            (0.266)         (0.266)         (0.261)           0.240

 4 year integral                             1.29            0.79            1.36
                                            (0.272)         (0.301)         (0.542)           0.388

 Including inflation
 2 year integral                             1.06            1.53            0.69
                                            (0.326)         (0.496)         (0.144)           0.140

 4 year integral                             1.28            1.00            1.01
                                            (0.316)         (0.356)         (0.379)           0.987

      Note: The values in brackets under the multipliers give the standard errors.




                                                      44
Figure 1. Government Spending and GDP


                              Log of real per capita government spending
           5

         4.5

           4

         3.5

           3

         2.5

           2

         1.5

           1
                1900         1920        1940         1960         1980        2000



                                      Log of real per capita GDP

         3.5


           3


         2.5


           2


         1.5


           1
                1900         1920         1940         1960        1980         2000




Note: The vertical lines indicate major military events: 1898q1(Spanish-American War), 1914q3 (WWI),
1939q3 (WWII), 1950q3 (Korean War), 1965q1 (Vietnam War), 1980q1 (Soviet invasion of Afghanistan),
2001q3 (9/11).




                                                 45
Figure 2. Military spending news and unemployment rate

                                       Military news (% of GDP)

          60

          40

          20

           0

                 1900          1920         1940         1960          1980         2000

                                        Unemployment rate


          20

          15

          10

           5

                 1900          1920         1940         1960          1980         2000


Note: Shaded areas indicate periods when the unemployment rate is above the threshold of 6.5%.




                                                   46
Figure 3. Tests of Instrument Relevance Across States of Slack

                         Full Sample                               Full Sample with no WWII
          20                                              20

          15                                              15

          10                                              10

           5                                               5

           0                                               0
               0          5     10            15               0          5        10         15
                            h                                                  h
                     Post−WWII Sample
          20

          15                                                          Linear
                                                                      High unemployment
          10
                                                                      Low unemployment
           5

           0
               0          5         10        15
                               h

Note: "Slack" is when the unemployment rate exceeds 6.5 percent. The lines show the F-statistic on the news
variable for each horizon in the case of the linear model (solid black lines), high unemployment state (blue
dashed lines) and the low unemployment state (lines with red circles). Statistics are capped at 20. The full
sample is 1890:1-2013:4, and the post-WWII sample spans 1947:3 - 2013:4.




                                                    47
Figure 4. Government spending and GDP responses to a news shock across slack states

                Linear: Government spending                              Linear: GDP
                                                           0.6
         0.6
                                                           0.4
         0.4

         0.2                                               0.2

            0
                                                            0
                     5        10       15        20                  5        10       15        20

        State−dependent: Government Spending                       State−dependent: GDP
            1
                                                           0.8
         0.8
                                                           0.6
         0.6
         0.4                                               0.4

         0.2                                               0.2
            0                                               0
                     5       10        15        20                  5       10        15        20
                            quarter                                         quarter

Note: Response of government spending and GDP to a news shock equal to 1% of GDP. The top panel shows
the responses in the linear model. The bottom panel shows the state-dependent responses where the blue
dashed lines are responses in the high unemployment state and the lines with red circles are responses in the
low unemployment state. 95% confidence intervals are shown in all cases.




                                                      48
Figure 5. Cumulative multipliers across slack states

                              Linear: cumulative spending multiplier

       2.2
         2
       1.8
       1.6
       1.4
       1.2
         1
       0.8
       0.6

              2      4        6       8      10      12        14      16   18   20



                         State dependent: cumulative spending multiplier
         2

       1.5

         1

       0.5

         0

      −0.5

        −1
              2      4        6       8      10      12        14      16   18   20
                                             quarter




Note: Cumulative spending multipliers across diﬀerent horizons. The top panel shows the cumulative mul-
tipliers in the linear model. The bottom panel shows the state-dependent multipliers where the blue dashed
lines are multipliers in the high unemployment state and the lines with red circles are multipliers in the low
unemployment state. 95% confidence intervals are shown in all cases.




                                                          49
Figure 6. Robustness check: New threshold of unemployment rate based on time-
varying trend



         20



         15



         10



          5



          0
               1900       1920        1940       1960       1980        2000


Note: Unemployment rate with a time-varying trend. The solid line is the unemployment rate and the black
dashed line shows the time varying trend based on HP filter with λ = 106 , over a split sample, 1889 - 1929
and 1947 - 2013 and linearly interpolated for the small gap in trend unemployment between 1929 and 1947.
Shaded areas indicate periods when the unemployment rate is above the time-varying trend.



Figure 7. Robustness check: New smooth transition threshold based on moving average
of output growth


         0.9

         0.8

         0.7

         0.6

         0.5

         0.4

         0.3

         0.2

         0.1


               1900       1920        1940       1960        1980       2000



Note: The figures shows the weight on a recession regime, F(z) and the shaded areas indicate recessions as
defined by NBER.


                                                    50
Figure 8. Estimating Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012) with the Jorda method

                Linear: Government spending                                Linear: GDP

          1.5
                                                             2
            1
                                                             1
          0.5
                                                             0
            0
                                                            −1
                     5        10        15        20                   5        10        15        20

         State−dependent: Government Spending                       State−dependent: GDP

                                                             6
            2
                                                             4
            1                                                2
                                                             0
            0
                                                            −2
          −1
                     5        10        15        20                   5       10         15        20
                             quarter                                          quarter

Note: Response of government spending and GDP to a government spending shock equal to 1% of GDP, with
the same data, identification scheme and threshold definition as Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012). The top
panel shows the responses in the linear model. The bottom panel shows the state-dependent responses where
the blue dashed lines are responses in recession and the lines with red circles are responses in expansions. 95%
confidence intervals are shown in all cases.




                                                       51
Figure 9. Responses of taxes and deficits


                     Government spending                                      GDP
                                                            0.6
          0.6

                                                            0.4
          0.4


          0.2                                               0.2


            0
                                                             0
                     5        10        15       20                  5        10        15        20

                            Tax rate                                         Deficit


          0.1                                               0.4
                                                            0.3
                                                            0.2
         0.05
                                                            0.1
                                                             0

            0                                              −0.1
                     5        10        15       20                  5        10        15        20

      Ratio of cumulative deficit to cumulative spending


          0.5



            0



        −0.5
                     5        10        15       20




Note: These are responses for taxes and deficits in the linear model. The shaded areas indicate 95% confidence
bands.




                                                      52
Figure 10. State-dependent responses of taxes and deficits: Considering slack state


                    Government Spending                                       GDP
            1
                                                           0.8
          0.8
                                                           0.6
          0.6
          0.4                                              0.4

          0.2                                              0.2
            0
                                                            0
                     5        10        15       20                  5        10        15        20

                            Tax rate                                         Deficit

                                                           0.6
         0.15

                                                           0.4
          0.1

                                                           0.2
         0.05
                                                            0
            0
                     5        10        15       20                  5        10        15        20
                                                                             quarter
      Ratio of cumulative deficit to cumulative spending


          0.5



            0



        −0.5
                     5       10         15       20
                            quarter




Note: These are state-dependent responses for taxes and deficits, where the black solid lines are responses in
the high unemployment state and the lines with red circles are responses in the low unemployment state. 95%
confidence intervals are also shown.



                                                      53
Figure 11. Military spending news and interest rate

                                         Military news (% of GDP)

          60

          40

          20

            0

                  1900          1920          1940          1960          1980         2000

                                             Tbill rate
          15


          10


            5



                  1900          1920          1940          1960          1980         2000


Note: Shaded areas indicate periods which we classify as the zero lower bound period for interest rate.




                                                     54
Figure 12. Tests of Instrument Relevance Across Monetary Policy Regimes
                           Full Sample                                Full Sample with no WWII
           20                                               20


           15                                               15


           10                                               10


            5                                                5


            0                                                0
                0         5          10         15               0         5          10         15
                                h                                                h

Note: "ZLB" is when interest rates are near the zero lower bound or the Fed is being very accommodative of
fiscal policy (1932q1-1951q1, 2008q4-2013q4). The lines show the F-statistic on the news variable for each
horizon in the case of the linear model (solid black lines), ZLB state (blue dashed lines) and the normal state
(lines with red circles). Statistics are capped at 20. The full sample is 1890:1-2013:4, and the post WWII
sample spans 1947:3 - 2013:4.




                                                     55
Figure 13. Inflation, output gap and Taylor rule implied interest rate


                                          Inflation (year over year)
          20

          10

            0

         −10

           1920     1930     1940     1950     1960       1970    1980     1990     2000     2010

                                                  Output gap

          20

            0

         −20

         −40
           1920     1930     1940     1950     1960       1970    1980     1990     2000     2010

                                     T−bill rate and Taylor rule int rate


          20


            0


         −20


           1920     1930     1940     1950     1960       1970    1980     1990     2000     2010




Note: The top panel shows the year-over-year GDP deflator inflation rate and the second panel shows the output
gap, which is constructed as the percentage deviation between real GDP and potential GDP. In the last panel,
the solid line shows the data for the 3-month T-bill rate, and the dashed line shows the Taylor-rule implied
nominal interest rate, where shaded areas indicate periods which we classify as the zero lower bound period
for interest rate.
                                                     56
Figure 14. Government spending and GDP responses to a news shock: Considering
zero lower bound
                Linear: Government spending                                 Linear: GDP
                                                              0.6
          0.6
                                                              0.4
          0.4

          0.2                                                 0.2

            0
                                                               0
                     5         10        15        20                  5        10        15        20

         State−dependent: Government Spending                        State−dependent: GDP


          0.6                                                 0.4

          0.4                                                 0.2
          0.2
                                                               0
            0
                                                             −0.2
                     5        10         15        20                  5        10        15        20
                             quarter                                           quarter

Note: Response of government spending and GDP to a news shock equal to 1% of GDP. The top panel shows
the responses in the linear model. The bottom panel shows the state-dependent responses where the blue dashed
lines are responses in the near zero-lower bound state and the lines with red circles are responses in the normal
state. 95% confidence intervals are shown in all cases.




                                                        57
Figure 15. Cumulative multipliers: Considering zero lower bound

                              Linear: cumulative spending multiplier

        2.2
         2
        1.8
        1.6
        1.4
        1.2
         1
        0.8
        0.6

              2      4        6       8      10      12        14      16   18   20




                         State dependent: cumulative spending multiplier
         5

         4

         3

         2

         1

         0

        −1
              2      4        6       8      10      12        14      16   18   20
                                             quarter




Note: Cumulative spending multipliers across diﬀerent horizons. The top panel shows the cumulative multi-
pliers in the linear model. The bottom panel shows the state-dependent multipliers where the blue dashed lines
are multipliers in the near zero-lower bound state and the lines with red circles are multipliers in the normal
state. 95% confidence intervals are shown in all cases.




                                                          58
