                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CAN UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE SPUR ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITY?

                                           Johan Hombert
                                          Antoinette Schoar
                                             David Sraer
                                           David Thesmar

                                        Working Paper 20717
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20717


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2014




This is the substantially revised version of a paper previously titled “Should the Government Make
it Safer to Start a Business? Evidence From a French Reform”. We thank participants at many conferences
and seminars for comments and suggestions. In particular, we are indebted to Ashwini Agrawal, Steve
Davis, Guy Laroque, David Matsa, Toby Moskowitz, Marina Niessner, and Elena Simintzi for their
valuable insights. The data used in this paper is confidential but not the authors’ exclusive access.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Johan Hombert, Antoinette Schoar, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Unemployment Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity?
Johan Hombert, Antoinette Schoar, David Sraer, and David Thesmar
NBER Working Paper No. 20717
November 2014
JEL No. G3,H25,J65

                                               ABSTRACT

We study a large-scale French reform that provided generous downside insurance for unemployed
individuals starting a business. We study whether this reform affects the composition of people who
are drawn into entrepreneurship. New firms started in response to the reform are, on average, smaller,
but have similar growth expectations and education levels compared to start-ups before the reform.
They are also as likely to survive or to hire. In aggregate, the effect of the reform on employment is
largely offset by large crowd-out effects. However, because new firms are more productive, the reform
has the impact of raising aggregate productivity. These results suggest that the dispersion of entrepreneurial
abilities is small in the data, so that the facilitation of entry leads to sizable Schumpeterian dynamics
at the firm-level.


Johan Hombert                                         David Sraer
HEC Paris                                             Haas School of Business
1 rue de la Liberation                                University of California, Berkeley
78351 Jouy en Josas                                   545 Student Services Building
France                                                Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
hombert@hec.fr                                        and NBER
                                                      sraer@berkeley.edu
Antoinette Schoar
MIT Sloan School of Management                        David Thesmar
100 Main Street, E62-638                              HEC Paris
Cambridge, MA 02142                                   1 rue de la libération
and NBER                                              78351 Jouy-en-Josas cedex
aschoar@mit.edu                                       France
                                                      thesmar@hec.fr
   “The problem with the French is that they have no word for entrepreneur”, attributed to George
W. Bush.




1       Introduction
Over the last decade, policy makers and academics alike have embraced entrepreneurship as a
panacea for many economic challenges. Reducing barriers to entrepreneurship has consequently
become a major policy objective and an object of intense academic evaluation.1 The primary
focus of this literature has been on how reduction in barriers to entrepreneurship affects the level
of entrepreneurship. However, this focus may be misleading. Entrepreneurial rates conceal a
substantial amount of heterogeneity, as entrepreneurs vary in their ability to manage their firm or
to grow and create jobs (Nanda (2008)), from self-employed individuals—looking for subsistence
opportunities—to transformational entrepreneurs who aim at building large firms (Schoar (2010)
or Haltiwanger et al. (2013)). Beyond ability, entrepreneurs have different degrees of risk tolerance,
ambition, or optimism (Hurst and Pugsley (2011), Landier and Thesmar (2009), or Holtz-Eakin
et al. (1994a)). The welfare implications of barriers to entrepreneurship thus crucially depend on
how individuals select into this activity. For instance, policies that draw less qualified individuals
into entrepreneurship may deteriorate allocative efficiency, as scarce resources are diverted to less
productive firms.
     Beyond ability, an important dimension of selection into entrepreneurship is risk-aversion, since
entrepreneurs have to bear significant idiosyncratic and possibly fundamental risk (Kihlstrom and
Laffont (1979)). The academic literature has been struggling to evaluate conclusively whether this
inherent risk associated with entrepreneurship and self-employment is an undesirable constraint
or a necessary selection criterion. When designing interventions that defray some of the downside
risk of entrepreneurship, policy-makers face an inherent tension. On the one hand, entrepreneurial
risk might dissuade many able individuals from starting a business, if these individuals are risk
averse and can only learn about their ability as entrepreneurs by starting a firm (see Jovanovic
(1982) or Caves (1998)). As a result, many promising businesses might not get set up. In such a
world, providing a form of downside insurance to would-be entrepreneurs could lead to increased
efficient entry into self-employment. On the other hand, this downside insurance could distort
the pool of entrepreneurs who start businesses. If people have ex ante private information about
their entrepreneurial abilities, being forced to bear downside risk might serve as an effective way
    1
     See, for example, the fast-growing literature on the impact of financial market reforms on entrepreneurship,
e.g., Bertrand et al. (2007) or Cole (2009). For papers on regulatory constraints, see Djankov et al. (2002) or
Klapper et al. (2006).


                                                       2
to screen out entrepreneurs who have low expectations about the success of their venture.
    To investigate this trade-off, we first develop a general equilibrium model of selection into self-
employment that features risk-averse individuals and heterogeneity in the distribution of talent.
We show that the effect of downside insurance provision on the pool of entrepreneurs depends
on the size of the wedge that is created by risk aversion and the heterogeneity of talents. If
talents are relatively heterogeneous, the “self-selection” effect dominates: an intervention that
lowers downside risk draws in low-quality entrepreneurs. In contrast, if the talent distribution is
more homogeneous, such an intervention draws in entrepreneurs of similar ex ante quality and
thus allows risk averse individuals to learn about their success as entrepreneurs. We refer to this
as the “experimentation channel”.2
    We then evaluate the above trade-off in the context of a large-scale reform implemented in
France in 2002, which aimed at facilitating (small) business creation for unemployed workers,
called PARE—Plan d’Aide au Retour à l’Emploi. The reform provided downside insurance to
unemployed individuals starting businesses, mostly by allowing them to retain their rights to
unemployment benefits for three years in case of failure of their venture, which previously they
would lose by becoming entrepreneurs. Additionally, the reform gave “unemployed entrepreneurs”
the possibility to fill any gap between their entrepreneurial revenues and their unemployment
benefits by using their accrued unemployment benefits, providing insurance against cash flow
shortfalls in the first three years.
    As soon as the reform is implemented, monthly firm creation immediately increases by 25%.
This is strongly suggestive of the large impact of the reform. To filter out the effect of other macroe-
conomic shocks, we employ a standard difference-in-difference estimation. The treatment group
consists of industries where newly created firms tend to be small before the reform. By contrast,
the control group contains industries where small firms are not prevalent at creation. The idea un-
derlying this choice is that since the reform provided downside insurance for unemployed workers,
it should have mostly affected industries that are most likely to attract small-scale entrepreneurs.
Therefore, our treatment industries should have a larger exposure to the reform than our control
industries. The identifying assumption is that absent the policy reform, both types of industries
would have experienced similar changes in entrepreneurial activity relative to pre-reform levels.
Under this assumption, which we make more explicit in Section 5, the difference-in-difference es-
timator allows us to reject the null hypothesis that the reform did not increase entrepreneurial
activity. Empirically, we find a very large effect of the reform on business creation across indus-
   2
     One can also extend this model to allow for heterogeneous talent and heterogeneity in risk aversion. The net
effect of greater downside insurance then depends on the sign of the correlation between talent and risk aversion.
In the limit, if very talented individuals are the most (resp. least) risk averse, providing downside insurance leads
to an increase (resp. a decrease) in average entrepreneurial talent.



                                                         3
tries: Post-reform entry growth is larger by more than 12 percentage points in industries where
small firms are prevalent at creation.
    Using the same identification strategy, we further document that the firms created in response
to the reform are not of (observably) worse quality ex post. We do not observe a significant change
in the failure rate, hiring rate, or growth rate of young firms in treated industries following the
reform relative to control industries. We also find that the reform did not significantly affect the
composition of educational backgrounds of founders. Somewhat surprisingly, the reform seems
to have led to a significant entry of “ambitious” founders, where ambition is measured from a
survey that asks founders of new firms about their growth expectations and intention to hire
workers in the next year. Firms created in the treatment industries are 3.5 percentage points
more likely to intend to hire relative to firms in control industries. This is a sizable effect since
the sample average is 18% for these industries. Overall, the evidence is more consistent with the
“experimentation view”, whereby providing downside insurance allowed unemployed workers to
enter into self-employment without significantly lowering the average quality of the pool. This
suggests that the ex ante selection into self-employment was not based on steep differences in the
talent distribution of would-be entrepreneurs.
    The final part of the paper focuses on the equilibrium effects of the reform and looks at potential
spillovers on incumbent firms in treated industries. The significant entry of new firms post-reform
may have eroded incumbent firms’ market shares, which is the key idea underlying the concept
of creative destruction. Our analysis reveals that employment growth among small incumbents is
lower by 2.6 percentage points after the reform in treated industries relative to control industries.
However, we do not find any evidence for spillover effects on large incumbent firms. This is
consistent with the idea that the competition from increased entrepreneurial activity is stronger
for small incumbents than for large ones, at least in the short-run. The crowding-out effects on
small incumbents are economically large. According to our estimates, they offset most of the direct
effects of the reform on employment creation by start-ups. These results bear some similarity to
the literature on financial reforms, which also documents that increased entry is detrimental to
incumbent firms (Cetorelli and Strahan (2006), Bertrand et al. (2007), Kerr and Nanda (2009a)).
    We also document that wages and productivity (measured as value added or sales per worker)
are larger in newly created firms, both in treated and control industries as well as before and after
the reform, when compared with “shrinking” incumbents, i.e., incumbents whose employment has
recently decreased. Two years after creation, value added per worker is e7,000 per year higher in
newly created firms relative to these incumbents. This suggests that, even if the jobs created by
newly created firms after the reform are fully offset by jobs destroyed in small incumbent firms, this
labor reallocation process from incumbents to start-ups can have a positive impact on aggregate
productivity, since newly created firms in the data are, on average, more productive than the firms

                                                  4
they displace.
    In the final part of the paper we offer an assessment of the aggregate cost-benefit analysis of
these reforms. We calculate that the reform had a positive impact on the French economy in the
order of magnitude of about e350 million per year. The analysis weighs the benefits of the reform
due to shorter unemployment spells and labor reallocation to more productive and higher-paying
jobs against the costs of subsidizing the move of marginal and infra-marginal unemployed into
self-employment. We also find that the cost to the unemployment agency is about e100 million
per year.


Related Literature
Our results make two novel contributions to the existing literature on barriers to entry into en-
trepreneurship: (1) we provide detailed micro-evidence on the composition of entrepreneurs who
get drawn into self-employment when entry barriers are relaxed; (2) we document how removing
barriers to entry affect incumbent firms. The earlier literature has looked at cross-country differ-
ences in barriers to entry and the aggregate implications for entry rates (Djankov et al. (2002),
Desai et al. (2003), Klapper et al. (2006)). Because of its focus on cross-country outcomes, this
literature has mostly overlooked how barriers to entry affect the composition of the pool of actual
entrepreneurs. There are few country-level studies on the impact of entry regulations that use
micro-data. Most of these papers focus on the effect of simplifications in the registration process
and/or reduction in the transaction costs associated with entry (Branstetter et al. (2014), Mul-
lainathan and Schnabl (2010), or Bruhn (2011)). These reforms affect not only the incentives
for individuals to create new firms but also the willingness to formalize existing activities. Addi-
tionally, these papers typically examine entry rates and do not consider how these de-regulations
affect entrepreneurial quality or labor reallocation across entire industries, which is the focus of
our paper.
    Our paper is also related to a large literature on the role of financing constraints on en-
trepreneurship. Many papers have shown that limited access to finance affects business creation
and growth (Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994a), Holtz-Eakin et al. (1994b),
Hurst and Lusardi (2004), de Mel et al. (2008), Kerr and Nanda (2009b), Adelino et al. (2013),
Schmalz et al. (2013)). The policy experiment in this paper can be viewed as a monetary transfer
to entrepreneurs, but in the form of increased insurance in case of failure. Our results demon-
strate that these types of subsidies also increase entrepreneurial activity, thereby fostering creative
destruction in affected industries.
    Our paper also contributes to the literature on selection into entrepreneurship (Kihlstrom
and Laffont (1979), Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), Hamilton (2000), Moskowitz and Vissing-


                                                  5
Jørgensen (2002), Hurst and Pugsley (2011)). These papers have documented a large heterogeneity
in the talent, ambition, and risk-preferences of entrepreneurs, which translates into different in-
vestment and effort choices following entry. Our results show that at the time of entry, potential
entrepreneurs seem to ignore this heterogeneity: In our sample, the marginal entrepreneurs that
enter post-reform share characteristics similar to infra-marginal ones. Consequently, the distribu-
tion of entrepreneurial talent does not worsen following a reduction in entry costs as individuals
are able to experiment with setting-up a firm and learn about their type.3
    Finally, our paper is also related to the vast literature that examines how unemployment ben-
efits distort labor supply, and in particular unemployment duration (Solon (1985), Moffitt (1985),
Katz and Meyer (1990), Card and Levine (2000) among others). Relative to these papers, our
contribution highlights a new, important distortive margin of unemployment insurance by looking
specifically at the supply of self-employed workers. In the same way that unemployment insurance
can reduce the incentives of unemployed workers to find a new job, the risk of losing unemployment
benefits can reduce the incentive of unemployed individuals to start a new firm/create their own
job. Our results show that this margin is quantitatively large. When the risk of losing unemploy-
ment benefits are reduced, which is precisely the experiment we are looking at, we observe a large
and significant increase in the supply of self-employment.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We present the reform in Section 2, a simple
economic framework in Section 3, the data in Section 4, the empirical strategy in Section 5, the
results on the direct effect of the reform on the number and quality of new firms in Section 6, the
aggregate impact effect of the reform on employment and productivity in Section 7. Section 8 is
an attempt to provide a cost-benefit analysis.


2       The Reform and Institutional Details
2.1     Describing the Reform
We focus on a reform passed by the French Ministry of Labor in 2001 that aimed at reducing the
implicit disincentives for unemployed workers to start a business. These changes were decided in
mid-2001, as part of a larger negotiation on unemployment benefits, and became fully effective
in mid-2002. In July 2001, a new agreement between labor unions and employer organizations
was signed (PARE, Plan d’Aide au Retour à l’Emploi), which established new rules on unemploy-
ment benefits. The overall goal was to provide more generous benefits for unemployed workers
    3
    By emphasizing the role of experimentation for entrepreneurs, our paper is also related to Manso (2011), who
shows that the combination of tolerance for early failure and reward for long-term success is optimal to motivate
innovation when entrepreneurs need to experiment.



                                                       6
who engage in an active employment search.4 An important part of this reform included the
provision of insurance to unemployed workers starting a new firm. First, the new system allowed
unemployed entrepreneurs to claim unemployment benefits in case of business failure. Before the
reform, an unemployed worker would lose eligibility to its accumulated unemployment benefits
when starting a business, even if the business subsequently failed. The new agreement allowed
unemployed individuals starting a firm to retain their rights to the remaining unemployment ben-
efits for up to three years.5 Second, the reform also stipulated that unemployed could keep their
unemployment benefits while starting their own firm (Rieg (2004)) if the income derived from the
entrepreneurial activity remained below 70% of the pre-unemployment income. Unemployment
benefits were in this case calculated so as to complement entrepreneurial income up to 70% of the
pre-unemployment income level. Finally, unearned benefits were not voided, but could be paid
in the future if entrepreneurial income would ever fall back below 70% of the pre-unemployment
threshold.6 Therefore, unemployed workers who decided to start a business were guaranteed to
receive at least their unemployment benefits for at least two and up to three years.

                                   INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

    The unemployment agency began massively advertising the reform to unemployed individuals
in the fall of 2002 (Rieg (2004)). While it is not possible to directly observe the timing of this
advertisement effort, the Ministry of Labor provides us with monthly data on the take-up of the
ACCRE program, a subsidy allocated to unemployed entrepreneurs only.7 Figure 1 shows the
monthly number of new firms receiving the ACCRE subsidy, which is therefore a lower bound of
the number unemployed entrepreneurs. As is clear from Figure 1, the number of new firms created
by unemployed entrepreneurs increases sharply between 2002 and 2005. We discuss the aggregate
magnitude in Section 4.
   4
     In France, labor and employer unions jointly run the unemployment benefit agency. Every third year, a new
agreement is signed to adapt unemployment insurance to changing labor market conditions. In 2001, against a
backdrop of strong economic recovery in the late 1990s, the unemployment insurance regime was running a large
surplus, and was expected to do so over the next few years.
   5
     Article 1-5 of the PARE agreement.
   6
     Each month, the unemployment agency uses the daily pre-unemployment wage w as a benchmark. It then
divides monthly entrepreneurial income by daily wage w to obtain the number d of days in the months in which
the jobless person has received the equivalent of her former salary. The agency then pays unemployment benefits
based on 28 − d days of unemployment. The person does, however, retain the “rights” over unpaid unemployment
benefits corresponding to d worked days, which she can claim for up to three years.
   7
     This program significantly reduces payroll taxes paid by entrepreneurs up to three years after starting their
firm.




                                                        7
2.2     External Validity
Since the reform we analyze takes place in France, a valid concern is that certain characteristics of
the French labor market might explain the effect the reform had on entry and average firm quality.
This section provides a comparison of the relevant aspects of the French labor market with other
OECD countries’ labor markets.
    First, our results on the relatively high quality of new entrepreneurs may in part be driven by
the fact that France has a particularly large pool of highly-skilled unemployed. France is a high
unemployment economy, with an unemployment rate of 8.3% in 2002 vs. 7.3% on average in the
OECD. Long-term unemployment is more prevalent than in Anglo-Saxon countries.8 This points
toward France having, if anything, a lower-skilled pool of individuals in unemployment. So we
would expect the reform to draw in relatively less-skilled individuals.
    Second, the reform could have a large effect on entry because large unemployment benefits
created, prior to the reform, a strong disincentive to start a company. The Net Replacement Rate
computed by OECD for the average wage in France is 62%, compared to an OECD average of
56%. It is thus the case that the French unemployment insurance system is slightly more generous
than the typical developed economy, but the difference is marginal.
    Third, the strength of the response to the reform may be related to the fact that France had
too few entrepreneurs to start with. Using World Bank data from 2004, we see that the French
firm creation rate (2.8 new corporations per 1,000 inhabitants) is slightly above the Eurozone
average, which is at 2.6, and slightly below the OECD median of 3.3. However, the firm creation
rate in France in the 2004 World Bank data shows a very large gap with the rate observed in
Anglo-Saxon countries (e.g., 9.8 for the UK). Clearly, continental Europe faces stronger barriers
to entry than Anglo-Saxon countries, so that reforms like the one we analyze in the paper may
have a weaker effect on firm creation in the latter countries.


3       Economic Framework
This section lays out the theoretical framework that will guide our empirical strategy. We first
describe the model, and then use it to derive predictions. The key insight is that these predictions
allow to indirectly measure the degree of heterogeneity in entrepreneurial ability.
    8
    About 32% of the unemployed in France have been unemployed for less than 3 months vs. more than 50% in
the US or Canada, and 45% for the UK.




                                                    8
3.1    The Model
We start from the model of entrepreneurship in equilibrium in Lucas (1978). We only make two
modifications. First, we make entrepreneurship risky, and introduce some level of government
insurance. Second, we introduce two separate sectors, which differ by their scale of production, in
order to fit our difference-in-difference empirical strategy.
   There are two industries, T (Treatment) and C (Control), which produce differentiated goods.
Let xs be the consumption of the good    produced in industry   s ∈ {T, C}. All agents maximize a
                                                            σ 
                                             σ−1     σ−1  σ−1
CES utility function U (xT , xC ) = log     xT σ + xCσ         , where σ > 0. Let ps be the price of
each good s and y be the income of an agent, its indirect utility is given by:

                                                        1
                                                           log p1−σ + p1−σ
                                                                           
                          U (y, pT , pC ) = log(y) +            T      C     .
                                                       σ−1

    The model has two periods. First, agents choose between starting a firm or supplying la-
bor. Second, production takes place, entrepreneurs in each industry receive profits and workers
salaries—which we normalize without loss of generality to 1. All agents consume.
    All agents in the economy are potential entrepreneurs. There is a measure 1 of potential en-
trepreneurs tied to each industry s. Industry knowledge is crucial for entrepreneurs, but irrelevant
for workers. An agent tied to s can work in any industry, but only start a firm in s. Starting a
firm is risky: When an individual decides to become an entrepreneur, he first needs to find out
whether there is a market for his idea. If there is no such market (with probability 1 − q), it is too
late to become a worker and he gets b. b is a government subsidy given to failed entrepreneurs.
This subsidy is financed through a proportional income tax, which creates no distortion since we
have assumed log utility.
    With probability q, the business lives but the profit depends on ability. The entrepreneur then
hires l workers and produces g(θ)A1−β lβ , where A is an aggregate productivity parameter, θ is
                                                                    θ1−β
entrepreneurial ability, and β ∈ (0, 1). We posit g(θ) ≡ (1−β)        1−β β β to simplify expressions. In

each industry, entrepreneurial abilities are distributed according to a Pareto distribution of c.d.f.
F (θ) = 1 − (θ0 /θ)φ , φ ≥ 1. Total costs consist of the wage bill l and a fixed cost cs that depends
on the industry. Industry T has a lower scale of production, i.e., a lower fixed cost: cT < cC .
Entrepreneurial profit is thus given by πs (θ, l, ps ) = ps A1−β g(θ)lβ − l − cs .


3.2    Predictions
Similarly to Lucas (1978), the equilibrium is characterized by an ability cutoff θs in each industry
above which all agents become entrepreneurs and below which all agents become workers.
   We then model the reform as an increase in the downside protection for failed entrepreneurs

                                                       9
b. We look at how this impacts entry, firm quality, and incumbent size. These quantities react
differently in sectors T and C, and the model leads to closed-form solutions for all three differential
reactions. We solve the model in Appendix A and gather the results in proposition 1.

Proposition 1. Assume the reform leads to a marginal increase in b by ∆b. Then:

  1. The differential increase in the number of firms Ns = 1 − F (θs ) is given by:

                                     ∆ log(NT ) − ∆ log(NC ) = E(φ)


  2. The differential increase in average quality of firms qs = E(log(θ)|θ ≥ θs ) is given by:

                                           ∆qT − ∆qC = −Q(φ)


  3. The average size of “incumbents” firms log(Ls ) = E(log(l(θ))|θ > θs ) is given by:

                                     ∆ log(LT ) − ∆ log(LC ) = −S(φ)


where E is positive and increasing. Q is positive, decreasing and tends to 0 when φ → ∞. S is
positive, increasing and S(1) = 0. Neither E, Q nor S depend on aggregate productivity A.

    The first output of the model is the difference-in-difference specification. Proposition 1 shows
that comparing outcomes between T and S allows to filter out the (unobserved) aggregate pro-
ductivity shock A. It also shows the intuitive result that the reform has a stronger impact on
the low-scale industry T . To see why, notice first that the minimum ability to start a business
is lower in industry T , since the fixed cost is lower. A key assumption is that the distribution
of abilities has a decreasing hazard rate F 0 (θ)/(1 − F (θ)) (as is the case with Pareto). Thus, in
industry T , the number of “marginal entrepreneurs” right below the threshold is larger, and the
reform brings in a heavier mass of entrepreneurs into that industry. This induces more entry and
more crowding-out in sector T . This also induces a bigger deterioration of quality.
    Second, the effect of the reform depends on the degree of entrepreneurial skill homogeneity.
When the shape parameter φ is close to 1, entrepreneurial skills are very heterogeneous. This
setting would be consistent with the “self-selection view” described in introduction, whereby entry
is determined by large differences in talents. In this case, Proposition 1 establishes that the reform
only has a small (positive) effect on entry. When b goes up, the ability threshold above which
agents become entrepreneurs goes down: There is more entry, but the effect is small because
agents are more “spread out” on the ability spectrum. Average quality does, however, respond
a lot, since the new entrepreneurs are much worse than the inframarginal ones. Because entry

                                                  10
is limited, however, there is very little crowding-out of incumbents (in the limit, not at all since
S(1) = 0).
     The picture changes drastically when entrepreneurial skills are very homogeneous, a setting
more consistent with the “experimentation view” discussed in introduction, whereby entrepreneurs
are similar ex ante, and entry is mostly determined by business risk. When the shape parameter
φ is large, the model predicts a big positive effect on entry, strong crowding-out, and a small
deterioration in firm quality. Intuitively, an increase in b reduces the ability threshold by the same
amount as before, but since the c.d.f. is a steeper function of ability, the amount of entry is much
larger. As a result, new entrants exert a stronger competitive pressure on incumbent firms, which
in turn shrink more. Since skills are more homogeneous however, the quality of new entrants is
not much lower than the quality of infra-marginal entrepreneurs. Our empirical findings are more
consistent with this second case.


4     Data
We use three sources of data, which we obtain from the French Statistical Office (INSEE): the firm
registry, accounting data on firm performance and employment, and a survey that is conducted
every four years on a sixth of all French entrepreneurs who start in that year.


4.1    Registry
The firm registry contains the universe of firms that are registered each month in France. This is
a monthly data set. It is available from 1993 to 2008. For each newly created firm, it includes the
industry the firm operates in, using a 4-digit classification system similar to the 4-digit NAICS.
It also provides the firm’s legal status (Sole Proprietorship, Limited Liability Corporation, or
Corporation). The registry dataset also contains the exhaustive list of French firms at the end of
each year, which we use to construct an exit dummy.

                                INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE

    As Figure 2 shows, the reform was followed by a steep increase in firm creation. This figure
reports the 12-month moving-average of the number of monthly creations over different categories
of firms and sample periods. Panel A looks at monthly firm creation for all types of firms between
1993 and 2008. It shows that, starting in 2003, the number of firms created each month increases
from 14,000 in early 2003 to about 18,000 at the end of 2004. This increase in firm creation is very
large compared to previous fluctuations (1995 and 2000). After reaching a plateau in 2005, firm
creation starts increasing again. This increase is often linked to a series of later reforms, including

                                                  11
the possibility to declare a company online (June 2006) and a reform (“auto-entrepreneur”, in
August 2008) designed to facilitate self-employment (for individuals billing less than e30,000 per
year). The study of these reforms is beyond the scope of this paper. To avoid any contamination
in the post-period, we focus our analysis on the 1999–2005 time frame. Panel B narrows in on
this period. Panel C looks separately at the number of firms created each month that have zero
employees at creation (blue, dotted line) or that have zero employees two years after creation (red,
solid line). It shows that, in the aggregate, the reform is accompanied by a surge in the creation
of firms that are started very small and remain so after two years. Panel D presents, for the
1999–2005 period, the number of firms created each month with at least one employee at creation
(blue, dotted line) and with at least one employee two years after creation (red, solid line). As
we see in Panel D, the reform is not associated with an increase in the number of firms created
with more than one employee. The bulk of the aggregate effect of the reform is thus to increase
the creation of firms created with no employees, as we see in Panel C. However, as we again see in
Panel D, the reform is also followed by a large increase in the creation of firms that will have at
least one employee two years after creation—from about 4,000 to 5,000 monthly creations. Taken
together, Panels C and D suggest that, while the reform fostered the creation of firms with zero
employees at creation, these firms grow and eventually hire employees after two years.
    Consistent with the idea that the increase in entrepreneurial activity observed in Figure 2 is
in fact triggered by the reform, we find that the dramatic surge in firm creation mostly consists
of unemployed entrepreneurs targeted by the reform. As shown in Figure 1, the number of new
firms that receive the ACCRE subsidy (a subsidy only accessible for unemployed entrepreneurs)
progressively increased from 3,000 per month in 2002, to about 6,000 per month in 2005. Hence,
between 2002 and 2005, the number of firms created by unemployed people rose by at least 3,000
per month.9 This is to be compared to the aggregate increase in firm creation reported in Figure 2,
which is somewhere between 3,500 and 4,000. Hence, in the aggregate, the increase in firm creation
by unemployed entrepreneurs is enough to explain most of the rise in aggregate firm creation.

                                 INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

   Table 1 provides annual data on firm creation for 8 broad industries, for both the pre-reform
period (1999–2001) and the post-reform period (2003–2005). Table 1 shows that both pre- and
post-reform, newly-created firms are mostly in Services, Construction, and Retail Trade. These
three industries constitute about 70% of all firm creations in the pre-reform years. Table 1 also
shows that the industries where the growth in the number of newly-created firms following the
  9
    It could be higher as some unemployed entrepreneurs may not take the ACCRE subsidy when starting their
business.



                                                   12
reform is the largest are Services, Retail Trade, Construction and FIRE, which could be charac-
terized as labor-intensive, low fixed-cost industries.10

                                  INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

   Table 2, Panel A aggregates creation data at the 4-digit industry level (290 industries), and
then averages the monthly number of newly-created firms across all months from January 1, 1999
to December 31, 2002 (our pre-reform period). It shows that the average industry experiences,
pre-reform, approximately 43.6 creations per month, which leads to an annual number of newly
created firms of about 152,000 per year.


4.2    Accounting Data
To analyze the long-term performance of new ventures, we complement the registry data with
accounting information from tax files (see Bertrand et al. (2007) for a more detailed description).
Tax files provide us with the number of employees at creation as well as two years after creation.
They cover all firms subject to the regular corporate tax regime (Bénéfice Réel Normal) or to the
simplified corporate tax regime (Régime Simplifié d’Imposition), which together represent 55%
of newly created firms during our sample period. Small firms with annual sales below e32,600
(e81,500 in retail and wholesale trade) can opt-out and choose a special micro-business tax regime
(Micro-Entreprise), in which case they do not appear in the tax files. Since expenses, and in
particular, wages cannot be deducted from taxable profits under the micro-business tax regime,
firms opting for this regime are likely to have zero employees. For this reason, in the empirical
analysis we will assume that firms that do not appear in the tax files do not have employees.
    Table 2, Panel B presents descriptive statistics from the tax files. The average firm has 0.49
employees at creation. This number includes the entrepreneur if she pays herself a salary. There is,
however, considerable skewness. Only 20% of firms have at least one employee at birth. Two years
after creation, firms have, on average, 0.87 employees. 25% of the new firms in the pre-reform
sample hire in the first two years in the sense that the number of employees they report after
two years is strictly larger than the number of employees at creation. 16% of the firms in the
pre-reform sample exit the sample before the end of the second fiscal year.


4.3    SINE Survey
To obtain additional demographic and personal information on the entrepreneurs (such as edu-
cation, age, growth expectations, etc.), we use a large-scale survey run by the French Statistical
  10
   A finer exploration of the data shows that, within the FIRE industry, most of the increase in the number of
newly-created firms occurs for real estate agencies.

                                                     13
Office every four years called the SINE survey (see Landier and Thesmar (2009) for an extensive
description of this survey). The SINE survey is a detailed questionnaire sent out to individuals
registering new firms, which contains questions about both the entrepreneur as well as the firm
she creates.11 We only have two cross-sections of the survey in the relevant time period: 2002 and
2006. 2002 corresponds to the pre-reform period—the survey is done during the first semester of
2002, while the unemployment agency advertises the reform only in the second half of 2002. 2006
corresponds to the post-reform period. SINE has a remarkably large coverage, with a response
rate typically around 85%. It covers approximately a third of newly created firms in the first six
months of a survey year (26,683 observation, in 2002, and 29,538 observations in 2006).
    The SINE survey provides information on the characteristics of entrepreneurs and their firm.
We construct two dummy variables related to the entrepreneur’s education—a dummy variable
for high school graduate and a dummy variable for college graduate. The survey also contains
information on entrepreneurial ambition, which we measure by the answer to the survey question,
“Do you plan to hire in the next twelve months?”. Table 2, Panel C reports descriptive statistics on
these three variables. 50% of the entrepreneurs surveyed in SINE are at least high school graduates
and 14% have at least a five-year college degree (which is equivalent to having a graduate degree
in the US). 23% of surveyed entrepreneurs plan to hire in the year following creation. Finally,
we construct two more variables in order to check that entrepreneurs are not just past employees
re-hired as contractors. The first variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur declares to
be “a supplier or client of his former employer”. The second variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the
entrepreneur responds that her firm “has at most 2 different customers”.


5        Empirical Strategy
5.1      Identifying Assumption
We seek to evaluate the reform’s impact on various firm- and industry-level outcomes, in particular,
whether it led to an increase in entrepreneurial activity. The main identification challenge is to
separate the effect of the reform from any other shock to macroeconomic fundamentals that could
have affected these outcomes. To this effect, we use a standard difference-in-difference analysis
with differing treatment intensity.
   In the spirit of our model, we use “small scale” industries as the treatment group. Concretely,
the intensity of treatment is measured, in the pre-reform period, as the fraction of sole proprietor-
ships among newly created firms at the industry level. In the model, the effect of the reform is
    11
    The survey uses stratified sampling, where the strata are the headquarter’s region and the 2-digit industry of
the firm.


                                                       14
expected to be stronger in industries where starting a business is comparatively less costly. In prac-
tice, the reform was aimed at unemployed individuals with limited capital, and thus, much more
likely to start as a sole proprietorship (we also use size at creation in alternative specifications—see
below). The relationship between employment status and the legal form of newly created firms
is obvious from the 2002 SINE survey: In the 2002 wave of the SINE survey, 70% of unemployed
entrepreneurs choose to create their firm as a sole proprietorship, while only 45% of previously
employed entrepreneurs make this choice.12 In our empirical specification, we split industries into
quartiles of our treatment intensity variable. Our treatment (resp. control) group is thus com-
posed of industries in the top (resp. bottom) quartile of the distribution of the industry-level
fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms.13 Appendix Table B.1 reports the
name of the industries that belong to the least treated industries and the most treated ones. Un-
surprisingly, in the most treated group, we find industries such as street vendors (which operate on
farmers’ markets), taxi drivers, healthcare specialists, and personal services. In the least treated
group, we find real estate developers and operators, movie and TV producers, wholesale trades,
supermarkets, and publishers. The identifying assumption is that absent the reform, these most
and least treated industries would have experienced similar evolutions in entry rates and other
outcomes of interest. In particular, this assumes that the industry characteristic used in defining
treatment intensity (i.e., the fraction of sole proprietors among entrepreneurs) is unrelated to how
industry-level entry rates are exposed to the business cycle. We discuss this assumption and the
sources of its potential violation in Section 5.3.
    For robustness, we also repeat our analysis using an alternative definition of treatment intensity:
the fraction of firms created with zero employees at the 4-digit industry level. Again, we expect
the reform to have a negligible impact on those industries where newly created firms are large, so
that industries with a small fraction of firms created with zero employees provide a valid control
group. Tables B.2-B.10, in Appendix B, report regression results using this alternative treatment
definition and show that our results hold.
    In Table 2, we split our pre-reform sample into four quartiles of treatment intensity (i.e., the
fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms) and present summary statistics for
firms/industries in each of these quartiles. In industries where newly created firms are predom-
  12
     The fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms is measured using the monthly creation file from
the registry at the 4-digit industry level. It is computed in the pre-reform period.
  13
     An alternative treatment intensity variable could be the fraction of newly created firms started by unemployed
workers in each industry, using the 2002 wave of the SINE survey. We chose our treatment variable for two reasons.
First, the SINE survey is available only in 2002, while we can compute the fraction of sole proprietorships among
newly created firms every year in the pre-period. Second, we use a fine definition of industries (290 industries), so
that a sizeable fraction of industries have a scarce representation in the SINE survey, while we can compute our
treatment variable over the exhaustive sample of newly created firms every year. We therefore believe that the
treatment variable is estimated more precisely this way.


                                                         15
inantly sole proprietors, the average firm is smaller at creation and is less likely to hire at least
one employee in the two years following creation. Comparing firms in the fourth and first quartile
of treatment intensity, we see that firms in the most treated industries have 0.54 less employees
at creation and are 11 percentage points less likely to hire at least one employee in their first two
years relative to firms in the least treated industries. Entrepreneurs in the most treated industries
are also, on average, less educated (7 percentage point less likely to have a high school degree than
firms in the least treated industries) and less ambitious (16 percentage point less likely to declare
a plan to hire an employee in the next twelve months).
    As an illustration of our empirical strategy, we report, in Appendix Table B.11, the top 20
4-digit industries in terms of their contribution to the post-reform surge in new firm creation, as
well as the quartile of treatment intensity these industries belong to. More precisely, we simply
compute for each industry s over the 2002-2005 period, ∆N     ∆N
                                                                s
                                                                   where ∆Ns is the increase in the
                                                   P
average monthly number of creations and ∆N = s ∆Ns . As can be seen in Appendix Table B.11,
the increase in new firm creation is concentrated and mostly occurs in the most treated industries:
(1) the top 20 4-digit industries contribute to more than half of the aggregate surge in new firm
creations; (2) out of these 20 industries, 13 belong to the fourth quartile (Q4) of treatment, and
18 belong to either Q4 or Q3.


5.2    Empirical Specification
Our main specification for industry-level outcomes is as follows:

                         4
                         X                              4
                                                        X
                Yst =          αk ·   Qks   × postt +         βk · Qks × t + µs + MONTHt + st ,    (1)
                         k=1                            k=1


   For firm-level outcomes (e.g., the probability that a firm exits in the two years following
creation), our main specification is as follows:

                         4
                         X                              4
                                                        X
                Yist =         αk ·   Qks   × postt +         βk · Qks × t + µs + MONTHt + ist ,   (2)
                         k=1                            k=1


where Yist is the outcome for firm i created in industry s in month t. We also cluster standard
errors at the industry level in this specification.
    For specifications using dependent variables from the SINE survey, where only two cross-




                                                              16
sections of data are available in 2002 and 2006, our main specification becomes:

                                         4
                                         X
                                Yist =         αk · Qks × postt + µs + ist ,                        (3)
                                         k=1


where the post dummy is equal to 1 for outcomes measured in the 2006 wave of the SINE survey
and 0 when measured in the 2002 wave.

                                INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE

    Figure 3 provides a graphical illustration of our identification strategy and our main regression
analysis. For each industry, we compute the log number of firms created each month from 1999
to 2005 normalized by the average monthly log number of firms created in the same industry
from January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2000. This corresponds to an industry log-growth of firm
creation in month t and industry j relative to 1999–2000, our benchmark years. We then average
these growth rates across industries for each quartile of our treatment intensity variable (i.e., the
fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms by industry). We then plot a 12-month
backward moving-average of this average growth rate for the four quartiles.
    Figure 3 first illustrates an important aggregate surge in entrepreneurial activity following
the reform, which is consistent with Figure 2. However, this surge was much more pronounced in
industries with a larger fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms. Entrepreneurial
activity increased by about 10% in industries in the bottom quartile of treatment intensity, while
it increased by 25% in industries in the top quartile. More generally, growth in entrepreneurial
activity increases monotonically with treatment intensity.


5.3    Discussion of Identifying Assumption
Two types of omitted variable concerns arise from the way we design our treatment intensity.

                                 INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE

   A first concern, already stated in Section 5.1, is our assumption that the treatment intensity
variable (i.e., the industry-level fraction of sole proprietors) is not correlated with industry exposure
to macroeconomic fluctuations. If this is not the case, then industries in the control and treatment
groups could experience different evolutions, even in the absence of a reform—a violation of the
parallel trend assumption. To invalidate this hypothesis, we estimate equation (1) using the log of
industry sales as our left-hand side variable. If economic recovery is stronger in treated sectors, we
should expect aggregate industry sales to pick up more sharply in treated sectors. Industry sales

                                                      17
are computed by aggregating firm-level sales at the industry level, and since financial statements
are only observed annually, they are annual. Table 3 reports the results. Because we include
industry fixed effects, the coefficient on postt captures total industry sales growth between the
pre- and the post-period. Column (1) includes only the post variable and shows that industry
sales increased overall by 8.2% around the reform: This is the 2003 recovery, which can be seen at
the macroeconomic level. However, columns (2) and (3) show that this recovery is uncorrelated
with treatment intensity. In column (3), none of the estimates of αk —the interaction of the post
dummy and the quartiles of treatment intensity—are statistically significant. Columns (4)-(6)
reach the same conclusion using value added (which is easier to aggregate at the sectoral level)
instead of sales to measure industry growth.14
    Relatedly, the treatment may correlate with other industry characteristics that could explain
how entry in these industries reacted to the 2003 aggregate recovery. For instance, industries where
firms start on a small scale could be industries with better growth opportunities, or more labor-
intensive industries. At the same time, entry in growing or labor-intensive sectors may be more
responsive to aggregate shocks. Table 3 has already shown that overall, treated industries did not
grow faster post-reform. To further account for this concern, we augment our main specification,
equation (1), by interacting both the post dummy and a trend variable with a measure of industry
capital intensity (the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001) and
industry growth (the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001).
In most regressions, the inclusion of these additional controls does not affect our results, neither
quantitatively nor qualitatively.
    A second concern with our strategy is that results could be driven by changes in the pool
of unemployed individuals. For instance, if skilled individuals tend to create firms in small-
scale industries and that the post-reform period coincides with an increase in the fraction of
skilled individuals in the unemployment pool, then our most treated industries could experience
an increase in entrepreneurial activity that would not have anything to do with the reform itself.
In the data, however, it is not the case that educated individuals are more likely to start businesses
in our treated industries. To obtain this result, we use the SINE survey and simply regress, using
the pre-reform wave of the survey (2002), our education dummies (high school graduate, college
  14
     As an alternative way to rule out that our main results are not driven by treated sectors being overall more pro-
cyclical, we simply compute industry betas with respect to GDP, and then use these betas as controls in our main
regression analysis. More precisely, for each industry, we use the 1993-1998 period to regress, in the time-series,
aggregate industry value added on GDP, using annual data. We then retrieve the coefficient estimate (i.e., the
industry beta), which captures the extent to which each industry is sensitive to aggregate economic conditions in
the mid-1990s. We then run our main regression analysis specified in equation (1), but include an additional term
that interacts this estimated industry beta and the post dummy or the national GDP growth rate. Controlling in
this way for the differential exposure of industries to the business cycle, we find that our main estimates are left
unchanged. These results are reported in Appendix Table B.12.


                                                         18
graduate) on the quartiles of treatment intensity. As one can see in the Appendix Table B.13,
the fraction of educated entrepreneurs does not significantly differ across industries. We are thus
confident that changes in the skill composition of the pool of unemployed individuals are not
driving the post-reform increase in new firm creation.


6        Effect on the Number and Quality of New Firms
In this section, we investigate the first two predictions of our model: (1) the reform should increase
the number of creations and (2) the quality of new firms should decrease. The model shows that
(1) should be stronger, and (2) weaker, if entrepreneurial talent is very heterogeneous.


6.1      Impact of the Reform on the Creation of New Firms
                                    INSERT TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE

    We first analyze the growth in firm creation induced by the reform. We estimate equation
(1) using the log number of firms created in industry s in month t as our dependent variable.15
The regressions use a balanced sample of 290 industries over 84 months—from January 1999 to
December 2001 for the pre-period and January 2002 to December 2005 for the post-period—and
thus a total of 24,360 industry-month observations. Column (1) is a simple time-series difference
estimate of the reform. It only includes the post dummy. The estimated coefficient on the post
dummy is 0.1 and significant at the 1% confidence level. Following the reform, the monthly number
of newly created firms increased, on average, by 10% across all industries. Given that there are 290
industries and that 44 firms are created every month in the average industry prior to the reform
(see Table 2), this amounts to 1,300 additional firms per month being created after the reform.
This result differs in magnitude from the aggregate growth of new creation observed in Figure 2,
which reports an increase by about 3,500 per month between 2001 and 2004. This discrepancy
comes from the fact that we conservatively define the post dummy as equal to 1 starting in January
2002, while the effect of the reform only starts to materialize in late 2002 and is progressive.16
    Column (2) estimates our main specification (equation (1)) without including the treatment-
specific trends. Column (3) and column (4) show that our estimates are robust to treatment-
specific trends and other controls (capital intensity and industry growth). As seen in Figure 3, post-
reform growth in firm creation increases monotonically with treatment “intensity”. For industries
    15
     More precisely, our dependent variable is log(1+ # firms created). Some smaller industries experience months
without any creation. Using log(# firms created) as our dependent variable would lead us to drop these industries.
To keep a balanced sample of industries, we instead use log(1+ # firms created). The results are similar when
using log(# firms created).
  16
     Our results are naturally stronger if we exclude 2002 from the sample.

                                                       19
in the top quartile of the treatment variable, firm creation grows by 12 percentage points more
following the reform than for industries in the bottom quartile (i.e., industries with the lowest
fraction of sole proprietorships at creation). Given that there are 72 industries in the top quartile
of sole proprietorships, and that these industries create 87 firms per month prior to the reform
(see Table 2), this corresponds to an increase of 750 newly created firms each month. This number
underestimates the overall impact of the reform, since firm creation also grows significantly more
in the third quartile relative to the bottom quartile (approximately 250 new creations per month).
Taking the third and fourth quartile of treatment together (the treatment group), we find that
treated industries experience an increase in firm creation following the reform of about 1,000 newly
created firms per month. This is only one fourth of the aggregate increase in firm creation (about
3,500 - 4,000 new firms per month). These aggregate estimates are conservative since they assume
that the increase in new firm creation observed in the control industries (i.e., industries in the
bottom quartile of our treatment intensity variable) is unrelated to the reform.
    A less excessively conservative estimate can be obtained if (1) we assume that the effect of the
reform on “tiny firm growth” is the same in all industries and (2) we attribute all of the differential
effect across sectors to the differential prevalence of small firms across industries. To fix ideas,
assume that the reform increases the number of “tiny” firms by g % in all industries, but has no
effect on “serious” firms. Industries vary by the fraction of tiny firms in total creations: Let us call
αs the fraction of tiny firms in total creations in industry s. Then, the post-reform growth in firm
creation in industry s is equal to g × αs : The reform has a bigger impact on industries where a
lot of the creations tend to be tiny firms. The differential growth in firm creation between treated
and control industries, which is what our difference-in-difference estimate measures, should thus
write as g × (αQ4 − αQ1 ). Hence, one could obtain an estimate of g by dividing the DD estimate by
αQ4 − αQ1 , the difference in the share of tiny firms in treated and control sectors. Taking the DD
estimate of column (4) and “sole proprietorships” as our measure of tiny firms, we find that the
reform increases the creation of new sole proprietorships by some 14/(0.72 − 0.11) ≈ 23 %.17 This
is to be compared with the actual aggregate post-reform growth in sole proprietorship creation,
or about 44%.18 Hence, using this alternative method, we estimate a larger aggregate impact of
the reform, closer to economy-level numbers. To remain conservative, however, in the rest of the
paper we will focus on the difference between the most and the least treated group.
  17
     In the pre-period, the fraction of sole proprietorships in the most treated industries is 72%, versus 11% in the
least treated ones.
  18
     In the pre-period, the French economy creates about 7,500 such firms per month, while in the post-period it
creates some 10,800.




                                                         20
6.2     The Quality of Post-Reform Start-Ups
6.2.1   Job Creation

We now explore whether the reform led to a significant change in the characteristics of newly
created firms (the second prediction of our model). The first measure of firm success or quality
we look at is job creation. If the main effect of the reform was to draw in individuals of lower
ability, start-ups should be less likely to create jobs, particularly in treated sectors (the “selection
view”). Alternatively, if entrepreneurial talent is homogeneous and entrepreneurial success is hard
to predict ex ante, after the reform, start-ups should be as likely as before to create jobs (the
“experimentation channel”).

                                 INSERT TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE

    Table 5 explores the effect of the reform on job creation by newly created firms, both at the
time of creation and two years after creation. Columns (1)-(4) break down the results from Table 4
by splitting the sample into businesses that start with at least one employee and businesses that
don’t. More precisely, we estimate equation (1) using as a dependent variable the number of
firms created in industry s in month t with zero employees at creation (columns (1) and (2))
and the number of firms created in industry s in month t with at least one employee at creation
(columns (3) and (4)). We find that newly created firms tend to be smaller at birth following
the reform. While the reform leads to a large increase in the number of firms created with zero
employees (columns (1) and (2)), it has no effect on the number of firms created with more than
one employee (columns (3) and (4)). Quantitatively, the creation of firms with zero employees
increases by a significant 16 percentage points following the reform in the most treated industries
relative to the least treated industries (Q4 vs. Q1 of our treatment intensity variable). In contrast,
the creation of firms with at least one employee increases by an insignificant 0.8 percentage points
following the reform in the most treated industries relative to the least treated industries. In other
words, the bulk of the effect of the reform on new firm creation is concentrated on firms with zero
employees at creation. This is not surprising given that the reform was targeted to unemployed
individuals, who are typically more likely to start very small firms.
    That the reform mostly had an impact on the creation of zero-employee firms does not mean
that it had no effect on job creation overall. As long as zero-employee firms create jobs in the
future with some probability, the reform still has the potential to stimulate employment in the
aggregate. Table 5, columns (5)-(8) show that the reform does lead to a significant increase in
the creation of firms that do not hire any employee after two years (column (6), increase of 9.3
percentage points, significant at the 1% confidence level). The reform “created” some tiny firms
that do not eventually grow. But more interestingly, the number of firms that eventually have at

                                                  21
least one employee two years after creation also increases significantly, and by a larger amount
(column (8), increase of 14 percentage points, also significant at the 1% confidence level). Overall,
the reform thus mostly leads to an increase in tiny firms, that eventually grow. This result is
not consistent with the reform worsening the pool of entrepreneurs, at least on the job-creation
dimension.

                                    INSERT TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE

    An alternative way to show the effect of the reform on average firm quality is to directly check
that firms created in the most treated industries are as likely to hire as firms in the least treated
industries. To this end, we estimate equation (2) using as a dependent variable a firm-level dummy
equal to 1 if the firm hires at least one employee between its creation date and the end of the
second calendar year after creation. We do not find any differential change in the propensity
to hire between firms in the most vs. least treated industries. As is apparent from Table 6,
columns (1)-(3), firms created in the most treated industries after the reform are not less likely to
hire. Hence, an increase in entrepreneurial activity, even from zero-employee firms, mechanically
leads to a proportionate increase in the number of firms with at least one employee two years after
creation.19

6.2.2    Exit

Another dimension of quality is the probability of exit. In our sample, 16% of newly-created firms
exit the sample in the two years following creation. This high attrition rate is consistent with
existing cross-country evidence on young ventures. Our data does not indicate why entrepreneurs
leave the sample. However, it is very likely that firms dropping out of the sample are closed
down, so that we interpret exit as a measure of failure.20 In Table 6, columns (4)-(6), we estimate
equation (2) using a dummy of exit within two years as our dependent variable. As is apparent from
Table 6, the reform has a similar effect on the probability of exit at two years across industries. The
probability of exiting the sample in the first two years after creation increases by 1.1 percentage
point in the aggregate, which is small relative to the large surge in firm creation observed in
Table 1. But this increase in exit probability is unrelated to the treatment (column (6)). Overall,
the additional firms created by the reform are not more likely to exit.

                                    INSERT TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE
  19
     In unreported regressions, we also run this specification using the actual number of hired employees as a
dependent variable and find similar results.
  20
     The 1998 wave of the SINE survey shows that only 5% of newly created firms that no longer exist two years
after creation have been purchased or transmitted, i.e., 95% correspond to firms that have closed down permanently.


                                                        22
6.2.3   Characteristics of Entrepreneurs

In this section, we provide further evidence that firm quality does not decline after the reform using
alternative, ex ante, measures of quality: education of the entrepreneur and her self-declared “am-
bition to grow”. These variables come from the SINE survey, only available once before (2002H1)
and once after (2006H1) the reform (see Section 4.3 for more details).
    Table 7, Panel A checks that ex ante measures of quality correlate well with ex post en-
trepreneurial success. Entrepreneurial success is measured as the firm’s employment four years
after creation, i.e., in 2006 (columns (1)-(3)), the probability that the firm has more than one em-
ployee in 2006 (columns (4)-(6)), and the probability that the firm has more than five employees
(columns (7)-(9)). More educated and ambitious entrepreneurs are more likely to start eventually
successful firms. For instance, entrepreneurs who “plan to hire” at creation end up with a larger
probability of having at least one employee (column (5), increase of 17 percentage points) as well
as a higher probability of having at least five employees four years after creation (column (8),
increase of 7.9 percentage points).
    Table 7, Panel B looks at the impact of the reform on ex ante quality. Our empirical strategy
is similar to that of Table 6, except we use our ex ante measures of quality as dependent variables
and work on the restricted sample of newly created firms surveyed in SINE in the first six months
of 2002 (pre-period) and in the first six months of 2006 (post-period). Table 7 shows no significant
change in the composition of entrepreneurs by education. Although the average level of education
of entrepreneurs increases across all industries following the reform, perhaps reflecting the positive
trend in educational attainment in France, our most treated industries do not differ from the least
treated ones in this dimension. Overall, these results are not consistent with the hypothesis that
the reform lowered the education of the average entrepreneur.

6.2.4   Marginal Versus Average Effect

The results on firm quality in Table 6 and Table 7 are obtained by comparing the average quality
of newly created firms across industries following the reform. As a consequence, these average
effects do not directly isolate the effect of the reform on the quality of marginal entrants, i.e.,
those newly-created firms that would not have been created absent the reform. In this section,
we attempt to provide a quantification of the effect of the reform on the quality of these marginal
entrants.
    First note that, by definition, infra-marginal entrepreneurs would be created irrespective of
whether the reform takes place or not, so that infra-marginal entrants constitute 100% of the firms
created in all industries before the reform. We then make two simplifying assumptions: (1) all
firms created in the least treated industries (industries in the first quartile of treatment intensity)

                                                  23
following the reform are created by infra-marginal entrepreneurs and (2) marginal entrepreneurs
constitute 100% of the differential entry between treated and control sectors. Let qi (resp. qm )
be a measure of the average quality of infra-marginal (resp. marginal) entrepreneurs. We know
from Table 4 that the number of firms created in the most treated industries increases by δ = 14%
relative to the least treated industries. Thanks to the second assumption above, all these firms
are marginal and thus of expected quality qm . The average quality in the most treated industries,
                                                                           δ
relative to the least treated ones, thus increases by an amount ∆q = 1+δ      × (qm − qi ). Given that
we observe the change in average quality ∆q and the fraction of marginal firms δ = .14, we can
infer, under our set of simplifying assumptions, the difference in observable quality between the
marginal and the infra-marginal entrants.
    Consider for instance the probability of hiring as a measure of quality, as we did in Table 6.
Column (3) of Table 6 shows that for this measure of quality, ∆q = −0.0089 and is insignificant.
Applying the formula derived above yields a difference in average quality between marginal and
infra-marginal entrepreneurs of about qm − qi = −7%. Before the reform, all entrepreneurs are
infra-marginal so that qi is equal to the average pre-reform hiring rate, which is 25%. Our estimates
thus suggest that the hiring rate of marginal entrepreneurs is 18%, on average, while it is 25% for
infra-marginal entrepreneurs. The two numbers are not statistically different from one another.
    The same calculation can be made for the other measures of observable quality used in the
paper. For instance, using the same methodology, we find that the average 2-year exit rate
of marginal entrepreneurs is 10%, compared to 17% for infra-marginal ones. According to this
estimate, it is thus very unlikely that the exit rate of marginal entrepreneurs is higher.

6.2.5   Disguised Employment

In this section, we check that the new start-ups are not just disguised employment. One could
worry that the reform allowed employers and employees to engage in regulatory arbitrage by trans-
forming workers into self-employed contractors who receive unemployment benefits at the same
time. To check this, we extract from the SINE survey information on the number of customers,
and on the business relationships with the entrepreneur’s former employer (see Section 4.3 for
more details).

                                INSERT TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE

   Results are reported in Table 8. This table first shows that the propensity to work with a
past employer and have only one or two clients seems to have slightly increased after the reform.
For instance, column (7) of Table 8 shows that the proportion of entrepreneurs reporting both to
work with their former employer and to have one or two customers has increased by about 0.5

                                                 24
percentage points. There is, however, no difference across industries. The results in Table 8 are
thus hard to reconcile with the view that many entrepreneurs drawn in by the reform are simply
employees “in disguise”.


7        Aggregate Effect on Employment and Productivity
7.1      Direct Effect of the Reform on Job Creation
We first estimate the aggregate effect of the reform on total job creation. We defer the discussion
on potential crowding-out effects to the next Section 7.2. To estimate this direct effect, we first
re-estimate equation (1) on industry-level employment data. We use the log of one plus Lst as our
dependent variable, where Lst is the total number of jobs reported after two years of existence by
all firms created in industry s in month t, as reported by the tax files. Lst measures the overall
number of jobs that firms created today will create in two years. Importantly, this measure takes
exit into account: firms that will exit before two years will simply not contribute to Lst , whatever
their total employment at creation. One issue in the measure of Lst is that we might be missing
the entrepreneur’s job itself. The tax files do not specify whether the entrepreneur is one of the
firm’s employees or whether or not she receives a wage or business income. We thus make two
alternative assumptions to bound this potential measurement error. In columns (1)-(2), we make
the aggressive assumption that the entrepreneur is never a wage earner, and add one to reported
firm employment. In columns (3)-(4), we make the conservative assumption that all entrepreneurs
are already counted as employees of their own firm.21

                                    INSERT TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE

    Whatever the convention we take, we find that the reform had a large impact on aggregate job
creation. We assume that the least treated industries Q1 are not affected by the reform. Table 9
reports the regression estimates. After the reform, the number of jobs created by entrepreneurial
firms two years after creation increases by 21 percentage points more in the most treated industries
relative to the least treated industries (column (2)). We know from Table 2, in the last line of
Panel A, that the most treated industries (i.e., industries in the top quartile of the fraction of sole
proprietorships among newly created firms) create, on average, 118 jobs per month pre-reform.
Focusing on the most treated sectors only, we find that the reform leads to at least 118×(e.21 −1) =
28 additional jobs created monthly. Since the top quartile of our treatment intensity variable has
72 industries, this implies that 2,000 jobs per month are created in these industries through the
    21
    If the firm reports zero employees after two years, we implicitly assume that the entrepreneur’s main job is not
with the firm.

                                                        25
reform. Under the more conservative assumption that the tax files’ employment figure always
includes the entrepreneur herself, we obtain a smaller estimate of 750 new jobs created monthly
in the treated industries (Table 9, column (4)). 22 These results suggest that the reform led to
the direct creation of between 9,000 and 24,000 new jobs every year.


7.2     Accounting for Crowding-Out
The third prediction of our model is that in equilibrium existing firms should shrink in order to
allow new firms to hire. This prediction hinges on the assumption that there is little slack on the
labor market, an assumption that can be disputed in the case of France, a high-unemployment
economy.
    To investigate possible crowding out of existing jobs triggered by the reform, we re-run our
industry-level regressions (equation (1)) using the employment growth of incumbent firms as a
dependent variable. We report the results in Table 10. More precisely, we first define incumbents
as firms present in our sample in year t but created before year t − 4. This long lag ensures that
all incumbents were started before the reform we are studying. We then define our dependent
variable as the growth rate of total industry employment of all incumbent firms. In columns (1)-
(2) of Table 10, we first focus on small incumbents only (i.e., incumbents with five employees or
less). These small incumbents are more likely to be competing directly with these new entrants,
either on the product or the labor market. In columns (3)-(4), we compute the growth rate of total
employment at large incumbents only (i.e., incumbent firms with more than five employees). Since
we use industry-level annual data, there are 2,610 observations in these regressions, corresponding
to a balanced panel of 290 industries followed over the 1999–2007 period.23

                                    INSERT TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE

    Table 10 shows that the reform led to lower employment growth for small incumbent firms.
Following the reform, annual employment growth fell by a significant 2.2 percentage points in
the most treated industries relative to the least treated ones (columns (1) and (2)). This result
is robust to controlling for industry capital intensity and industry growth and is consistent with
competitive dynamics whereby newly created firms partially crowd out existing small firms, as
illustrated in the third prediction of Proposition 1. As a form of a placebo test, we also analyze
  22
     Naturally, this wedge comes from the difference in the base rate of jobs created by entrepreneurial firms under
the two assumptions: Under the conservative assumption, newly created firms in treated industries generate 43
jobs, on average, while the aggressive assumption lead to 118 jobs created monthly.
  23
     Note that in Table 9, the sample stopped in 2005, while it stops in 2007 in Table 10. The reason is that in
Table 9, we need to observe employment counts two years after a firm’s creation. Since 2007 is the last year where
we have employment data, we need to stop at the 2005 cohort. In Table 10, we compute the overall employment
of incumbent firms, i.e., all firms created more than four years ago, which we can do up to 2007.

                                                        26
the effect of the reform on larger incumbents. Large incumbents—incumbent firms with more
than five employees—are less likely to directly compete with new entrants, who tend to be very
small.24 Table 10, columns (3)-(4) show that in fact, employment growth at large incumbent firms
does not significantly change following the reform in the most treated industries relative to the
least treated ones (insignificant 0.9 percentage points estimate in column (4)).
     In Table 10, columns (5)-(6), we look directly at the overall effect of the reform on industry
employment. To this end, we compute, for each industry, the total number of jobs at small incum-
bents firms and at firms created over the last two years and use the growth rate of this variable
as our dependent variable in equation (1). This variable cumulates the direct effect of the reform
on job creation at new firms with the crowding-out effect leading to job destruction at small in-
cumbents. We exclude the contribution of large incumbents to total industry employment since
columns (3)-(4) of Table 10 have shown that the reform had no effect on large incumbents’ employ-
ment. Columns (5)-(6) show that the most treated industries do experience a two percentage point
larger growth in employment coming from entrepreneurial firms and small incumbents following
the reform and relative to the least treated industries. While this interaction coefficient is large,
it is not statistically significant. Overall, we conclude that, while the reform allowed unemployed
workers to start firms on a large scale, it is important to consider the effect of crowding-out when
quantifying the aggregate employment gains from such a reform.
     Based on the estimates of column (3), we can quantify how many jobs are being displaced
following the massive entry of new firms triggered by the reform. Since the average industry in
our group of most treated industries has, on average, 5,196 employees working for small incumbents
(Table 2, Panel D), the industry-level effect of the reform on small incumbents is estimated to be
5, 196 × 0.022 = 114 jobs destroyed per year and per industry. Aggregating over all the industries
in the treatment group, this amounts to about 8,000 jobs per year. This aggregate effect has to be
compared to the approximate (and admittedly conservative) 9,000 to 24,000 jobs directly created
per year that we estimated in Section 7.1 using the same treatment variable. Of course, these
numbers are imprecisely estimated. Nevertheless, this analysis suggests that crowding out effects
are of the same order of magnitude as the direct effect of the reform.


7.3      Efficiency
The previous section has demonstrated that the reform led to a significant reallocation of labor
from small incumbent firms to newly created firms. A natural question in this context is whether
or not such a reallocation is productivity enhancing. In this section, we test whether new entrants
are more productive than incumbents.
 24
      In fact, the median employment among newly created firms is zero.


                                                       27
   Table 11 provides regression evidence to this effect. It estimates the following equation:

           4
           X                                            4
                                                        X
  Yist =         ak ·   Qks   × postt × New firmist +         βk · Qks × New firmist
           k=1                                          k=1

                                                 + γ · New firmist × postt + ζ · New firmist + δst + ist (4)

where Yist is a measure of productivity for firm i created in industry s in month t. We use
several simple firm-level measures of productivity as dependent variables in Panel A of Table 11.
Productivity is measured through average wage (columns (1) and (2)), value added per worker
(columns (3) and (4)), and sales per worker (columns (5) and (6)). In principle, value added per
worker is a better measure of productivity than sales per worker, as it excludes intermediate input
purchases, but for small firms, total sales may be better reported. We also restrict the sample
to two categories of firms: (1) entrepreneurial firms created in year t and (2) small incumbent
firms that are the most likely affected by the crowding-out effects. We construct category (2) as
“shrinking incumbents”, i.e., firms whose labor force decreases by at least one body count between
t and t + 1—including those incumbents who exit the sample in t + 1. The new firm dummy in
equation (4) takes the value of 1 if the observation corresponds to a newly-created firm and 0
otherwise. For each new firm created in year t, productivity is measured as of year t + 2. We
cluster standard errors at the industry level.

                                        INSERT TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE

    Columns (1), (3), and (5) of Panel A in Table 11 show that, prior to the reform, wages and
productivity in newly created firms are larger than those of shrinking incumbents. Annual wages
are larger by about e5,200; value added per worker is higher by about e7,000 per year. This
difference is sizable, considering that the average wage (including payroll taxes, as in our data) in
France is about e50,000 per year. These regressions also show that this productivity advantage of
newly created firms does not change following the reform. The interaction of the new firm dummy
with the post dummy is quantitatively small and statistically insignificant. This shows that the
productivity distribution of newly created firms did not change very much following the reform.
However, this result could mask a relative drop in the productivity of newly created firms in the
most treated industries, and a relative increase in the productivity of newly created firms in the
least treated industries. Columns (2), (4), and (6) show that this productivity advantage of newly
created firms remained constant following the reform, irrespective of the industries where firms
are operating. For instance, the larger average wage observed for newly created firms does not
increase differentially following the reform for firms in the control industries relative to firms in
the most treated industries.

                                                              28
    In Panel B, Table 11, we repeat these tests using standard measures of Total Factor Productiv-
ity. T F P 1 is obtained as the residual of the following regression, where i is a firm, s its industry,
t is the year of observation and we use the universe of firms present in the tax files:

                           log(Yist ) = αst + βst log(List ) + γst log(Kist ) + ist ,

where List is one plus firm i’s total employment (thus setting employment of zero-employee firms
to 1), Kist is firm i’s fixed assets, and Yist is firm i’s value added. T F P 2 is obtained directly by
computing T F P 2ist = log(Yist ) − ws log(List ) + (1 − ws ) log(Kist ), where ws is the average labor
share in value added in industry s. We then re-estimate equation (4) comparing the productivity
of new entrants vs. incumbent firms using these TFP measures as dependent variables and report
the results in Panel B, Table 11. We find results very similar to Panel A: The TFP of new firms
is higher, but the difference between entrants and incumbents does not change after the reform.
    As pointed out in Section 7.2, the aggregate employment effects of this reform are blurred by
the reallocation of labor across firms. Yet the evidence in this section points out that the reform
can still improve efficiency. Since newly-created firms are more productive, both before and after
the reform, and in all industries, the reallocation of labor from small incumbent firms to new
entrepreneurial firms has the potential to lead to significant productivity gains.


8        Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Reform
In this section, we propose a rough cost-benefit analysis of the reform. Such an analysis inevitably
has to be somewhat tentative as it relies on many assumptions. We focus on three main channels:
job reallocation, subsidizing unemployed entrepreneur, and savings on unemployment benefits.


8.1      Job Reallocation
The first channel is that more productive jobs are created, which leads to e350 million of additional
GDP per year. This, in our view, is the main aggregate benefit of the reform. To get this estimate,
we start from the conservative assumption that the reform led to zero net new job creation.25
We showed in Section 7.3 that because new firms are more productive than incumbents, job
reallocation creates additional value added. Our baseline estimation suggests that about 10,000
jobs are reallocated annually. Value added per worker in these new jobs is higher by about e7,000
    25
     While the overall employment effect uncovered in column (6) of Table 10 is positive, it is not significantly
different from 0, so that we use 0 as a conservative estimate.




                                                       29
(see Table 11). Finally, we assume that, on average, these new firms survive five years.26 With these
assumptions, the overall value added created by the reform, in steady state, is 7, 000×10, 000×5 =
e350 million every year. We believe that this calculation is a lower bound since we estimated in
Section 7.1 that new job creation through the reform was between 9,000 and 24,000, while job
destruction in incumbent firms was estimated to be around 8,000 in Section 7.2.


8.2     The Cost of Subsidizing Unemployed Entrepreneurs
Prior to the reform, an unemployed individual starting a business would give up all unemployment
benefits. After the reform, all unemployed entrepreneurs (about 70,000 creations per year—see
Figure 1) can claim the difference between entrepreneurial income and the benefit they are entitled
to. This section estimates this cost.
    To calculate the subsidy per entrepreneur, we collect data on unemployed individuals tran-
sitioning into entrepreneurship. We use the 2003–2006 waves of the French Labor Force Survey
(equivalent to the CPS in the US, see for instance Goux et al. (2014) for a description). The
French Labor Force Survey is a quarterly panel with about 280,000 individuals where households
are followed during 6 consecutive quarters. In this sample we can isolate 352 unemployed indi-
viduals who become entrepreneurs.27 Since we also need to observe unemployment benefits and
entrepreneurial income after starting a firm, the sample size goes down to 38 individuals. For each
of these unemployed entrepreneurs, we can then compute:

                     Subi = min{(36 − Ti ) × max(0, U Bi − EIi ), (24 − Ti ) × U Bi },

where Ti is the number of months between the beginning of the unemployment spell and the date
of firm creation, U Bi is the unemployment benefits the entrepreneur is entitled to, and EIi is the
reported entrepreneurial income. We observe all these numbers for each of the 38 individuals in
our sample. The above formula mimics the spirit of the reform: The entrepreneur receives the
difference between the unemployment benefit and the entrepreneurial income (if this difference is
positive) every month until one of two conditions is met: (1) three years have passed since the
beginning of the unemployment spell—in which case the entrepreneur receives the subsidy for
36 − Ti months; or (2) the entrepreneur has exhausted her rights to two full years of benefits—in
which case she receives a total subsidy of (24 − Ti ) × U Bi . On average, this subsidy is small and
  26
     This assumption is consistent with the fact that about 50% of firms in our sample are active for more than five
years, and that firms created through the reform do not have a differential exit rate, as shown in Table 6.
  27
     Our selection criterion is conservative, as we are excluding individuals that experience inactivity between
unemployment and entrepreneurship. The quarterly frequency also forces us to miss many employees that lose
their job and start a business a few weeks after: In such cases, the Labor Force Survey observes a transition from
employment into entrepreneurship.


                                                        30
represents only some e2,000 annually. This number is small because about 70% of the unemployed
generate more entrepreneurial income than their benefits. Overall, the cost of the reform for the
unemployment insurance fund is thus about 2, 000 × 70, 000 = e140 million annually.


8.3    Savings from Shortening Unemployment Spells
As some unemployed return to work more quickly, the unemployment agency saves on unem-
ployment benefits. Our most conservative estimates suggest that about 12,000 additional firms
are created every year thanks to the reform. We then use the French Labor Force Survey to
compute the corresponding savings for the unemployment insurance fund. For each unemployed
individual transitioning to entrepreneurship, we calculate U Bi × ([1 − p(Xi , Ti )] + [1 − p(Xi , Ti )]2 +
... + [1 − p(Xi , Ti )]24−Ti ), where Ti is the length (in months) of the unemployment spell before
the unemployed is observed to start his business. p(Xi , ti ) is the conditional probability that an
unemployed finds a paid job during in the coming quarter, conditional on fixed observed charac-
teristics Xi (age, education, gender, 1-digit occupation classification), and ti , which is the number
of months since the unemployment spell started. p(Xi , ti ) is estimated with a logit model using
the entire sample of unemployed from the Labor Force Survey (i.e., some 50,000 observations in
total). U Bi is the average unemployment benefit claimed by the unemployed before the observed
transition to entrepreneurship. This formula computes the savings to the unemployment insurance
fund coming from the reform as the sum of the benefits that would have been paid had the unem-
ployed remained jobless. An obvious limitation of this approach is that unemployed entrepreneurs
may have a higher probability of returning to the workforce, for unobservable reasons. If this is
the case, our savings estimation will be upward biased. We finally compute the average of this
imputed saving across all 92 transitioning individuals for which we have enough data to make this
computation (out of the 352 transitions observed in the sample). The average total savings is
equal to e3,600, which leads to aggregate savings of some 12, 000 × 3, 600 ≈ e45 million annually.
    Overall, savings are about a third of the costs of the reform to the unemployment agency. The
intuition is that savings are larger per individual, but only apply to marginal entrepreneurs. Costs
per individual are smaller, but apply to both marginal and infra-marginal entrepreneurs.


9     Conclusion
This paper looks at a large-scale policy reform that provided significant downside insurance to
unemployed workers who enter into entrepreneurship. Our identification rests on the idea that
the reform had a differential effect on some industries, where new businesses are smaller. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, we find that the reform led to a large increase in the level of firm creation, espe-

                                                    31
cially in those treated industries. More surprisingly, our results suggest that the reform did not
lead to a significant change (worsening) in the composition of the pool of entrepreneurs. While
most firms start out small at creation, they show no differences in their survival rate, firm growth
or likelihood to hire workers over the three years following creation. Similarly, personal character-
istics of entrepreneurial quality such as educational attainment or ambition are not lower for the
entrepreneurs drawn in by the reform. As a result, newly created firms are estimated to create
directly between 9,000 and 24,000 jobs annually.
    The paper also emphasizes the importance of going beyond a partial equilibrium analysis of
these types of reforms. We document that the entry of the new firms had strong crowd-out effects,
especially on small incumbents, which experienced a reduction in employment growth because of
the reform. This crowding-out effect is of the same order of magnitude as the direct creation
effect, so that the overall effect on job creation is neutral. At the same time, we show that the
newly created firms are more productive than incumbents. Therefore, on net, we calculate that
the reforms had a positive impact on the French economy. We weigh the benefits of the reform
due to shorter unemployment spells and labor reallocation to more productive and higher-paying
jobs against the costs of subsidizing the move of marginal and infra-marginal unemployed into
self-employment. We find that the benefits are roughly 350 million euros while 100 million euros
are transferred from the unemployment agency to unemployed entrepreneurs.




                                                 32
References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, “House Prices, Collateral and
 Self-Employment,” NBER Working Papers 18868, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
 March 2013.

Bertrand, Marianne, Antoinette Schoar, and David Thesmar, “Banking Deregulation and
 Industry Structure: Evidence from the French Banking Reforms of 1985,” Journal of Finance,
 04 2007, 62 (2), 597–628.

Blanchflower, David G and Andrew J Oswald, “What Makes an Entrepreneur?,” Journal
  of Labor Economics, January 1998, 16 (1), 26–60.

Branstetter, Lee, Francisco Lima, Lowell J. Taylor, and Ana Venâncio, “Do Entry Regu-
 lations Deter Entrepreneurship and Job Creation? Evidence from Recent Reforms in Portugal,”
 Economic Journal, 06 2014, 124 (577), 805–832.

Bruhn, Miriam, “License to Sell: The Effect of Business Registration Reform on Entrepreneurial
 Activity in Mexico,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2011, 93 (1), 382–386.

Card, David and Phillip B. Levine, “Extended benefits and the duration of UI spells: evidence
 from the New Jersey extended benefit program,” Journal of Public Economics, October 2000,
 78 (1-2), 107–138.

Caves, Richard E., “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and Mobility
 of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1998, 36 (4), 1947–1982.

Cetorelli, Nicola and Philip E. Strahan, “Finance as a Barrier to Entry: Bank Competition
 and Industry Structure in Local U.S. Markets,” Journal of Finance, 02 2006, 61 (1), 437–461.

Cole, Shawn, “Financial Development, Bank Ownership, and Growth: Or, Does Quantity Imply
 Quality?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2009, 91 (1), 33–51.

de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff, “Returns to Capital in
  Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  November 2008, 123 (4), 1329–1372.

Desai, Mihir, Paul Gompers, and Josh Lerner, “Institutions, Capital Constraints and En-
 trepreneurial Firm Dynamics: Evidence from Europe,” NBER Working Papers 10165, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc December 2003.


                                             33
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
 “The Regulation Of Entry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2002, 117 (1), 1–37.

Evans, David S and Boyan Jovanovic, “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
 Liquidity Constraints,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1989, 97 (4), 808–27.

Goux, Dominique, Eric Maurin, and Barbara Petrongolo, “Worktime Regulations and
 Spousal Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, January 2014, 104 (1), 252–76.

Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus
 Large versus Young,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2013, 95 (2), 347–361.

Hamilton, Barton H., “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to
 Self-Employment,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2000, 108 (3), 604–631.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, “Entrepreneurial Decisions
 and Liquidity Constraints,” RAND Journal of Economics, Summer 1994, 25 (2), 334–347.

  , , and Harvey S Rosen, “Sticking It Out: Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Con-
  straints,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1994, 102 (1), 53–75.

Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi, “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and En-
 trepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, April 2004, 112 (2), 319–347.

   and Benjamin Wild Pugsley, “What do Small Businesses Do?,” Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, 2011, 43 (2 (Fall)), 73–142.

Jovanovic, Boyan, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, May 1982, 50 (3),
  649–70.

Katz, Lawrence F and Bruce D Meyer, “Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations,
 and Unemployment Outcomes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1990, 105 (4),
 973–1002.

Kerr, William and Ramana Nanda, “Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship,” NBER
 Working Papers 15498, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc November 2009.

Kerr, William R. and Ramana Nanda, “Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financ-
 ing constraints, and entrepreneurship,” Journal of Financial Economics, October 2009, 94 (1),
 124–149.



                                             34
Kihlstrom, Richard E and Jean-Jacques Laffont, “A General Equilibrium Entrepreneurial
 Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1979,
 87 (4), 719–48.

Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan, “Entry regulation as a barrier to
 entrepreneurship,” Journal of Financial Economics, December 2006, 82 (3), 591–629.

Landier, Augustin and David Thesmar, “Financial Contracting with Optimistic En-
  trepreneurs,” Review of Financial Studies, January 2009, 22 (1), 117–150.

Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
 Autumn 1978, 9 (2), 508–523.

Manso, Gustavo, “Motivating Innovation,” Journal of Finance, October 2011, 66 (5), 1823–1860.

Moffitt, Robert, “Unemployment insurance and the distribution of unemployment spells,” Jour-
 nal of Econometrics, April 1985, 28 (1), 85–101.

Moskowitz, Tobias J. and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, “The Returns to Entrepreneurial
 Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?,” American Economic Review, September 2002,
 92 (4), 745–778.

Mullainathan, Sendhil and Philipp Schnabl, “Does Less Market Entry Regulation Generate
 More Entrepreneurs? Evidence from a Regulatory Reform in Peru,” in “International Differ-
 ences in Entrepreneurship” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2010,
 pp. 159–177.

Nanda, Ramana, “Cost of External Finance and Selection into Entrepreneurship,” Harvard
 Business School Working Papers 08-047, Harvard Business School January 2008.

Rieg, Christian, “Forte Hausse des Créations d’Entreprises en 2003,” INSEE Première, 2004,
 994.

Schmalz, Martin C., David A. Sraer, and David Thesmar, “Housing Collateral and En-
  trepreneurship,” NBER Working Papers 19680, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
  November 2013.

Schoar, Antoinette, “The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship,”
  in “Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 10” NBER Chapters, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research, Inc, 2010, pp. 57–81.


                                             35
Solon, Gary R, “Work Incentive Effects of Taxing Unemployment Benefits,” Econometrica,
  March 1985, 53 (2), 295–306.




                                         36
                 Figure 1: Monthly Number of New Firms Started With the ACCRE Subsidy




Source: French Ministry of Labor. Note: This figure shows the monthly number of individuals receiving the ACCRE
subsidy, which is granted to unemployed individuals creating a new firm. The sample period covers 1999 to 2006.




                                                      37
                                     Figure 2: Monthly Number of New Firms


  Panel A: All new firms, 1993–2008                             Panel B: All new firms, 1999–2005




Panel C: New firms with zero employees                   Panel D: New firms with at least one employee




 Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Panel A plots the 12-month moving average of the
 number of firms created January 1993 to January 2008 (1993 does not appear on the graph as we compute a 12-
 month moving average). Panel B zooms in on our sample period 1999–2005 (1999 does not appear on the graph as
 we compute a 12-month moving average). Panel C plots the number of new firms started with 0 employees (dotted
 blue) and the number of new firms with 0 employees two years after creation including firms that have exited (plain
 red). Panel D plots the number of new firms started with at least 1 employee (dotted blue) and the number of new
 firms with at least 1 employee two years after creation (plain red). The vertical dark lines correspond to the the
 reform period, which starts in January 2002 and ends in January 2003.




                                                         38
                          Figure 3: Growth Rate in Firm Creation: Treated vs. Control




Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Note: Qk% is the kth quartile of our treatment intensity
variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform
period). Each month t and for each quartile Qk (k = 1, 2, 3, 4) of treatment intensity, we compute the average
growth rate of the number of firms created in industries belonging to quartile Qk from the beginning of the sample
period (1999–2000) to month t:
                                                                                                            !
           k             1           X                               1      X
          gt =                             log(# firms createdst ) −                 log(# firms createdsτ ) .
                #industries in Qk                                    24 τ ∈1999,2000
                                  s∈Qk


The graph plots the 12-month moving average of gtk .




                                                        39
                                   Table 1: Industry Composition: Annual Data


      Industry                     Pre-reform     % of pre     Post-reform    % of post    Pre-post growth
                                   # creations   # creations   # creations   # creations    in # creations
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)              (5)
      Transportation - Utilities      4,937          3.3          5,031          2.6              2%
      Wholesale trade                11,942          7.9         12,711          6.6              6%
      Manufacturing                   9,119          6.0         10,006          5.2             10%
      Mining                            21           0.0            19           0.0             10%
      Services                       68,266         45.0         84,317         44.0             23%
      Retail trade                   25,498         16.8         34,683         18.1             36%
      Construction                   25,454         16.8         34,970         18.3             37%
      FIRE                            6,546          4.3          9,768          5.1             49%

      Total                         151,787         100         191,506          100             26%

Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Note: This table reports the number of firms created per
year during the pre-reform period (1999–2001, column 1) and the post-reform period (2003–2005, column 3) at
the 1-digit industry level. Columns 2 and 4 normalize these numbers by the total number of firm creation in the
pre- and the post-reform period respectively. Column 5 reports the growth in new firm creation in the post-reform
period relative to the pre-period reform.




                                                       40
                                              Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                                                                            Mean by quartile of % of
                                                           N       Mean       SD             Sole Prop. new firms
Panel A: New firms, industry-level                                                        Q1      Q2      Q3        Q4
Avg # firms created (monthly)                             290      43.62      84          22      18       44       87
Avg # jobs created after two years (monthly)              290      32.49       62         22      22       41       43
———– adding entrepreneurs’ jobs (monthly)                 290      69.30      123         39      37       78      118

Panel B: New firms, firm-level
Employment at creation                                  381,683     0.49      1.9         0.86     0.72      0.55     0.32
Dummy at least 1 employee at creation                   381,683     0.20       .4         0.26     0.27      0.22     0.15
Employment two years after creation                     381,683     0.87      2.5         1.06     1.38      1.08     0.60
Dummy at least 1 employee two years after creation      381,683     0.29      .45         0.36     0.42      0.36     0.23
Hire during first two years                             381,683     0.25      .43         0.31     0.36      0.31     0.20
Exit during first two years                             381,683     0.16      .36         0.21     0.15      0.15     0.14

Panel C: New firms, survey, firm-level
High school graduate                                     26,783     0.50                  0.54     0.59      0.53     0.47
College graduate                                         26,783     0.14                  0.12     0.16      0.16     0.12
Plan to hire                                             26,783     0.23                  0.34     0.34      0.27     0.18

Panel D: Incumbents, industry-level
# small incumbents                                        290       2,779    5,289       1,039     1,466     3,597   4,747
# jobs in small incumbents                                290       3,647    7,667       1,497     2,381     5,200   5,196
# large incumbents                                        290        804    1,243         705       791       992     715
# jobs in large incumbents                                290      21,967   38,740       27,527   24,135    24,802   11,948

  Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office and 2002 SINE survey. Panels A and B report
  summary statistics on all new firms started during the pre-reform period (1999–2001). Statistics are computed
  at the 4-digit industry level in Panel A and at the firm level in Panel B. Panel C reports summary statistics
  on entrepreneurs’ education and ambition using the 2002 wave of the SINE survey. Panel D reports summary
  statistics on incumbent firms in the 1999–2001 period, where incumbents are defined as firms that have been in
  the tax files for the last four years; small incumbents are defined as incumbents with 5 employees or less and which
  are not reported to be part of a conglomerate; large incumbents are incumbents with more than 5 employees and
  those that belong to a conglomerate. The last four columns provide summary statistics by splitting the sample
  into four quartiles of treatment intensity. Qi is the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of
  sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period).




                                                            41
                              Table 3: Aggregate Growth Rate: Treated vs. Control


                                                      Sales                         Value added
                                             (1)         (2)      (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)
          POST                            .082***    .095***    -.0026       .1***     .13***     .013
                                           (.013)     (.021)    (.013)       (.013)     (.02)   (.011)
          Q2 % Sole Props × POST                      -.063*     -.031                -.086**     -.02
                                                      (.034)    (.022)                 (.036)   (.024)
          Q3 % Sole Props × POST                      -.0084     -.011                  -.041   -.029*
                                                      (.028)    (.021)                 (.029)   (.016)
          Q4 % Sole Props × POST                        .017    -.0021                  .0058    -.003
                                                      (.039)    (.018)                 (.038)   (.016)
          Constant                         15***      15***     -40***        14***    14*** -44***
                                          (.0074)    (.0073)     (8.2)       (.0077) (.0076)     (9.2)
          Treatment-specific trend          No           No       Yes          No        No       Yes
          Industry FE                       Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes
          Observations                     2,030       2,030     2,030        2,030     2,030   2,030
          R-squared                         .99          .99      .99          .98       .98       .98

Source: Tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries from 1999–2005, annual observations.
Note: In columns (1) to (3) the dependent variable is the log of total industry sales. In columns (4) to (6) the
dependent variable is the log of total industry value added. POST is a dummy variable equal to 0 for observations
in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry
belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly
created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of
Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                        42
                                   Table 4: Firm Creation: Treated vs. Control


                                                             Number of  firms created
                                                         (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)
                      POST                             .1***    .046*     -.16*** -.25***
                                                       (.014) (.027)       (.031)   (.072)
                      Q2 % Sole Props × POST                     .019       .035      .027
                                                               (.043)      (.044)   (.043)
                      Q3 % Sole Props × POST                    .08**      .11***   .11***
                                                               (.038)      (.037)   (.036)
                      Q4 % Sole Props × POST                   .12***     .13***    .14***
                                                               (.038)      (.039)   (.039)
                      Industry capital intensity                                     .041*
                      × POST                                                        (.025)
                      Industry growth × POST                                         -.048
                                                                                    (.038)
                      Industry capital intensity                                     -.014
                      × Trend                                                      (.0085)
                      Industry growth × Trend                                      .054***
                                                                                    (.017)
                      Constant                         3.2***    3.2*** .98***      .98***
                                                       (.017)    (.018)     (.24)    (.23)
                      Treatment-specific trend           No        No        Yes      Yes
                      Month-of-the-year FE              Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
                      Industry FE                       Yes       Yes        Yes      Yes
                      Observations                     24,360    24,360 24,360      24,360
                      R-squared                          .92       .92       .92       .92

Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly observations.
Note: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms created in an industry in a month.
POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi%
Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable
(the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period).
Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time
trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001.
Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions
include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and
*** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                         43
                                   Table 5: Job Creation Through New Firms


                                                              Number of firms created
                                 0 employees            ≥ 1 employee            0 employees          ≥ 1 employee
                                 at creation             at creation           after 2 years          after 2 years
                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)           (8)
POST                         -.17*** -.31***        -.055**       -.054     -.11*** -.21***       -.15*** -.25***
                              (.031)     (.072)      (.026)      (.062)      (.028)     (.072)     (.026)       (.063)
Q2 % Sole Props × POST          .04        .031       -.016       -.019       .013       .0058      .021          .016
                              (.044)     (.043)      (.034)      (.034)      (.043)     (.043)     (.039)       (.039)
Q3 % Sole Props × POST       .12***      .13***        .012        .012       .048        .049    .14***       .14***
                              (.037)     (.036)      (.033)      (.033)      (.035)     (.034)     (.034)       (.034)
Q4 % Sole Props × POST       .15***      .16***      .0067        .0088     .086**      .093**    .13***       .14***
                              (.039)     (.038)      (.035)      (.035)      (.037)     (.037)     (.035)       (.035)
Industry capital intensity               .057**                  .0038                   .041*                  .04**
× POST                                   (.024)                   (.02)                 (.024)                   (.02)
Industry growth × POST                    -.031                   -.032                  -.035                   -.016
                                         (.037)                  (.027)                 (.041)                  (.037)
Industry capital intensity              -.019**                  .0038                  -.0087                -.023***
× Trend                                 (.0087)                 (.0073)                (.0091)                 (.0069)
Industry growth × Trend                 .048***                 .043***                   .032                 .11***
                                         (.018)                  (.011)                  (.02)                  (.015)
Constant                       .072        .072      2.1***      2.1***      .66***     .66***      .092          .092
                               (.24)      (.23)       (.18)       (.18)       (.24)      (.24)      (.22)         (.2)
Treatment-specific trend        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
Month-of-the-year FE            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
Industry FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
Observations                 24,360      24,360     24,360       24,360     24,360      24,360    24,360       24,360
R-squared                       .91         .91         .84         .84        .91         .91       .86           .86

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly.
Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms started with 0
employees. In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms started
with 1 employee or more. In columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new
firms with 0 employees two years after creation, including those which have exited. In columns (7) and (8), the
dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms with 1 employee or more two years after creation.
POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole
Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the
fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period).
Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time
trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001.
Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions
include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. *, **,
and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                        44
                                     Table 6: Firm Quality: Ex Post Measures


                                                     Hire                                    Exit
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
      POST                            .01***        .0076       -.0021       .011***        .0036        .019
                                      (.0038)     (.0046)       (.013)       (.0017)      (.0058)      (.014)
      Q2 % Sole Props × POST                       -.0058       -.0088                      .0032       .0038
                                                   (.008)      (.0081)                    (.0096)       (.01)
      Q3 % Sole Props × POST                       .0053         .0052                    .000016     -.00077
                                                   (.007)      (.0069)                    (.0074)      (.007)
      Q4 % Sole Props × POST                       -.0064       -.0089                     -.0087      -.0086
                                                  (.0056)      (.0061)                    (.0083)     (.0077)
      Industry capital intensity                                 .0066                                  -.006
      × POST                                                   (.0044)                                (.0052)
      Industry growth × POST                                   -.0086*                                 -.0011
                                                                (.005)                                (.0062)
      Industry capital intensity                                -.0029                                .0032**
      × Trend                                                   (.002)                                (.0015)
      Industry growth × Trend                                   .0082*                                  .0023
                                                               (.0043)                                (.0021)
      Constant                        .26***       .21***       .21***       .17***         .048         .048
                                     (.0043)       (.049)        (.05)       (.0028)       (.034)      (.033)
      Treatment-specific trend          No           Yes          Yes           No          Yes          Yes
      Month-of-the-year FE              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      Industry FE                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      Observations                  1,034,674    1,034,674    1,034,674     1,034,674    1,034,674   1,034,674
      R-squared                        .091         .091          .091         .037         .038         .038

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 1,034,674 new firms started in the
1999–2005 period. Note: In columns (4) to (6) the dependent variable is replaced by a dummy equal to 1 if the
firm exits during the first two years. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and
equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile
of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry,
measured in the pre-reform period). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear
time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in
the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from
1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                         45
                                     Table 7: Firm Quality: Ex Ante Measures


  Panel A: Education and ambition predict firm size

                        Log(employment)                     Employment≥1                     Employment≥5
                     (1)       (2)     (3)              (4)       (5)     (6)            (7)       (8)     (9)
  High school     .052***           .033***          .031***           .02***         .017***           .012***
                   (.011)             (.01)           (.007)           (.0066)        (.0038)           (.0037)
  College          .043**            .043**            .012              .012          .017**            .017**
                    (.02)            (.018)           (.011)             (.01)        (.0071)           (.0067)
  Plan to hire               .29***  .29***                    .17*** .17***                   .079*** .078***
                             (.022)  (.022)                     (.013)  (.013)                  (.0072) (.0074)
  Constant         .29***    .25***  .22***           .23***   .21***   .2***         .042*** .033*** .025***
                  (.0053) (.0053) (.0067)            (.0035) (.0032) (.0046)           (.002)   (.0018) (.0022)
  Industry FE        Yes       Yes     Yes              Yes      Yes      Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes
  Observations     26,783    26,783  26,783           26,783   26,783 26,783           26,783   26,783   26,783
  R-squared         .094       .13     .13             .099       .12     .12            .05      .069     .07

Source: 2002 SINE survey. Sample: random sample of 26,783 new firms started in the first semester of 2002.
Note: In columns (1) to (3) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of employees four years after
creation. In columns (4) to (6) the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has at least 1 employee
four years after creation. In columns (7) to (9) the dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm has at
least 5 employees four years after creation. High school is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at
least a high school degree. College is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at least a five-year college
degree. Plan to hire is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur answers “yes” to the question “Do you plan
to hire in the next twelve months?”. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                          46
                                                Table 7 (continued)


       Panel B: Education and ambition after the reform

                                                 High school                College            Plan to hire
                                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
       POST                                   .03**        .026        -.0047      -.009   -.031**      -.026
                                              (.015)     (.035)        (.008)     (.023)    (.014)     (.025)
       Q2 % Sole Props × POST                 .0073     .000073        -.0094      -.014   -.00082 -.0035
                                              (.022)     (.022)        (.019)      (.02)    (.019)     (.019)
       Q3 % Sole Props × POST                 .033*      .031*         .0078       .0068    .029*        .028
                                              (.019)     (.018)        (.011)     (.011)    (.018)     (.017)
       Q4 % Sole Props × POST                  .012      .0052         .0047      .00076   .038**     .035**
                                              (.018)     (.017)       (.0092) (.0097)       (.015)     (.016)
       Industry capital intensity × POST                 .0088                     .0058              .00089
                                                         (.014)                  (.0092)              (.0084)
       Industry growth × POST                           -.023**                  -.013**                -.012
                                                         (.012)                  (.0063)                (.01)
       Constant                               .5***       .5***       .14***      .14***   .25***     .25***
                                             (.0038) (.0037)          (.0022) (.0021)      (.0029) (.0028)
       Industry FE                             Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes
       Observations                          56,321      56,321       56,321      56,321   56,321     56,321
       R-squared                                .25         .25          .29        .29       .07         .07

Source: 2002 and 2006 SINE survey. Sample: random sample of 56,321 new firms started in the first semester of
2002 and the first semester of 2006. Note: In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at least high school degree. In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is a
dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at least a five-year college degree. In columns (5) and (6), the dependent
variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur answers “yes” to the question “Do you plan to hire in the next
twelve months?”. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations from the 2002 wave of the survey and equal to 1
for observations from the 2006 wave of the survey. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs
to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created
firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period). Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor
ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in
the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                        47
                                           Table 8: Entrepreneurs’ Relation with Former Employer across Industries


                                                            Relation with                  One or two clients             Relation former employer
                                                          former employer                                                    & One or two clients
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)        (9)
            POST                                   .011*** -.00063         .0021      .013***      .015    .046**       .005*** .0051**      .025***
                                                   (.0039)      (.01)      (.02)      (.0037)     (.01)     (.019)      (.0018) (.0024)       (.0071)
            Q2 % Sole Props × POST                              .019        .021                  .003       .0029                 -.0021     .00058
                                                               (.017)     (.017)                 (.023)     (.023)                (.0075)     (.0069)
            Q3 % Sole Props × POST                              .013        .014                 -.0016     -.0023                  .0019      .0021
                                                               (.012)     (.012)                 (.011)     (.011)                (.0036)     (.0032)
            Q4 % Sole Props × POST                              .011        .013                  -.005     -.0059                -.00084      .0012
                                                               (.012)     (.011)                 (.011)     (.012)                (.0036)     (.0037)
            Industry capital intensity × POST                             -.0029                            -.0098                          -.0091***
                                                                         (.0077)                           (.0066)                            (.0026)
            Industry growth × POST                                         .0056                            -.012*                             .0018
                                                                         (.0077)                           (.0073)                            (.0036)
            Constant                               .098*** .098*** .098***            .13***     .13***    .13***       .018*** .018***      .018***
                                                   (.0024) (.0024) (.0024)            (.0022)    (.0022)   (.0022)      (.0011) (.0011)      (.00098)
            Industry FE                              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes




48
            Observations                            56,264     56,264     56,264      56,264     56,264    56,264        56,264    56,264     56,264
            R-squared                                .028       .029        .029        .11        .11        .11         .03        .03        .03

     Source: 2002 and 2006 SINE survey. Sample: random sample of 56,321 new firms started in the first semester of 2002 and the first semester of
     2006. Note: In columns (1) to (3), the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur reports to be “a supplier or client of
     his former employer”. In columns (4) to (6), the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur reports to have one or two
     customers. In columns (7) to (9), the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur reports to be “a supplier or client of
     his former employer” and to have one or two customers. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations from the 2002 wave of the survey and equal
     to 1 for observations from the 2006 wave of the survey. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our
     treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period).
     Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate
     of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level.
     *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.
                                               Table 9: Job Creation


                                                    Number of jobs created          Number of jobs created
                                                 adding entrepreneurs’ jobs
                                                     (1)           (2)                 (3)             (4)
      POST                                       -.23***        -.48***             -.23***        -.53***
                                                  (.051)         (.096)              (.049)           (.1)
      Q2 % Sole Props × POST                        .087          .075                .093            .087
                                                  (.065)         (.064)              (.066)         (.066)
      Q3 % Sole Props × POST                      .17***         .18***              .21***        .22***
                                                  (.059)         (.058)               (.06)          (.06)
      Q4 % Sole Props × POST                       .2***         .21***             .21***          .22***
                                                  (.059)         (.058)              (.061)         (.061)
      Industry capital intensity × POST                         .096***                              .1***
                                                                 (.033)                             (.033)
      Industry growth × POST                                      -.025                               .055
                                                                 (.044)                             (.057)
      Industry capital intensity × Trend                       -.037***                           -.042***
                                                                 (.012)                             (.013)
      Industry growth × Trend                                   .079***                             .12***
                                                                 (.014)                             (.018)
      Constant                                    .85***         .85***                 .4              .4
                                                   (.27)          (.25)               (.3)           (.27)
      Treatment-specific trend                      Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Month-of-the-year FE                          Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Industry FE                                   Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Observations                                24,360         24,360              24,360         24,360
      R-squared                                      .84           .84                 .76             .77

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly.
Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of employees in new firms
two years after creation plus the number of surviving firms after two years (to account for the entrepreneurs’ jobs).
In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is replaced by the log of one plus the number of employees in new
firms two years after creation. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal
to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of
our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry,
measured in the pre-reform period). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear
time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in
the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from
1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                         49
                                Table 10: Employment Growth per Category of Firm


                                             Small incumbents            Large incumbents             Small incumbents
                                                                                                          + New firms
                                                 (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)       (6)
 POST                                        -.027***       -.027       -.058***       -.093**        .0016       -.14
                                                (.01)       (.04)         (.016)        (.038)        (.027)     (.13)
 Q2 % Sole Props × POST                        -.025*     -.024**           .02           .016         -.014     -.019
                                               (.013)      (.012)         (.019)        (.019)        (.031)    (.026)
 Q3 % Sole Props × POST                        -.019*       -.019           .03          .031         .0095       .012
                                               (.011)      (.012)         (.019)        (.019)        (.028)    (.028)
 Q4 % Sole Props × POST                       -.022**     -.022**           .01         .0099           .018      .024
                                               (.010)      (.011)         (.018)        (.017)        (.031)    (.033)
 Industry capital intensity × POST                        -.00031                         .017                    .053
                                                           (.013)                       (.012)                  (.043)
 Industry growth × POST                                     .0012                         -.02                  .00087
                                                          (.0092)                       (.022)                  (.037)
 Industry capital intensity × Trend                        -.0013                    -.0063***                  -.019*
                                                          (.0024)                       (.002)                   (.01)
 Industry growth × Trend                                   .00073                        -.002                   .0043
                                                          (.0019)                      (.0034)                 (.0077)
 Constant                                       -.09         -.09        -7.1***       -7.1***           1.9       1.9
                                               (1.4)        (1.4)         (2.1)          (2.1)         (4.2)     (3.9)
 Treatment-specific trend                       Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes
 Industry FE                                    Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes       Yes
 Observations                                  2,610        2,610         2,610         2,610         2,610      2,610
 R-squared                                       .47          .47          .17             .18           .61       .62


Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2007, monthly.
Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the growth rate of total employment in small incumbent
firms (i.e., firms that have been in the tax files for the last four years, have 5 employees or less in year t − 1, and are
not reported to be part of a group in either year t − 1 or year t). In columns (3) and (4), the dependent variable
is the growth rate of total employment in large incumbent firms (i.e., firms which have been in the tax files for the
last four years and are not small according to the above definition). In columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable
is the growth rate of total employment in small incumbents and new firms started over the last two years (i.e.,
firms started in years t − 2, t − 1 and t). POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period
and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile
of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry,
measured in the pre-reform period). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear
time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in
the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from
1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                            50
                               Table 11: Comparison New Firms vs. Shrinking Incumbents


Panel A: Simple measures of productivity

                                                   Wage                   Value added                     Sales
                                                                           per worker                  per worker
                                               (1)       (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)
New firm                                     5.2***    5.7***           7***      6.6***          9.3***        5.4***
                                              (.39)     (1.6)          (.37)       (.78)           (.51)         (1.9)
New firm × POST                               .014       .18             .19         .62            .23           1.8
                                              (.18)     (.39)          (.15)       (.55)           (.29)         (1.1)
Q2 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                        -.41                       -.22                          -2.2
                                                        (.54)                      (.65)                         (1.3)
Q3 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                        -.72                       -.94                         -2.3*
                                                        (.47)                      (.63)                         (1.2)
Q4 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                        .56                        -.25                          -1.4
                                                        (.53)                       (.6)                         (1.2)
Constant                                     22***      22***          26***       26***           43***        43***
                                             (.11)      (.11)          (.61)       (.61)           (.86)         (.88)
Industry × Year FE                            Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes
Quartile treatment × New firm                 No         Yes             No         Yes             No            Yes
Observations                                265,586    265,586       1,269,812 1,269,812         1,258,595 1,258,595
R-squared                                     .16        .16             .12         .12             .2             .2

    Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: all new firms and small “shrinking”
    incumbents in the tax files, 1999-2005. Note: Incumbent firms are defined as firms that have been in the tax files
    for the last four years. “Shrinking” incumbents are defined as incumbents whose employment decreases from year
    t to year t + 1). For new firms, all dependent variables are computed two years after creation. In columns (1) and
    (2) the dependent variable is total wages divided by number of employees (requires that the firm has at least 1
    employee). In columns (3) to (4), the dependent variable is value added divided by one plus number of employees.
    In columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is sales divided by one plus number of employees. New firm is a
    dummy variable equal to 0 if the observation corresponds to a “shrinking” incumbent and 1 if it corresponds to a
    newly-created firm. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from
    2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment
    intensity variable (the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the
    pre-reform period). Quartile treatment × New firm are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with the new firm
    dummy. All regressions include industry × year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level.
    *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                            51
                                               Table 11 (continued)


            Panel B: Total Factor Productivity

                                                                 TFP1                      TFP2
                                                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
            New firm                                       .16***      .13***       .33***      .2***
                                                           (.0061)     (.023)        (.013)     (.057)
            New firm × POST                                 -.0053     -.0025       -.02***       .029
                                                           (.0032)     (.014)       (.0063)     (.038)
            Q2 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                           .0039                    -.042
                                                                       (.015)                    (.04)
            Q3 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                          -.0076                    -.051
                                                                       (.015)                   (.039)
            Q4 % Sole Props × New firm × POST                          -.0019                    -.062
                                                                       (.014)                   (.038)
            Constant                                       -.14***    -.14***       -.27***    -.27***
                                                           (.0036)    (.0035)        (.011)     (.012)
            Industry × Year FE                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
            Quartile treatment × New firm                     No         Yes           No         Yes
            Observations                                   966,938    966,938       966,786    966,786
            R-squared                                        .035        .035         .079         .08


Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: all new firms and small “shrinking”
incumbents in the tax files, 1999-2005. Note: Incumbent firms are defined as firms that have been in the tax files
for the last four years. “Shrinking” incumbents are defined as incumbents whose employment decreases from year
t to year t + 1). For new firms, all dependent variables are computed two years after creation. In column (1)
and (2), the dependent variable is TFP1, the residual of a Cobb-Douglas production function estimated industry
by industry. In column (3) and (4), the dependent variable is TFP2, which uses the industry-level labor share as
coefficients in the industry-level Cobb-Douglas production function. New firm is a dummy variable equal to 0 if
the observation corresponds to a “shrinking” incumbent and 1 if it corresponds to a newly-created firm. POST is
a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% Sole Props
is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction
of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period). Quartile
treatment × New firm are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with the new firm dummy. All regressions include
industry × year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically
different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                         52
A     Derivation of the Model
A.1     Solving the model
Solving the model is simple. First, start with the entrepreneurial decisions. Maximizing profits
w.r.t. l gives labor demand and the expected profit of a successful entrepreneur:

                                 β     1                                    1
                           l=       ps1−β Aθ       and             π = ps1−β Aθ − cs .
                                1−β

    Given the indirect utility written above, an individual becomes entrepreneur if and only if:
                                         1
                                 q log(ps1−β Aθ − cs ) + (1 − q) log(b) ≥ ln(1)
                                               − 1
                                                     1−q        
                          ⇔      Aθ ≥ θs ≡ ps 1−β b− q + cs ,                                           (5)

so that production in industry s is given by:
                      Z                                                                       φ
                              1      β
                                                    q     β
                                                              φ                          Aθ0
                 Ys =      q      ps1−β AθdF (θ) =     ps1−β     θs                                 .
                      Aθ≥θs 1 − β                  1−β       φ−1                          θs

   We now write the two product market clearing conditions. Aggregating over individual con-
sumption leads to:
                                          1       1
                                    pT XTσ = pC XCσ .

Given that markets clear, we have that Xs = Ys for s ∈ {T, C}. This implies that:
                                        β+σ(1−β)        β+σ(1−β)

                                      pT σ(1−β)        pCσ(1−β)
                                             φ−1   =         φ−1     ≡ k.                               (6)
                                        θT    σ
                                                            θCσ




A.2     The Reform
Once the equilibrium conditions are written, we can investigate the effect of the reform. We
first compute the differential increase in the number of entrepreneurs in industries T and C as a
response to the reform. We model the reform as a increase in b. Differentiating (5), we get:

                                                                      1−q
                                        1                    q
                          ∆ log θs = −     ∆ log(ps ) −         1−q ∆ log(b),
                                       1−β              1 + cs b q




                                                       53
and differentiating (6), we get:

                        β + σ(1 − β)              φ−1
                                     ∆ log(ps ) −     ∆ log(θs ) = ∆ log(k).
                          σ(1 − β)                 σ

Therefore:
                                                                              1−q
                               σ                     1 + (σ − 1)(1 − β)      q
        ∆ log θs = −                      ∆ log(k) −                                 ∆ log(b).   (7)
                       φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β)            φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β) 1 + cs b 1−q
                                                                                  q



We can write our first prediction:

Proposition 2. Assume the reform leads to a marginal increase in b by ∆b. Then, the Difference-
in-Difference (DD) estimate of the increase in the number of entrepreneurs is given by:
                                                                              1−q
                                                          1−q
                                  φ + φ(σ − 1)(1 − β)      q
                                                              (cC − cT )b q
        ∆ log(NT ) − ∆ log(NC ) =                                           1−q ∆ log(b).
                                   φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β) (1 + cT b 1−q
                                                                 q )(1 + c b q )
                                                                          C


Proof. The log number of entrepreneurs in industry s is given by:

                    log(Ns ) = log(1 − F (θs /A)) = φ log θ0 − φ log θs + φ log A.

We then use equation (7) to calculate the DD.

    Firm creation increases more in industry T than in industry C. When φ increases, the popula-
tions of entrepreneurs become more homogeneous. The differential effect increases, and eventually
converges to 1 + (σ − 1)(1 − β) as φ goes to infinity. If the “experimentation view” prevails (i.e.,
when ex post outcomes are the dominant source of heterogeneity—φ is very large), the effect of
the reform is the largest.
    The second prediction is about average quality of entrepreneurs, which we define as:

                                                        1
                            qs ≡ E[log(θ)|Aθ ≥ θs ] =     + log θs − log A.
                                                        φ

We directly combine this definition with equation (7) to obtain our second proposition:

Proposition 3. Assume the reform leads to a marginal increase in b by ∆b. Then, the DD
estimate of the average quality of entrepreneurs is given by:
                                                                        1−q
                                                    1−q
                             1 + (σ − 1)(1 − β)      q
                                                        (cC − cT )b q
               ∆qT − ∆qC = −                                          1−q ∆ log b.
                             φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β) (1 + cT b 1−q
                                                           q )(1 + c b q )
                                                                    C



                                                  54
   Quality decreases more in industry T than in industry C. This happens because there is more
entry in industry T . When potential entrepreneurs are however more similar, this effect vanishes
(the quality threshold θs responds less in both industries). The difference goes to zero when
φ → +∞, i.e., when ex post outcomes are the dominant source of heterogeneity.
   Finally, we compute the size of “incumbents”. Employment in a firm of given quality is pro-
                1
portional to ps1−β . So employment change in existing firms is:

                    1
    ∆ log(Ls ) =       ∆ log ps + ∆ log A
                   1−β
                                                                       1−q
                         σ                          φ−1               q
               =                    ∆ log k −                                 ∆ log b + ∆ log A.
                 φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β)           φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β) 1 + cs b 1−q
                                                                           q



This allows us to write down our third prediction:

Proposition 4. Assume the reform leads to a marginal increase in b by ∆b. Then, the DD
estimate of the average size of “incumbents” is given by:
                                                                             1−q
                                                           1−q
                                          φ−1               q
                                                               (cC − cT )b q
        ∆ log(LT ) − ∆ log(LC ) = −                                          1−q ∆ log(b).
                                    φ + (σ − 1)(1 − β) (1 + cT b 1−q
                                                                  q )(1 + c b q )
                                                                           C


   Since there is more entry in industry T , competition is fiercer there. Marginal revenues fall, and
entrepreneurs hire less. When φ increases, the effect of the reform is even larger, which reinforces
the crowding-out.




                                                 55
B      Appendix Tables and Figures

              Figure B.1: Growth Rate in Firm Creation. Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.




Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Note: Qk% is the kth quartile of the alternative treatment
intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the
pre-reform period (1999-2001)). For each month t and for each quartile Qk (k = 1, 2, 3, 4) of treatment intensity,
we compute the average growth rate of the number of firms created in industries belonging to quartile Qk from the
beginning of the sample period (1999–2000) to month t:
                                                                                                            !
           k             1           X                               1      X
          gt =                             log(# firms createdst ) −                 log(# firms createdsτ ) .
                #industries in Qk                                    24 τ ∈1999,2000
                                  s∈Qk


The graph plots the 12-month moving average of gtk .




                                                        56
                    Table B.1: Industries in Treatment and Control Industries


Industry name                                        % Sole Proprietorships     Treatment Quartile

Infrastructure development                                     1.3                     Q1
Temporary work agencies                                        2.1                     Q1
Holding Companies                                              2.5                     Q1
Residential real estate development                            2.6                     Q1
Property operators                                             2.9                     Q1
Television film production                                     4.9                     Q1
Periodical publishing                                          5.8                     Q1
Television non-film production                                 5.8                     Q1
Wholesale trade: Footwear                                      6.0                     Q1
Wholesale trade: Apparel                                       6.0                     Q1
Wholesale trade: Packaged frozen food                          6.3                     Q1
Motion picture production                                      6.3                     Q1
Arrangement of Transportation of Freight and Cargo             6.7                     Q1
Department stores                                              7.5                     Q1
Newspaper publishing                                           7.6                     Q1

Secretaries and translators                                   83.1                     Q4
Miscellaneous trade intermediaries                            83.3                     Q4
Other sport services                                          87.2                     Q4
Other educational services                                    87.3                     Q4
Fairground attractions                                        88.0                     Q4
Other personal services                                       89.4                     Q4
Taxis                                                         92.0                     Q4
Food non-store retailers                                      92.5                     Q4
Independent artists                                           92.9                     Q4
Veterinary offices                                            93.6                     Q4
Dental offices                                                95.9                     Q4
Non-food non-store retailers                                  96.2                     Q4
Medical offices                                               96.5                     Q4
Legal services                                                96.6                     Q4
Medical aides                                                 99.7                     Q4




                                               57
                      Table B.2: Summary Statistics: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                                                                           Mean by quartile of % of
                                                           N       Mean       SD            New zero-employee firms
Panel A: New firms, industry-level                                                        Q1      Q2      Q3       Q4
Avg # firms created (monthly)                             290      43.62      84          12      35      59        69
Avg # jobs created after two years (monthly)              290      32.49       62         22      41      47        19
———– adding entrepreneurs’ jobs (monthly)                 290      69.30      123         33      71      95        77

Panel B: New firms, firm-level
Employment at creation                                  381,683     0.49      1.9         1.18     0.82      0.47     0.19
Dummy at least 1 employee at creation                   381,683     0.20       .4         0.38     0.31      0.20     0.09
Employment two years after creation                     381,683     0.87      2.5         2.03     1.29      0.91     0.36
Dummy at least 1 employee two years after creation      381,683     0.29      .45         0.54     0.43      0.33     0.13
Hire during first two years                             381,683     0.25      .43         0.46     0.37      0.29     0.12
Exit during first two years                             381,683     0.16      .36         0.12     0.12      0.18     0.16

Panel C: New firms, survey, firm-level
High school graduate                                     26,783     0.50                  0.42     0.38      0.49     0.60
College graduate                                         26,783     0.14                  0.06     0.10      0.13     0.18
Plan to hire                                             26,783     0.23                  0.39     0.32      0.26     0.14

Panel D: Incumbents, industry-level
# small incumbents                                        290       2,779    5,289       1,961     2,798     4,167   2,180
# jobs in small incumbents                                290       3,647    7,667       3,752     4,189     4,891   1,739
# large incumbents                                        290        804    1,243        1,005      891     1,010     305
# jobs in large incumbents                                290      21,967   38,740       33,540   21,739    24,991   7,396

  Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office and 2002 SINE survey. Panels A and B report
  summary statistics on all new firms started during the pre-reform period (1999–2001). Statistics are computed
  at the 4-digit industry level in Panel A and at the firm level in Panel B. Panel C reports summary statistics
  on entrepreneurs’ education and ambition using the 2002 wave of the SINE survey. Panel D reports summary
  statistics on incumbent firms in the 1999–2001 period, where incumbents are defined as firms that have been in
  the tax files for the last four years; small incumbents are defined as incumbents with 5 employees or less and which
  are not reported to be part of a conglomerate; large incumbents are incumbents with more than 5 employees and
  those that belong to a conglomerate. The last four columns provide summary statistics by splitting the sample
  into four quartiles of treatment intensity. Qi is the ith quartile of our alternative treatment intensity variable (the
  fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period
  (1999-2001)).




                                                            58
                  Table B.3: Aggregate Growth Rate: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                                       Sales                          Value added
                                              (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)      (6)
       POST                                .082***    .081***    -.025**       .1***    .092*** -.013
                                            (.013)     (.014)     (.011)       (.013)    (.014)   (.011)
       Q2 % zero employees × POST                       -.011      .013                  -.0034    .024
                                                        (.03)     (.019)                 (.032)   (.021)
       Q3 % zero employees × POST                       -.031      .012                   -.025    .007
                                                       (.025)     (.021)                 (.025)   (.017)
       Q4 % zero employees × POST                        .049      .021                   .07*      .02
                                                        (.04)     (.018)                  (.04)   (.018)
       Constant                              15***     15***     -40***         14***    14*** -44***
                                            (.0074)   (.0073)      (8.2)       (.0077) (.0076)     (9.2)
       Treatment-specific trend               No          No        Yes          No        No       Yes
       Industry FE                            Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes      Yes
       Observations                          2,030     2,030      2,030         2,030     2,030   2,030
       R-squared                              .99         .99       .99          .98       .98      .98

Source: Tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries from 1999–2005, annual observations.
Note: In columns (1) to (3) the dependent variable is the log of total industry sales. In columns (4) to (6) the
dependent variable is the log of total industry value added. POST is a dummy variable equal to 0 for observations
in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the
industry belongs to the ith quartile of the alternative treatment intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee
firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period). Treatment-specific trends are
the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1%
levels of significance.




                                                        59
                       Table B.4: Firm Creation: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                                                Number of firms created
                                                            (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)
                    POST                                   .1*** .059** -.13*** -.2***
                                                          (.014) (.023) (.028)        (.074)
                    Q2 % zero employees × POST                     .046       .045     .046
                                                                  (.038) (.035)       (.035)
                    Q3 % zero employees × POST                     .041       .024     .021
                                                                  (.036) (.038)       (.038)
                    Q4 % zero employees × POST                    .088**     .1***    .11***
                                                                   (.04)     (.04)    (.039)
                    Industry capital intensity                                          .033
                    × POST                                                            (.024)
                    Industry growth × POST                                             -.051
                                                                                      (.037)
                    Industry capital intensity                                         -.013
                    × Trend                                                          (.0083)
                    Industry growth × Trend                                          .056***
                                                                                      (.017)
                    Constant                              3.2*** 3.2*** .98***        .98***
                                                          (.017) (.018)      (.23)     (.23)
                    Treatment-specific trend                No      No        Yes       Yes
                    Month-of-the-year FE                    Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
                    Industry FE                             Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
                    Observations                          24,360 24,360 24,360        24,360
                    R-squared                               .92     .92        .92       .92

Source: Firm registry from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly observations.
Note: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms created in an industry in a month.
POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% zero
employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of the alternative treatment intensity
variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform
period (199-2001)). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend
is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from
1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All
regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level.
*, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                         60
                  Table B.5: Job Creation Through New Firms: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable


                                                                 Number of firms created
                                      0 employees          ≥ 1 employee            0 employees           ≥ 1 employee
                                      at creation           at creation           after 2 years           after 2 years
                                     (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)
POST                              -.13*** -.24***        -.1***      -.097     -.1***      -.18**     -.13*** -.21***
                                   (.026)     (.074)     (.025)     (.063)     (.026)      (.072)      (.024)       (.061)
Q2 % zero employees × POST          .034        .037     .076** .075**           .018        .021      .067*        .07**
                                   (.035)     (.035)     (.033)     (.033)     (.035)      (.035)      (.035)       (.035)
Q3 % zero employees × POST          .029        .028       .03        .027      .0074       .0052       .032          .032
                                   (.037)     (.037)     (.033)     (.033)     (.037)      (.037)      (.036)       (.036)
Q4 % zero employees × POST         .11***    .12***      .079** .083**         .087** .092**           .1***       .11***
                                    (.04)     (.039)     (.034)     (.034)     (.039)      (.038)      (.035)       (.035)
Industry capital intensity                    .046*                 .0037                    .034                    .031
× POST                                        (.024)                 (.02)                 (.023)                    (.02)
Industry growth × POST                         -.033                 -.036                   -.04                    -.015
                                              (.036)                (.026)                 (.039)                   (.038)
Industry capital intensity                   -.017**                .0025                  -.0076                 -.023***
× Trend                                      (.0084)               (.0068)                (.0088)                  (.0067)
Industry growth × Trend                      .05***               .044***                   .035*                   .1***
                                              (.017)                (.011)                 (.019)                   (.016)
Constant                            .072        .072     2.1*** 2.1***         .66*** .66***            .092          .092
                                    (.24)      (.23)      (.18)      (.18)      (.24)       (.24)       (.23)         (.2)
Treatment-specific trend             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Month-of-the-year FE                 Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry FE                          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                      24,360     24,360      24,360 24,360         24,360 24,360          24,360       24,360
R-squared                            .91         .91       .84         .84        .91         .91        .86           .86

     Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly.
     Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms started with 0
     employees. In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms started
     with 1 employee or more. In columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new
     firms with 0 employees two years after creation, including those which have exited. In columns (7) and (8), the
     dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms with 1 employee or more two years after creation.
     POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi%
     zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable
     (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period
     (1999-2001)). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend is
     a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from
     1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All
     regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level.
     *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                              61
             Table B.6: Firm Quality: Ex Post Measures. Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                                      Hire                                     Exit
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)
    POST                                .01***       .0033        -.013         .011***      .019***      .037**
                                        (.0038)     (.0061)      (.014)         (.0017)      (.0051)      (.017)
    Q2 % zero employees × POST                       .0084         .011                       -.0047      -.0072
                                                    (.0071)     (.0072)                      (.0068)     (.0072)
    Q3 % zero employees × POST                       .0088        .013*                     -.016***     -.02***
                                                    (.0075)     (.0069)                      (.0061)     (.0068)
    Q4 % zero employees × POST                       -.008       -.0051                     -.034***    -.037***
                                                    (.0067)     (.0069)                      (.0072)     (.0072)
    Industry capital intensity                                    .0069                                   -.0072
    × POST                                                      (.0044)                                   (.006)
    Industry growth × POST                                       -.0058                                    .0038
                                                                (.0046)                                  (.0048)
    Industry capital intensity                                  -.0035*                                  .0036**
    × Trend                                                     (.0019)                                  (.0018)
    Industry growth × Trend                                     .0073*                                    .00053
                                                                 (.004)                                  (.0019)
    Constant                             .26***     .21***       .21***         .17***       .049*         .049*
                                        (.0043)      (.048)      (.048)         (.0028)      (.029)       (.028)
    Treatment-specific trend               No         Yes          Yes             No         Yes           Yes
    Month-of-the-year FE                   Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
    Industry FE                            Yes        Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
    Observations                       1,034,674   1,034,674   1,034,674       1,034,674   1,034,674    1,034,674
    R-squared                             .091        .091         .092           .037        .038          .038

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 1,034,674 new firms started in the
1999–2005 period. Note: In columns (4) to (6) the dependent variable is replaced by a dummy equal to 1 if the
firm exits during the first two years. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and
equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile
of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry,
measured in the pre-reform period (1999-2001)). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4
with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio
of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the
industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of
significance.




                                                         62
             Table B.7: Firm Quality: Ex Ante Measures. Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


       Panel B: Education and ambition after the reform

                                                 High school              College              Plan to hire
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
       POST                                   .048*        .039       .0073      .0043     -.04***      -.042
                                              (.029)     (.048)     (.0079)     (.027)      (.015)     (.028)
       Q2 % zero employees × POST              -.021      -.019     -.025** -.024**          .025        .026
                                              (.031)     (.031)      (.011)     (.011)      (.018)     (.018)
       Q3 % zero employees × POST               .01       .016        -.006     -.0025      .036**      .04**
                                               (.03)      (.03)     (.0094)      (.01)      (.017)     (.017)
       Q4 % zero employees × POST            .00012      .0049      -.00077      .0019     .052*** .055***
                                              (.031)      (.03)      (.011)      (.01)      (.016)     (.017)
       Industry capital intensity × POST                 .0075                   .0036                  .0035
                                                         (.015)                (.0091)                (.0084)
       Industry growth × POST                           -.025**                -.015**                 -.018*
                                                         (.011)                (.0062)                  (.01)
       Constant                               .5***      .5***       .14***    .14***       .25***     .25***
                                             (.0036) (.0036)        (.0022) (.0021)        (.0029) (.0028)
       Industry FE                              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
       Observations                          56,321     56,321       56,321    56,321       56,321     56,321
       R-squared                                .25         .25        .29         .3         .07         .07

Source: 2002 and 2006 SINE survey. Sample: random sample of 56,321 new firms started in the first semester of
2002 and the first semester of 2006. Note: In columns (1) and (2), the dependent variable is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at least high school degree. In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is a
dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur has at least a five-year college degree. In columns (5) and (6), the dependent
variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the entrepreneur answers “yes” to the question “Do you plan to hire in the next
twelve months?”. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations from the 2002 wave of the survey and equal to 1 for
observations from the 2006 wave of the survey. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs
to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created
firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period (1999-2001)). Industry growth is the average growth rate
of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of
significance.




                                                         63
                        Table B.8: Job Creation: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                                    Number of jobs created          Number of jobs created
                                                 adding entrepreneurs’ jobs
                                                     (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
      POST                                       -.17***        -.39***             -.16***        -.42***
                                                  (.046)         (.099)              (.048)           (.1)
      Q2 % zero employees × POST                    .058           .067               .071           .082
                                                  (.057)         (.058)              (.062)         (.062)
      Q3 % zero employees × POST                    .041           .041               .034           .041
                                                  (.059)         (.057)              (.064)         (.062)
      Q4 % zero employees × POST                   .12**          .12**              .12**           .12*
                                                  (.059)         (.057)              (.063)         (.062)
      Industry capital intensity × POST                          .085**                             .09***
                                                                 (.033)                             (.035)
      Industry growth × POST                                      -.025                              .056
                                                                 (.044)                             (.057)
      Industry capital intensity × Trend                       -.037***                           -.043***
                                                                 (.012)                             (.013)
      Industry growth × Trend                                   .078***                             .12***
                                                                 (.014)                             (.019)
      Constant                                    .85***         .85***                 .4             .4
                                                   (.27)          (.25)               (.3)           (.27)
      Treatment-specific trend                      Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Month-of-the-year FE                          Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Industry FE                                   Yes            Yes                Yes             Yes
      Observations                                24,360         24,360              24,360         24,360
      R-squared                                      .84            .84                .76            .77

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly.
Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of employees in new firms
two years after creation plus the number of surviving firms after two years (to account for the entrepreneurs’ jobs).
In columns (3) and (4) the dependent variable is replaced by the log of one plus the number of employees in new
firms two years after creation. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal
to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of
our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry,
measured in the pre-reform period (1999-2001)). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4
with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio
of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the
industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of
significance.




                                                         64
        Table B.9: Employment Growth per Category of Firm: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable.


                                          Small incumbents            Large incumbents           Small incumbents
                                                                                                     + New firms
                                              (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)
POST                                      -.039***      -.038       -.053***       -.091**        -.012      -.15
                                           (.0088)      (.04)         (.011)         (.04)       (.023)     (.13)
Q2 % zero employees × POST                  -.0064     -.0063          .017           .018         .032      .038
                                             (.01)     (.011)         (.015)        (.015)       (.026)    (.027)
Q3 % zero employees × POST                   -.011      -.011          .023          .021        .00094     .0021
                                            (.012)     (.012)         (.016)        (.017)       (.028)    (.026)
Q4 % zero employees × POST                 -.00025    -.00035          .004         .0052         .036       .037
                                            (.011)     (.011)         (.016)        (.016)       (.028)    (.028)
Industry capital intensity × POST                     -.00049                         .017                   .051
                                                       (.014)                       (.012)                 (.042)
Industry growth × POST                                  .002                         -.018                 -.0014
                                                      (.0096)                       (.023)                 (.036)
Industry capital intensity × Trend                     -.0013                    -.0062***                 -.019*
                                                      (.0024)                      (.0019)                  (.01)
Industry growth × Trend                                .00075                        -.002                  .0037
                                                       (.002)                      (.0036)                (.0082)
Constant                                     -.09        -.09        -7.1***       -7.1***          1.9       1.9
                                            (1.4)       (1.4)         (2.1)          (2.1)        (4.2)     (3.9)
Treatment-specific trend                     Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes       Yes
Industry FE                                  Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes       Yes
Observations                                2,610       2,610         2,610         2,610         2,610     2,610
R-squared                                     .47         .47          .17             .18          .61       .63

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2007, monthly.
Note: In columns (1) and (2) the dependent variable is the growth rate of total employment in small incumbent
firms (i.e., firms that have been in the tax files for the last four years, have 5 employees or less in year t − 1, and
are not reported to be part of a group in either year t − 1 or year t). In columns (3) and (4), the dependent
variable is the growth rate of total employment in large incumbent firms (i.e., firms that have been in the tax files
for the last four years and are not small according to the above definition). In columns (5) and (6), the dependent
variable is the growth rate of total employment in small incumbents and new firms started over the last two years
(i.e., firms started in years t − 2, t − 1 and t). POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001
period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to
the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms
in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period (1999-2001)). Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of
Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time trend. Industry capital intensity is the average
assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Industry growth is the average growth rate of
sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at
10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                          65
           Table B.10: Comparison New Firms vs. Shrinking Incumbents: Alternative Treatment Intensity Variable


                                                       Wage                   Value added                      Sales
                                                                               per worker                   per worker
                                                   (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
New firm                                         5.2***      4***           7***      6.6***           9.3***        9.2***
                                                  (.39)      (.31)         (.37)         (1)            (.51)         (1.1)
New firm × POST                                   .014        .67            .19        .79*             .23           1.1
                                                  (.18)      (.53)         (.15)       (.45)            (.29)         (.69)
Q2 % zero employees × New firm × POST                         -.79                      -.75                            -1
                                                             (.61)                      (.5)                          (.77)
Q3 % zero employees × New firm × POST                        -1.1*                       -1*                           -1.4
                                                             (.58)                     (.53)                          (.89)
Q4 % zero employees × New firm × POST                       -.0032                        .1                           -.13
                                                              (.7)                     (.58)                          (.93)
Constant                                         22***      22***          26***       26***            43***        43***
                                                 (.11)       (.12)         (.61)       (.61)            (.86)         (.86)
Industry × Year FE                                Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes              Yes           Yes
Quartile treatment × New firm                     No          Yes            No         Yes              No            Yes
Observations                                    265,586    265,586       1,269,812 1,269,812          1,258,595 1,258,595
R-squared                                         .16         .16            .12         .12              .2            .2

     Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: all new firms and small “shrinking”
     incumbents in the tax files, 1999-2005. Note: Incumbent firms are defined as firms that have been in the tax files
     for the last four years. “Shrinking” incumbents are defined as incumbents whose employment decreases from year
     t to year t + 1). For new firms, all dependent variables are computed two years after creation. In columns (1) and
     (2) the dependent variable is total wages divided by number of employees (requires that the firm has at least 1
     employee). In columns (3) to (4), the dependent variable is value added divided by one plus number of employees.
     In columns (5) and (6), the dependent variable is sales divided by one plus number of employees. New firm is a
     dummy variable equal to 0 if the observation corresponds to a “shrinking” incumbent and 1 if it corresponds to a
     newly-created firm. POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from
     2002 to 2005. Qi% zero employees is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment
     intensity variable (the fraction of zero-employee firms among newly created firms in the industry, measured in
     the pre-reform period (1999-2001)). Quartile treatment × New firm are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with
     the new firm dummy. All regressions include industry × year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
     industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                             66
                 Table B.11: 20 Industries with Largest Post-reform Surge in Aggregate Creation


               Industry name                                     % Share of Aggregate      Quartile of
                                                                 Increase in Creation      Treatment

               Business and management consulting services                 7.7                 Q3
               Non-food non-store retail trade                             6.8                 Q4
               Masonry contractors                                         4.4                 Q4
               Real estate agents                                          3.9                 Q4
               Electrical contractors                                      3.5                 Q4
               Miscellaneous trade intermediaries                          3.3                 Q4
               Other Miscellaneous store retailers                         2.8                 Q4
               Beauty parlors                                              2.4                 Q4
               Other business services                                     2.4                 Q3
               Real estate brokers                                         2.4                 Q1
               Apparel retail trade                                        2.4                 Q3
               Painting contractors                                        2.4                 Q4
               Plumbing contractors                                        2.0                 Q4
               Full-service restaurants                                    1.9                 Q3
               Legal services                                              1.8                 Q4
               Hairdressers                                                1.7                 Q4
               Food non-store retail trade                                 1.7                 Q4
               Carpentry contractors                                       1.7                 Q4
               Engineering services                                        1.7                 Q2
               Computer maintenance services                               1.7                 Q3

               Total                                                       58


Source: Firm registry data from French Statistical Office. Note: In this Table, we list the 20 4-digit industries that
contribute the most to the increase in average monthly firm creation between the pre period (1999-2001) and the
post period (2002-2005). Column 1 is the industry’s name. Column 2 is the contribution in percentage points to
                                                                      ∆Ns
                                           P s, it is computed as ∆N where ∆Ns is the increase in the average
the aggregate surge in creation. For industry
monthly number of creations and ∆N = s ∆Ns . Column 3 reports the quartile of treatment (measured through
the % of sole proprietorships in industry creations, as in the main text). Overall, the 20 top contributors contribute
to 58% of the total surge in business creation. The rise in masonry creation contributes to 4.4% of the total surge.




                                                         67
                Table B.12: Firm Creation: Controlling for Industry-level Exposure to the Cycle


                                                                 Number of firms    created
                                                                   (1)     (2)           (3)
                      POST                                     -.28*** -.28***       -.29***
                                                                (.076)  (.075)        (.075)
                      Q2 % Sole Props × POST                       .03    .031          .031
                                                                (.044)  (.044)        (.044)
                      Q3 % Sole Props × POST                    .11***  .11***        .11***
                                                                (.036)  (.036)        (.036)
                      Q4 % Sole Props × POST                    .14***  .14***        .14***
                                                                (.039)  (.038)        (.038)
                      Industry capital intensity × POST          .042*   .042*         .042*
                                                                (.025)  (.025)        (.025)
                      Industry growth × POST                   -.00018 .00075         .00075
                                                                (.036)  (.035)        (.035)
                      Industry capital intensity × Trend        -.014*  -.014*        -.014*
                                                               (.0087) (.0086)       (.0086)
                      Industry growth × Trend                     .006   .0052         .0052
                                                                (.014)  (.014)        (.014)
                      GDP growth                               .062***               .063***
                                                               (.0087)               (.0085)
                      Beta × GDP growth                            -.1                  .058
                                                                (.069)                (.065)
                      Beta × POST                                         -.14          -.15
                                                                         (.14)         (.14)
                      Beta × Trend                                      .12***        .12***
                                                                        (.042)        (.044)
                      Constant                                  .69***  .98***        .69***
                                                                 (.25)   (.23)         (.25)
                      Treatment-specific trend                    Yes     Yes           Yes
                      Month-of-the-year FE                        Yes     Yes           Yes
                      Industry FE                                 Yes     Yes           Yes
                      Observations                              24,360  24,360        24,360
                      R-squared                                    .92     .92           .92

Source: Firm registry and tax files from the French Statistical Office. Sample: 290 industries, 1999–2005, monthly.
Note: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the number of new firms created in an industry in a month.
POST is a dummy equal to 0 for observations in the 1999-2001 period and equal to 1 from 2002 to 2005. Qi%
Sole Props is a dummy equal to 1 if the industry belongs to the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable
(the fraction of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period).
Treatment-specific trends are the interactions of Q2, Q3 and Q4 with linear time trends. Trend is a linear time
trend. Industry capital intensity is the average assets-to-labor ratio of firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001.
Industry growth is the average growth rate of sales for firms in the industry from 1999 to 2001. Beta is computed
for each industry by regressing, in the time-series, the aggregate industry value added on national GDP, using
annual data. All regressions include industry and month-of-the-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at
the industry level. *, **, and *** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.


                                                        68
                             Table B.13: Entrepreneur’s education across Industries


                                     High school graduate                    College graduate
                                       All       Unemployed                 All        Unemployed
                                entrepreneurs entrepreneurs          entrepreneurs entrepreneurs
                                       (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)
         Q2 % Sole Props              .066            .042                 .044             .056
                                    (.079)          (.073)               (.054)           (.056)
         Q3 % Sole Props              .023          -.0037                 .063             .028
                                    (.088)          (.075)               (.062)           (.056)
         Q4 % Sole Props             -.053          -.13**                .0054            -.029
                                    (.079)          (.058)               (.042)           (.028)
         Constant                   .52***          .53***               .12***           .1***
                                    (.057)          (.042)               (.022)            (.02)
         Observations               27,157           9,479               27,157           9,479
         R-squared                   .0072           .018                 .0056            .011

Source: SINE survey. Sample: 27,157 new firms created in 1998, 9,479 new firms created by unemployed en-
trepreneurs. Note: The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur is a high school
graduate (columns (1) and (2)) or a dummy variable equal to 1 if the entrepreneur is a college graduate (columns
(3) and (4)). Columns (1) and (3) use the whole sample. Columns (2) and (4) restricts the analysis to the sample
of unemployed entrepreneurs. Qi% Sole Props is the ith quartile of our treatment intensity variable (the fraction
of sole proprietorships among newly created firms in the industry, measured in the pre-reform period). *, **, and
*** mean statistically different from zero at 10, 5 and 1% levels of significance.




                                                       69
