                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HOUSE PRICES, LOCAL DEMAND, AND RETAIL PRICES

                                           Johannes Stroebel
                                             Joseph Vavra

                                         Working Paper 20710
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20710


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2014




This draft: June 2016. We are grateful to Viral Acharya, Manuel Adelino, David Berger, Jeff Campbell,
Lawrence Christiano, Eduardo Davila, Jonathan Dingel, Martin Eichenbaum, Eduardo Engel, Erwin
Gautier, Ed Glaeser, Francois Gourio, Jessie Handbury, Erik Hurst, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Nir Jaimovich,
Alejandro Justiniano, Greg Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, Amir Kermani, Pete Klenow, Theresa Kuchler,
John Leahy, Amy Meek, Atif Mian, Kurt Mitman, Holger Mueller, Emi Nakamura, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh,
Matt Notowidigdo, Cecilia Parlatore, Andrea Pozzi, Alexi Savov, Jon Steinsson, Amir Sufi, Harald
Uhlig, Laura Veldkamp, and Michael Weber, and seminar participants at MIT, Harvard, Berkeley,
Stanford, LSE, Cornell, Wharton, University of Southern California, Chicago Booth, New York University,
New York Fed, Minneapolis Fed, Fed Board, Ohio State University, UW Milwaukee, University of
Hawaii, Leuven, University of Iowa, New York Junior Macro-Finance Workshop, Mannheim, Munich,
Frankfurt, NBER EF&G, NBER Summer Institute, Society for Economic Dynamics, Econometric
Society World Congress, Banque of France, Yale Cowles Conference, and the Junior Macro Workshop
in New Orleans for helpful suggestions. We thank David Argente for outstanding research assistance.
The Institute for Global Markets at Chicago Booth provided financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Johannes Stroebel and Joseph Vavra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail Prices
Johannes Stroebel and Joseph Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 20710
November 2014, Revised June 2016
JEL No. D14,D22,E31,E32,E5,L16,L66,R3

                                                ABSTRACT

We use detailed micro data to document a causal response of local retail prices to changes in local
house prices, with elasticities of 15%-20% across housing booms and busts. Notably, these price responses
are largest in zip codes with many homeowners, and non-existent in zip codes with mostly renters.
We provide evidence that these retail price responses are driven by changes in markups rather than
by changes in local costs. We then argue that markups rise with house prices, particularly in high homeownership
locations, because greater housing wealth reduces homeowners’ demand elasticity, and firms raise
markups in response. Consistent with this explanation, shopping data confirms that house price changes
affect the price sensitivity of homeowners, but not that of renters. Our evidence suggests a new source
of markup variation in business cycle models.


Johannes Stroebel
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Joseph Vavra
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu
     How do prices and markups respond to demand shocks? This question is of central importance
for business cycle modeling, and a large empirical literature has tried to provide answers using aggre-
gate time-series data. However, this approach requires strong assumptions, both to identify aggregate
demand shocks and to measure markups; consequently, the literature has arrived at conflicting con-
clusions regarding the cyclicality of markups (see Nekarda and Ramey, 2013, for a review). Analyzing
only time-series data also makes it hard to isolate the channel that explains any observed relationship.
     In this paper, we instead turn to micro data to provide direct causal evidence on the response of
retail price-setting and household shopping behavior to changes in wealth and demand, and in doing
so propose a new channel for business-cycle variation of markups. In a series of papers, Mian and Sufi
(2011, 2014a,b) and Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) document that local house price movements have strong
effects on local demand. In this paper, we link retailer scanner price data and household shopping data
to zip-code-level house prices to identify the response of price-setting and shopping behavior to these
house-price-induced local demand shocks. We provide evidence that households’ elasticity of demand,
and thus firms’ markups, vary substantially in response to these shocks.
     Our first result is that retail prices increase much more in regions with higher house price growth.
We argue for a causal relationship from house prices to retail prices using two alternative and comple-
mentary identification strategies. First, we follow the identification strategy in Mian and Sufi (2011)
and use measures of local housing supply elasticity constructed by Saiz (2010) and Gyourko, Saiz and
Summers (2008) as instruments for local house price movements. Across a variety of empirical specifi-
cations, we estimate an elasticity of local retail prices to house price movements of 15%-20%. This elas-
ticity is highly significant, and its magnitude implies that house-price-induced local demand shocks
account for roughly two-thirds of the substantial inflation differences across regions in our sample.
     Our second identification strategy exploits variation in homeownership rates across zip codes. The
same change in house prices will induce different real wealth and demand effects for homeowners
and renters, since they differ in their net asset position in housing.1 Consistent with these differential
demand effects, we show that there is a strong interaction between homeownership rates and the
relationship between house prices and retail prices. In zip codes with a high homeownership rate,
house price increases lead to the largest increases in retail prices, while in zip codes with the lowest
homeownership rates, house price increases lead to (statistically insignificant) declines in retail prices.
     Taken together, we believe that our two identification strategies provide compelling evidence for
a causal effect of house-price-induced local demand shocks on local retail prices, since it is difficult to
jointly explain both results via confounding explanations such as local supply shocks. Our first em-
pirical results instrument for changes in house prices using measures of the housing supply elasticity,
   1 House price increases relax borrowing constraints and raise wealth for homeowners. Neither effect should be present

for renters. Higher rents (either explicit, or implicit rents when living in owner-occupied housing) affect both renters and
homeowners the same way. Therefore, higher house prices raise wealth and credit access of homeowners relative to renters.



                                                             1
and it is unclear why possible confounding supply-side shocks would be particularly strong in regions
with lower housing supply elasticity. More importantly, any shock that might violate the exclusion re-
striction in our instrumental variables strategy would need to also vary with local homeownership
rates, which dramatically narrows the list of potential concerns.
    To provide further evidence for our causal interpretation of the observed relationship, we show
that the relationship between house prices and retail prices survives an extensive set of robustness
checks. In particular, we document that our results are not driven by changes in store or product
quality, changes in income or gentrification, differences in the employment mix across locations, or
store entry and exit. We also show that our results hold with coast and region fixed effects, so that our
instrumental variables results are not driven by a spurious correlation between supply elasticity and
region-specific shocks. Finally, our results hold when dropping the “sand-states” that saw the largest
housing bubbles as well as other outliers, and so are not driven by unusual observations.
    After arguing for a causal relationship between house prices and retail prices, we next consider
why increases in house prices lead to higher retail prices. By definition, an increase in retail prices must
be driven by either an increase in markups or by an increase in marginal costs. While we believe that
identifying either channel would be interesting, we provide several pieces of evidence that support
markup variation as the primary explanation for our empirical patterns.
    First, our retail price data include only tradable goods in grocery and drug stores. These goods
are not produced locally, so their wholesale cost should be independent of any local shocks. Indeed,
we exploit a novel data set, containing UPC-level wholesale costs from around the U.S., to show that
geographic variation in wholesale costs is very small. Since wholesale costs represent nearly three-
quarters of total costs and an even larger fraction of marginal costs in our stores, it is thus unlikely that
geographic variation in marginal costs drives our retail price patterns. To provide additional support
for this argument, we supplement our primary analysis using data from a large national retailer, which
include measures of both marginal costs and markups. We use these high-quality internal cost mea-
sures to directly show that this retail chain raises markups in locations with increasing house prices.
Again, this house price effect on markups is strongest where homeownership rates are high.
    While wholesale costs are the primary component of our retailers’ marginal costs and do not drive
our retail price patterns, we next directly consider two additional cost channels that might affect retail
prices: local labor costs might rise in response to increased local demand, or local retail rents may rise.
    Since labor costs are a small fraction of overall marginal cost for the stores in our data, explaining
retail price movements through this channel would require extremely large responses of local labor
costs to local demand. Consistent with this channel not being important, we find that controlling for
local wages and a variety of other labor market conditions does not change our estimates.
    Next, we provide evidence that our retail price results do not reflect a pass-through of local retail


                                                     2
rents or land prices. First, and most importantly, pass-through of these costs cannot explain the fact
that retail prices rise much more quickly with house prices in locations with high homeownership
rates. If the relationship between retail prices and house prices was driven by pass-through of local
land prices or rents, then local homeownership rates should instead be irrelevant. Second, we match
our data with information on local retail rents and find that they do not affect our estimates. Finally,
we exclude high-rent locations from our analysis (since they should have the highest fraction of rent
in total costs), and obtain near-identical estimates.
    Together, wholesale inventory costs, labor costs, and rent overhead represent essentially one-
hundred percent of marginal costs for our retailers. Thus, if the variation in retail prices is not driven
by variation in costs, it must be driven by variation in markups.
    Why would firms raise markups in response to positive house price shocks, and more so in re-
gions with more homeowners? In the final empirical section of our paper, we document that positive
wealth effects lead households to become less price-sensitive, prompting firms to increase their “natu-
ral markups” as the elasticity of demand falls.2 We use data on individual household shopping behav-
ior from Nielsen Homescan to show that when house prices rise, homeowners increase their nominal
spending but purchase fewer goods with a coupon, and reduce the fraction of spending on generics
and on items that are on sale. In contrast, the behavior of renters is essentially unchanged.
    Why would homeowners become less price sensitive as house prices increase? If homeowners face
the possibility of moving in the future, increases in local house prices directly lead to increases in ex-
pected wealth. In many models in which the value of leisure rises with wealth, as households become
wealthier, they will allocate less time to shopping for lower prices and thus become less price-sensitive
(see the discussions in Alessandria, 2009; Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis, 2013; Kaplan and Menzio,
2013; Huo and Ríos-Rull, 2014). Similarly, in the presence of home equity extraction, higher house
prices can alleviate credit constraints, relaxing homeowners’ budget constraint and similarly reducing
price-sensitivity (see Berger et al., 2015). Since house price changes have different wealth and collateral
effects for homeowners and renters, this naturally explains the difference in shopping responses, and
rationalizes our earlier findings that retail price responses depend on local homeownership rates.
    Taken together, our empirical results provide evidence of an important link between changes in
household wealth, shopping behavior, and firm price-setting. Positive shocks to wealth cause house-
holds to become less price-sensitive and firms respond by raising markups and prices.

    Implications: Our results have direct implications for understanding the consequences of the re-
cent housing boom and bust, which was central to the Great Recession. We show that in addition to
the well-documented effects of house prices on spending (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2014a), there were im-
portant effects on local prices. Indeed, our evidence implies that part of the variation in local spending
  2 Following   the New Keynesian literature, we refer to the markup under fully flexible prices as the natural markup.


                                                              3
captures price variation rather than variation in real spending. Our estimates also imply important but
not implausible effects of house price changes on aggregate inflation: around one-fourth of aggregate
price movements over our sample period can be explained by aggregate house price changes.
     Even though our results are most directly informative about business cycle movements related to
housing, we believe they provide useful insights for understanding business cycles in general. While
recessions can be caused by many factors, as long as they lead to more price-sensitive shopping be-
havior, then the mechanisms we identify will apply.3 There is indeed growing empirical evidence for
this type of shopping response during recessions: Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis (2013) show that
time spent on shopping increased during recessions, and Krueger and Mueller (2010) and Nevo and
Wong (2014) show that many measures of shopping intensity rose during the Great Recession. The
fact that our house-price-induced demand shocks are large, unanticipated, and generate the kinds of
changes in household shopping behavior and demand elasticity observed in recessions contrasts our
approach with existing micro studies of demand shocks such as Warner and Barsky (1995), Chevalier,
Kashyap and Rossi (2003), Gicheva, Hastings and Villas-Boas (2010), and Gagnon and Lopez-Salido
(2014). These papers study responses to predictable seasonal holidays, changes in gasoline prices,
store strikes, and temporary weather events. While these demand shocks are interesting in their own
right, it is less clear they are informative for understanding business cycles.
     To our knowledge, Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Hong (2014) are the first to analyze geographic
variation in price-setting to inform aggregate business cycles. They use the same scanner data as we
do to find that prices respond little to local unemployment rates. Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015) use
a broader set of scanner data that is only available beginning in 2006, and find larger movements. Our
focus on exogenous changes in house prices allows us to isolate demand shocks, while local unem-
ployment rates reflect a combination of local supply and demand factors.4 We also jointly analyze
household shopping behavior and firm price setting to argue that the relationship between house
prices and retail prices reflects markup variation driven by changes in households’ price sensitivity.
     This type of markup variation has significant implications for business cycle modeling. In New
Keynesian models, increases in demand drive up nominal marginal costs, and sticky prices mean
that average markups fall and real economic activity rises. In the simplest versions of these models,
   3 Our  empirical evidence of a strong interaction between household shopping behavior and firm price-setting supports
the theoretical models of Huo and Ríos-Rull (2013) and Kaplan and Menzio (2013), who argue that such interactions can give
rise to recessions. Our time-series analysis also complements cross-sectional analyses of relationships between household
characteristics and firm price setting. For example, Handbury (2012) estimates non-homothetic price indices that vary with
household wealth in the cross-section, and Manova and Zhang (2012) show that exporters set higher prices in wealthier
product markets. However, the forces driving these long-run, static relationships between wealth and prices might be irrele-
vant for understanding the effects of business cycle fluctuations. For example, permanent differences in tastes could explain
the static relationships, but would not generate the changes across time in individual household behavior that we document.
    4 Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Hong (2014) and Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015)’s conflicting findings could reflect time-

varying confounding shocks, since supply and demand shocks imply opposite correlations between prices and unemploy-
ment. In addition, even large increases in unemployment affect only a small part of the population directly, which reduces
their econometric power for identifying demand effects. In contrast, house price changes impact many more households.


                                                             4
flexible-price natural markups are constant so that if pricing frictions are removed then actual, realized
markups are also constant. This means that all variation in realized markups in these models is driven
by sticky prices, which induce a “gap” between the natural and the realized markup. Our results sug-
gest that even with no pricing frictions, realized markups can change for a second and complementary
reason: countercyclical household shopping intensity leads to higher natural markups in booms.
    It is important to note that a procyclical natural markup need not imply a procyclical realized
markup if markups gaps are countercyclical, but it does suggest that modeling the endogenous in-
teraction between household shopping intensity and firm pricing behavior might improve our un-
derstanding of the monetary transmission mechanism. Indeed, medium-scale DSGE models such as
Smets and Wouters (2007), Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2010), and Justiniano, Primiceri and Tam-
balotti (2011) introduce natural markup (“cost-push”) shocks to match aggregate time-series data. One
can interpret our results as a potential microfoundation for such shocks. However, in these models,
changes in natural markups are treated as exogenous policy-invariant shocks. In contrast, our evidence
suggests that natural markups will respond endogenously to changes in monetary policy.
    The conclusion that realized markups vary for reasons besides sticky prices also complicates the
interpretation of the large literature using aggregate time-series data to measure markup cyclicality.
(e.g., Domowitz, Hubbard and Petersen, 1986; Bils, 1987; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999; Gali, Gertler
and Lopez-Salido, 2007; Nekarda and Ramey, 2013).5 These papers measure movements in realized
markups and often interpret their results as tests of New Keynesian mechanisms. However, if natural
markups are procyclical, while sticky-price-induced markup gaps are countercyclical, then the realized
markup measured in the data will depend on the relative strength of these two forces, and tests assum-
ing a constant natural markup will likely be misspecified. Moreover, if the relative strength of the two
forces varies over time (see Vavra, 2014), then this can potentially reconcile conflicting conclusions
about the importance of price stickiness in explaining markup variation in the literature.
    In addition to contributing a new source of identification to a long-running empirical debate in
macroeconomics, which has typically relied on VAR analyses of aggregate time-series relationships,
our results also have a wide range of implications that stretch beyond macroeconomics. For exam-
ple, the response of local prices to local house price movements is central to many models in urban
economics and for understanding the incidence of local labor market shocks. Our paper directly in-
forms this important and previously unobserved parameter. We also provide novel evidence on the
industrial organization of wholesale-retailer relationships and their interactions with local economic
conditions. Many recent papers have argued that pricing decisions are largely made at the wholesale
rather than the retail level (e.g., Nakamura and Zerom, 2010). However, this literature has focused
on the pass-through of cost shocks. Our empirical evidence shows that the exact opposite conclusion
  5 Analogous   concerns also apply to the voluminous literature focusing on testing New Keynesian Phillips Curves.



                                                            5
arises when studying the price response to demand shocks. This implies that fully understanding the
behavior of prices requires a comprehensive analysis of the interaction of retailers and their suppliers.
Retailers are crucial in determining how prices and markups respond to changes in customer demand,
while wholesalers play a crucial role in transmitting upstream cost shocks into final prices. These and
other implications are developed in more detail in Appendix D, which also provides a more extensive
discussion of the primary implications of our paper for business cycle modeling.

1     Data Description
To conduct the empirical analysis we combine a number of data sets. We begin by describing the
construction of our key dependent variables and then detail the sources for our other data.

1.1     Retail Price Data - IRI Data

Our primary retail price data set covers various grocery and drug stores from 2001 to 2011, and is
provided by IRI Worldwide.6 The data set includes store-week-UPC sales and quantity data for prod-
ucts in 31 categories, representing roughly 15% of household spending in the Consumer Expenditure
Survey.7 We also obtained the zip code location of each store in the data from IRI Worldwide. These
zip code identifiers are not part of the standard academic data release, and we believe we are the first
to exploit them.8 In total, the data cover around 7200 stores in over 2400 zip codes. There are many
retailers in each metropolitan area. For example, the Chicago market contains observations from 131
unique retailers. Appendix Figure A1 shows the geographic distribution of the stores in our data.
      While the raw data are sampled weekly, we construct quarterly price indices, since this makes the
time-unit comparable to that of our house price measures and reduces high-frequency noise. Let t
index the quarter of observation, l a geographic location (MSA or zip code), c a product category, and i
an individual UPC-store pair (henceforth item).9 We construct the price of an item by dividing its total
                                                                                                    TSi,l,c,t
dollar value of sales ( TS) by the total quantity of units sold ( TQ). That is Pi,l,c,t =           TQi,l,c,t .
      Total sales are inclusive of retailer discounts and promotions, but exclude manufacturer coupons.
In our benchmark specification, we include all observed prices when constructing our price indices,
since we are interested in how the broadest price aggregate responds to local demand. We later show
the robustness of our results to using price indices constructed when excluding “sales” prices.
      We next describe the construction of our location-specific price indices from these individual price
    6 Seehttps://www.iriworldwide.com/en-US/solutions/Academic-Data-Set for information on acessing the data and
Bronnenberg, Kruger and Mela (2008) for additional description.
   7 These categories cover mostly processed food and beverages, cleaning and personal hygiene products, and so are most

similar to the BLS food-at-home price index.
   8 The standard academic data release only includes geographic indicators for 47 broad geographic markets, often covering

a major metropolitan area (e.g., Chicago), but sometimes covering regions with numerous MSAs (e.g., New England).
   9 We track the price of identical items (UPC-store pairs) across time, so that changes in quality or issues with comparing

non-identical products are not relevant for our results (quality changes across time will typically be associated with new
UPCs). In particular, our price index is not affected by changes in the composition of goods or stores over time.



                                                             6
observations. This construction necessarily entails various measurement choices. In the body of the
paper we concentrate on a single benchmark price index, but in Appendix C we show that our empir-
ical results continue to hold for price indices constructed under various alternative assumptions.
     Since we are interested in constructing price indices across time, we only include an item if it
has positive sales in consecutive quarters. After constructing item-level prices, we create location-
specific price indices using a procedure similar to the construction of the CPI by the BLS. In particular,
we construct a geometric-weight price index with a consumption basket that is chained annually.10
                      TSi,l,c,y(t)
Let ωi,l,c,y(t) =   ∑i∈c TSi,l,c,y(t)
                                        be an item’s share in a category’s annual revenue, where y(t) indexes the
year in which quarter t is observed. In our benchmark results, we construct these revenue weights
separately for each location to allow for spatial variation in item importance. That is, ω is indexed by
l. In Appendix C, we also redo our analysis using national revenue weights, so that ω is no longer
indexed by l, and using constant geographic weights, so that ω is no longer indexed by t. Under these
alternative constructions, location-specific changes in household purchases, in product composition,
or changes in product quality do not affect location-specific price indices. Our findings are robust to
these alternative weights, which implies that the retail price responses we document require actual
changes in price posting behavior, and cannot be explained by shifting weights.
     We construct our price index in two steps. We first construct a category-level price index:
                                                                                 ωi,l,c,y(t)
                                                Pl,c,t+1             Pi,l,c,t+1
                                                 Pl,c,t
                                                         =   ∏        Pi,l,c,t
                                                                                                     .
                                                             i


We then construct an overall location-specific price index by weighting these category price indices by
                                                                         ∑i∈c TSi,l,c,y(t)
the revenue share of a particular category, ωl,c,y(t) =                   ∑i TSi,l,y(t)
                                                                                             :

                                                                               ωl,c,y(t)
                                                 Pl,t+1              Pl,c,t+1
                                                  Pl,t
                                                        =    ∏        Pl,c,t
                                                                                                 .
                                                             c


     Panel A of Figure I shows that a nationally-aggregated version of our price index reproduces the
behavior of the BLS food-at-home CPI.11 While they do not match precisely, this is not surprising, since
the categories and products sampled are not identical. The BLS also produces food-at-home CPIs for 27
metro areas, of which 19 overlap with locations in the IRI data. Panel B of Figure I compares changes
in our MSA-level price indices to changes in these BLS indices. Again, there is a strong correlation
  10 We  chain our results annually rather than at higher frequencies to avoid “chain-drift”.
  11 We normalize indices to 1 in period t = 0, so our computation requires information on how prices change across time but
not information on how products are priced across locations at a point in time. This is because we are interested in responses
to demand shocks at business cycle frequencies, not in permanent price differences across locations. This specification in
changes also allows us to avoid the biases discussed in Handbury and Weinstein (2015). Nevertheless, it is worth noting that
methodological differences make our time-series results perfectly consistent with their conclusion that retail price levels do
not vary across locations. Their paper uses household-level data with controls for income as well as retailer fixed effects.
This specification absorbs most of our variation of interest since any correlation between retail prices and house price levels
that is related to household demographics or retailer location will be absorbed by their controls.


                                                                     7
between changes in our MSA price indices and those published by the BLS. The relationship is not
perfect, but this is even less surprising for these disaggregated indices.12 This figure also shows large
variation across MSAs in retail price movements, reflecting in part substantial local pricing within
chains: the mean within-chain, within-UPC standard deviation of log prices is 4.7%.
      Finally, Panel C of Figure I shows that the cross-sectional variation in the food-at-home CPI pro-
duced by the BLS is very similar to the cross sectional variation in the broader CPI including all prod-
ucts. This suggests that the retail price responses to house prices that we document are likely to gen-
eralize to a broader set of goods than that covered by our IRI data.

1.2    Wholesale Cost Data

We use IRI data as our primary measure of retail prices, since it covers many chains and has large
geographic coverage. Unfortunately, IRI does not collect data on wholesale costs. Since the second half
of our paper focuses on decomposing price changes into changes in markups and marginal cost, we
supplement our primary IRI data with two additional data sets that do contain measures of wholesale
costs. First, we use Nielsen PromoData, which collects information from one confidential grocery
wholesaler in each of 32 markets for the period 2006-2012.13 This data contains UPC-level wholesale
prices for each date in each market. Overall there are more than 34,000 UPCs in PromoData.
      While IRI data contain retail prices and not wholesale costs, PromoData contain wholesale costs
and not retail prices. Since we are ultimately interested in measuring markups, we supplement our
analysis with one additional data set from a large retail chain, which contains reliable measures for
both prices and costs. This retailer reports UPC-store-level information for more than 125,000 UPCs
from 250 stores in 39 MSAs, from January 2004 to June 2007. For each item, there is information on
wholesale costs, adjusted gross profits, gross prices (i.e., list prices) and net prices (i.e., list prices net
of rebates, promotions, and coupons). We follow Gopinath et al. (2011) and measure the marginal
cost for each item as the difference between net price and adjusted gross profit. This represents the
retailer’s cost, net of discounts and inclusive of shipping costs, and is the cost measure used in their
pricing decisions (see Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo, 2011). Using these data, we construct a
price, marginal cost and markup index for each location, using the approach described in Section 1.1.14
  12 For most MSAs, the increase in the CPI is modestly larger than the increase in the IRI index since we use a chained
index while the BLS uses a fixed basket. Sampling error is also less of a concern in IRI data since it has twenty times more
observations per MSA-quarter than the BLS and covers substantially more markets.
  13 There is a single wholesaler for each market, but potentially different wholesalers across markets. Due to the anonymous

nature of the wholesaler information, there is no way to identify which wholesalers are related across markets. While the
raw data set contains information on more than 32 markets, many of these have very little data, so we concentrate on the
largest 32 markets. Results are not sensitive to this restriction.
  14 This cost measure does not include wages or other fixed overhead. We address this explicitly in our empirical analysis.

We concentrate on prices inclusive of discounts but results are similar using gross prices.




                                                             8
1.3    Shopping Data

We use Homescan data from AC Nielsen to measure household-level shopping behavior.15 The data
set contains a weekly household-level panel for the period 2004-2011. The panel has large coverage,
with 125,000 households in over 20,000 zip codes recording prices for 400 million unique transactions.
The product coverage is somewhat broader than that in the IRI data, and essentially captures broad
non-service retail spending. Roughly half of expenditures are in grocery stores, a third of expendi-
tures are in discount/warehouse club stores, and the remaining expenditures are split among smaller
categories such as pet stores, liquor stores, and electronics stores.
      Households report detailed information about their shopping trips using a barcode scanning de-
vice provided by Nielsen. After a shopping trip, households enter information including the date and
store location. They then scan the barcodes of all purchased items. The price is then collected in one
of two ways: for trips to stores that partner with Nielsen, the average price of the UPC for that store-
week is automatically recorded. For trips to stores not partnered with Nielsen, households hand-enter
the price paid from their receipt. In addition to the price, households also record whether a product
was purchased while “on sale” or using a coupon.In addition, since we know the UPC of each item,
information is available on whether a product is generic or name-brand. We use this information to
construct quarterly expenditure shares for goods purchased in these categories for each household.
      While panelists are not paid, Nielsen provides incentives such as sweepstakes to elicit accurate
reporting and reduce panel attrition. Projection weights are provided to make the sample representa-
tive of the overall U.S. population.16 A broad set of demographic information is collected, including
age, education, employment, marital status, and type of residence. Nielsen maintains a purchasing
threshold that must be met over a 12-month period in order to eliminate households that report only
a small fraction of their expenditures. The annual attrition rate of panelists is roughly 20%, and new
households are regularly added to the sample to replace exiting households.

1.4    Other Data

We also use a number of other data sets in our analysis. We obtain house price indices at both the
zip code level and the MSA level from CoreLogic, which computes repeat sales price indices from
individual transactions data. We also use information on average effective retail rents from 2000-
2014 for 45 MSAs. These rent data are compiled by the REIS corporation from surveys of property
managers and leasing agents, and include quarterly information on the average rent paid per square
foot of retail space. Homeownership rates by zip code come from the 2000 Census. Data on education
levels, age, and population density also come from the respective waves of the American Community
  15 Thesedata are available for academic research through a partnership with the Kilts Center at the University of Chicago,
Booth School of Business. See http://research.chicagobooth.edu/nielsen for more details on the data.
  16 We use these projection weights in all reported results, but our results are similar when weighting households equally.




                                                             9
Survey. We obtain wage data from the the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages conducted by
the BLS. Employment shares and information on the number of retail establishments come from the
County Business Patterns produced by the U.S. Census, and we classify NAICS sectors into tradable
and construction using the definitions in Mian and Sufi (2014b).

2     Empirical Analysis
We next provide an overview of our empirical strategy for identifying the impact of house price
changes on retail prices. We use two complementary identification strategies to show that our rela-
tionship is causal, and that house-price-induced demand shocks drive changes in retail prices.
      Our first approach uses across-MSA variation in housing supply elasticity as an instrument for
house price changes. This approach isolates differences in house price growth that are plausibly or-
thogonal to other factors that might directly influence retail prices.
      Our second approach exploits a unique feature of house price changes to provide additional ev-
idence that they causally influence retail price. In particular, house price changes induce differential
wealth effects for homeowners and renters due to these households’ different net housing positions.
Consistent with this, we show that the relationship between house prices and retail prices depends
strongly on local homeownership rates.
      The use of these two complementary identification strategies substantially reduces the set of con-
founding explanations for our results, since geographic variation in homeownership rates is quite
distinct from geographic variation in housing supply elasticity. In particular, alternative stories must
explain not just why housing supply elasticity would not satisfy the instrumental variables’ exclusion
restriction, but also why such violations would then interact with local homeownership rates.
      In addition to documenting a causal link from house prices to retail prices, we provide evidence on
the economic mechanism driving this relationship. In general, an increase in retail prices must reflect
an increase in marginal costs or an increase in markups. We argue that that our results primarily reflect
markup movements by first showing that our patterns are not driven by changes in observable costs.
We then present direct evidence that households become less price sensitive after their housing wealth
rises; this increases firms’ optimal markups. Just as suggested by our retail price results, we show that
this change in household price sensitivity differs strongly by homeownership status.

2.1    Price-Setting Behavior - MSA Level

We first analyze the relationship between house prices and retail prices. We split the sample into the
periods 2001-2006, when house prices in the U.S. were generally rising, and 2007-2011, when house
prices were generally falling. This allows for an asymmetric impact of house price increases and de-
creases on retail prices. We begin by sorting MSAs into quintiles by their house price growth over the
housing boom and housing bust. The top row of Figure II shows how retail prices evolve for MSAs in


                                                    10
the top and bottom quintile of house price growth over each period. Clearly, retail price growth was
significantly stronger in those MSAs that experienced higher house price growth.17
     The middle row of Figure II shows the more disaggregated correlation between MSA-level house
price growth and retail price growth over the periods 2001-2006 (Panel C) and 2007-2011 (Panel D).
In both periods there is a strong positive correlation between house price growth and retail price
growth. This positive relationship is confirmed by OLS regressions of retail price changes on house
price changes, shown in column 1 of Table I. Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics on the de-
pendent variable and controls. The estimated coefficient suggests an elasticity of retail prices to house
prices of about 6%-8%.18 In column 2, we also include controls for changes in economic conditions
such as the unemployment rate, wages, and employment shares in the grocery retail, construction,
and non-tradable sector. The estimated elasticity of retail prices to house prices is unaffected.19
     However, even after the inclusion of control variables, these estimates do not establish causality,
since there might be an unobserved third factor, such as time-varying productivity, that could simul-
taneously move both house prices and retail prices. If we cannot directly control for this third factor in
the OLS regression, we will obtain a biased estimate of the elasticity of retail prices to house prices.

2.1.1   Price-Setting Behavior - Instrumental Variables Identification Strategy

Our first approach to dealing with possible omitted variables bias is to exploit instrumental variables
that are correlated with house price changes over our periods of interest, but that do not directly affect
retail price growth. In particular, we follow an extensive literature that exploits across-MSA variation
in housing supply elasticity to instrument for house price changes (see, for example, Mian and Sufi,
2011, 2014a; Adelino, Schoar and Severino, 2013; Giroud and Mueller, 2015). The intuition for this
instrument is that for a fixed housing demand shock during the housing boom, house prices should
rise more in areas where housing supply is less elastic.20 During the housing bust, it is then precisely
those areas where house prices rose most that see the largest declines in house prices (Glaeser, 2013).
     We use two measures of housing supply elasticity as instruments for house price changes: the
  17 While the difference in retail prices between high and low house-price-growth MSAs during the bust is smaller than

during the boom, the elasticity is higher, because the difference in house price changes is smaller in the bust. In addition,
sorting over 2001-2011 house price growth rather than separately over the boom and the bust produces similar patterns.
  18 Figure II shows that there are some outliers in house price changes which might affect our estimates. Repeating regres-

sions excluding the top and bottom 5% of MSAs by house price growth raises elasticities to 8%-9%, and equality with the IV
coefficients shown below cannot be rejected.
  19 The positive coefficient on unemployment rate changes might appear to conflict with our argument that house prices

move due to a markup response to demand shocks. However, this coefficient is estimated after controlling for house price
changes, which were were the primary driver of cross-regional differences in changes in the unemployment rate in our
sample. Indeed, when we regress retail price changes on changes in the unemployment rate without also controlling for
house price changes, we recover a negative relationship. See also footnote 4.
  20 Importantly, this instrument generates differential regional house price movements through a differential propagation

of a national housing demand shock, not through inducing a shock of its own. That is, it is the interaction of supply elasticity
with the national shock that allows a time-invariant instrument to predict time-varying effects. This national demand shock
could, for example, result from the relaxation in downpayment requirements, or a decline in interest rates. See Appendix A
for additional discussion, and Appendix B for some alternative, related empirical specifications.


                                                              11
primarily geography-based measure of Saiz (2010), and the Wharton Regulation Index from Gyourko,
Saiz and Summers (2008). Saiz (2010) uses information on the geography of a metropolitan area to
measure the ease with which new housing can be constructed. The index assigns a high elasticity
to areas with a flat topology without many water bodies, such as lakes and oceans. Gyourko, Saiz
and Summers (2008) conduct a nationwide survey to construct a measure of local regulatory environ-
ments pertaining to land use or housing. Their index aggregates information on who can approve or
veto zoning requests, and particulars of local land use regulation, such as the review time for project
changes. In areas with a tighter regulatory environment, the housing supply can be expanded less
easily in response to a demand shock, and house prices should therefore increase more. Appendix
Table A2 presents results from the first-stage regression 1. Both instruments are highly predictive of
house price changes over both periods, with low-elasticity MSAs experiencing larger house price gains
during the housing boom, and larger house price drops during the housing bust.21
     The exclusion restriction requires that housing supply elasticity affects retail prices only through
its impact on house prices (see Appendix A for a formal statement of the exclusion restriction). To
provide some evidence for the validity of the Saiz (2010) instrument, Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014a) show
that wage growth did not accelerate differentially in elastic and inelastic CBSAs between 2002 and
2006. The authors also show that the instrument is uncorrelated with the 2006 employment share in
construction, construction employment growth in the period 2002-2005, and population growth over
the same period. Consistent with this, we find no relationship between housing supply elasticity and
income growth in our sample: during the housing boom, income growth has a correlation of 0.040 with
the Saiz (2010) instrument and -0.007 with the Wharton Regulation Index. These correlations are -0.224
and 0.054, respectively, for the housing bust, and never statistically significant (see also Davidoff, 2013,
for a discussion of the exclusion restriction). It is also important to recall that the main objective in our
paper is to document the response of retail prices and markups to shocks that affect demand elasticity.
While we believe that the IV approach in this section and the homeownership interaction in the next
section strongly point to a causal link from house-price-induced local demand shocks to retail prices,
it is worth noting that many potential violations of the exclusion restriction in our IV approach involve
a correlation between housing supply elasticity and local demand factors. While we find no evidence
for such a correlation, its presence would only mildly change our interpretation. In particular, while
not all of the markup response would then represent a response to changes in house prices, it would
still represent a markup response to demand shocks that shift demand elasticity. This would have the
same implication for business cycle models as our preferred causal interpretation.
  21 Unsurprisingly,  the power of the instrument is significantly stronger during the housing boom than during the housing
bust. The first-stage F-stats of the Saiz (2010) instrument are 42.4 for 2001-2006, and 19.9 for 2007-2011. They are 52.5 and
17.2, respectively, for the Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) instrument. Supply elasticity has predictive power during the
bust because it reflects ex-post unraveling of the differential house price bubble.




                                                             12
     One channel that could violate the exclusion restriction is if changes in the degree of local retail
competition were correlated with the housing supply elasticity. This might occur if the regulatory or
geographic environment hindered the entry of new retail stores. In Section 2.3 we directly address this
concern, and show that differential changes in competition do not explain our results.
     The first and second stages of the IV regression are given by equations 1 and 2, respectively.


                          ∆log( HousePrice)m = ρSupplyElasticitym + δXm + em                                               (1)

                           ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice
                                                         \         )m + γXm + ε m                                          (2)


The unit of observation is an MSA, denoted by m. We estimate these regressions separately for the
housing boom (2001-2006) and bust (2007-2011). The dependent variable in the second-stage regression
is the change in retail prices over the period of interest. The coefficient of interest is β, which captures
the causal effect of house price growth on retail price growth. Xm is a vector of controls.
     We first present results using the housing supply elasticity from Saiz (2010) as an instrument for
house price changes. Column 3 of Table I presents estimates from the second-stage regression. The
elasticity of retail prices to house prices is about 12-13% during both the housing boom and the hous-
ing bust. These elasticities are about two times as large as the estimates from the OLS regressions
presented in columns 1 and 2. This is consistent with the presence of local productivity shocks, which
would lower retail prices but raise house prices. In addition, any measurement error in house price
growth will also bias down the OLS estimates.22 Column 4 includes control variables for local eco-
nomic conditions. The robustness of the estimated coefficients to the addition of these controls, as well
as additional controls for changes in income and demographics that will be added in Section 2.3, helps
to alleviate concerns about whether our instruments satisfy the exclusion restriction.
     Column 5 and 6 of Table I show the instrumental variables estimates using the Wharton Regulation
Index as an alternative measure of housing supply elasticity to instrument for house price changes. The
estimated elasticity of retail prices to house prices is slightly stronger, with estimates between 15% and
22% depending on the exact specification.
     We next provide additional robustness checks to the results presented above. We first address the
geographic clustering of our measures of housing supply elasticity, which raises concerns that they
might be correlated with unobserved regional shocks. To show that such unobserved shocks do not
explain our results, we add geographic controls to the instrumental variables regression. In columns
  22 Whether  one would expect the IV estimates to be larger or smaller than the OLS estimates depends on whether omitted
variables or shocks would primarily induce a positive or a negative correlation between house prices and retail prices. As
discussed, local productivity shocks might lower retail prices and increase house prices. On the other hand, local demand
shocks might lead to higher house prices and higher retail prices. The IV estimates remove the effects of both types of poten-
tial omitted shocks, as well the attenuation bias associated with measurement error. Indeed, if we exclude the largest outliers
in house price growth, which are more likely to suffer from measurement error, the OLS coefficients increase substantially
and we cannot reject equality with the IV regressions. See footnote 18.



                                                              13
1-3 of Appendix Table A5, we add a coastal indicator, four census region fixed effects, and nine census
division fixed effects, respectively. The estimated elasticity of retail prices to house prices is unchanged,
suggesting that it is not explained by regional shocks. Next, while we believe that using the broadest
price index available is the appropriate benchmark, a large literature has explored the implications
of sales for monetary policy. Column 4 of Appendix Table A5 shows that our results are robust to
excluding temporary “sales” prices from the price index. We also want to ensure that our results are
not driven by extreme outliers. Column 5 of Appendix Table A5 excludes the MSAs with the largest
and smallest 5% house price growth; column 6 drops observations from states that experienced some of
the largest swings in house prices: California, Arizona and Florida. Our results are robust across these
specifications. Finally, one might worry that the relationship between our instruments and house price
changes could be non-linear. Column 7 includes the squared and cubed measures of supply elasticity
as additional regressors in the first stage; the results are essentially unchanged.

2.2    Price-Setting Behavior - Zip Code Level Identification Strategy

In the previous section we measured both house prices and retail prices at the MSA level. There are
some advantages of these MSA-level estimates relative to estimates using house price and retail price
measures at more disaggregated levels such as zip codes. First, nearly all grocery spending for a
household should occur within MSAs, but this may not hold for zip codes. Second, both house price
changes and retail price changes are measured more precisely for MSAs than for zip codes.23 Third,
our housing supply elasticity instruments do not vary at the zip code level. Therefore, we think the
elasticities at the MSA level are the most reasonable to take away from our analysis.
      Nevertheless, we now extend our analysis to the zip code level, because the large variation in
homeownership rates across zip codes allows us to explore a separate, complementary identification
strategy. In particular, the same change in house prices will induce different demand effects for home-
owners and renters, since these households differ in their net asset position in housing. While house
price increases can raise wealth or relax borrowing constraints for homeowners, they have no such
effects on renters. If house prices are capitalized into apartment rents or renters plan to purchase in the
future, then higher house prices might even represent a negative wealth shocks for renters.24 Thus, if
the positive relationship between retail prices and house prices is truly driven by house-price-induced
demand effects, we would expect a stronger relationship in zip codes with high homeownership rates.
      To explore this prediction, the bottom row of Figure II shows the average retail price level for zip
   23 The repeat sales house price index at the zip code level is often based on a small number of sales: an analysis of

transaction-level data for Los Angeles since 1994, for example, reveals that in the median zip code-quarter there were 62
arms-length housing transaction, and many fewer transactions that were part of a repeat-sales pair.
   24 We analyze apartment rent data from REIS, and find that the elasticity of cumulative apartment rent growth to cumula-

tive house price growth over the housing boom was 0.34. The same elasticity was 0.10 over the housing bust (see Appendix
Figure A2). The less-than-full pass-through of house price movements to rents, even over such relatively long horizons, is
consistent with swings in the price-rent ratio over this period (see, for example, Sinai, 2013).



                                                            14
codes in the top and bottom quartile of house price growth between 2001 and 2011. Panel E focuses on
zip codes in the bottom quarter of the homeownership rate distribution (average of 46%), Panel F on
zip codes in the top quarter of the homeownership rate distribution (average of 86%). Those zip codes
with larger house price increases have higher retail price growth. However, as one would expect if
house price effects work through a wealth channel, the differential price growth is much larger in zip
codes with higher homeownership rates than it is in zip codes with low homeownership rates.
     Regression 3 formalizes this insight. As before, we estimate this specification separately for the
housing boom period and the housing bust period. Since we do not have housing supply measures at
the zip code level, we focus on ordinary least squares estimates.


             ∆log( RetailPrice)z = β∆log( HousePrice)z + γHomeownershipRatez +                                              (3)

                                            δ∆log( HousePrice)z × HomeownershipRatez + ψXz + ε z


The results of this regression are presented in Table II. Columns 1 and 5 show the elasticity of retail
prices to house prices without controlling for other covariates for the periods 2001-2006 and 2007-
2011, respectively. The estimated elasticities are approximately 50% of the size of the MSA-level OLS
estimates presented in Table I. As discussed above, this likely reflects attenuation bias relative to the
MSA specifications, due to greater measurement error of zip code level house prices, plus the fact that
some fraction of household spending will occur outside of a household’s zip code of residence. The
addition of control variables in columns 2 and 6 has little effect on the estimated elasticities.
     Importantly, columns 3 and 7 of Table II interact house price changes with the homeownership
rate in the zip code. The results show that house price increases are associated with particularly large
increases in retail prices in zip codes with high homeownership rates.25 For zip codes with low home-
ownership rates, the effect of higher house prices on retail prices is, if anything, negative, although this
point estimate is not statistically significant.26
     These results significantly strengthen the argument for a causal effect of house prices on retail
prices. In particular, any omitted variables that might be correlated with our housing supply elasticity
instruments in Section 2.1, and which would thus violate the exclusion restriction, would also have to
have a differential impact on homeowners and renters in order to explain our results.
     One concern with the interpretation of the homeownership rate interaction is that homeownership
rates might proxy for effects of other neighborhood characteristic. For example, high-homeownership
  25 The implicit identification assumption is that homeownership rates (conditional on controls) are orthogonal to shocks
which simultaneously move house prices and retail prices. See below for further discussion of additional controls.
  26 One might worry that this relationship is driven by larger measurement error in house prices in areas with more renters,

which could lead to larger attenuation bias. However, there is no strong relationship between homeownership rates and
turnover: in zip codes in the bottom quartile of the homeownership distribution, about 2.1% of the housing stock turned
over every year between June 2008 and March 2015; in zip codes in the top quartile of the homeownership rate distribution,
this share was 2.2%. In addition, all results persist if we measure the change in house prices in regression 3 at the MSA-level.



                                                              15
zip codes have lower population density, and so might have inhabitants who do more grocery shop-
ping within the zip code. This could explain the larger measured response of local retail prices to local
house prices in those areas, even with no differential wealth effects. Similarly, low-homeownership zip
codes also have younger inhabitants, who might be less responsive to house price changes for reasons
unrelated to homeownership status. To see whether these factors can explain our findings, columns 4
and 8 of Table II include controls for the population density and the share of inhabitants under age 35,
as well as their interaction with the change in house prices. Furthermore, Appendix Table A3 addition-
ally controls for zip code level income, racial composition, and education levels, and their interaction
with house price changes. Reassuringly, the estimated coefficient on the interaction of house price
changes and homeownership rates is, if anything, slightly larger in this specification.

2.3    Changes in Markups or Pass-Through of Changes in Marginal Cost?

The previous sections provide evidence of a strong response of retail prices to house-price-induced
demand shocks. By definition, a change in retail prices can be decomposed into a change in marginal
costs and a change in markups. While either channel would be interesting, we next provide evidence
that the relationship between house prices and retail prices is driven largely by markup variation.
      We begin by decomposing retailers’ marginal cost into its various components, before analyzing
these components separately. For the typical grocery store, the wholesale cost of goods sold makes up
approximately 75% of total costs.27 It is more difficult to decompose the remaining 25%, but the ma-
jority of those costs represent fixed overheads (e.g., store rental costs, utilities, and corporate salaries)
rather than costs that directly vary with sales. Thus, wholesale costs make up substantially more than
75% of all marginal costs. Since our data only include tradable goods, which are generally not pro-
duced locally, these wholesale costs are also likely to be insensitive to local demand shocks.28
      Indeed, in the next section we use Nielsen PromoData to provide direct evidence that the geo-
graphic variation in wholesale costs is very small, consistent with wholesale costs not being deter-
mined locally. We also use data from a large national retailer that allow us to directly measure both
marginal costs and markups in the same setting, and show that the estimated price response captures
movements in markups. In addition, our results are robust to excluding products from our price index
construction that likely have a larger local component of wholesale costs (e.g., milk). We also directly
control for changes in retail rents and labor costs that could affect retailers’ (small) non-wholesale cost
component of marginal cost. Our results are unaffected by the addition of these control variables.
  27 For example, Safeway’s 2013 10-K reports a cost of goods sold of $26.6bn, compared to operating and administrative
expenses (which include store occupancy costs, wages, employee benefits, rent, depreciation and utilities) of $8.9bn. Walmart
reported “cost of sales” of $385bn, compared to “operating, selling and administrative expenses” of $91.3bn.
  28 In commodity flows survey data, only 24% of food and beverage shipments by gross value added are shipped less than

50 miles. However, net rather than gross value added is the relevant object for determining local marginal cost shares, and
local distribution inflates gross relative to net value added in local production. The BEA reports that trucking/warehousing
has a 12.4% intermediate share in food and beverage which, together with the 24% local share in gross value added, implies
that less than 3% of inventory input costs for food and beverage stores are determined within an MSA.


                                                             16
     We conclude that changes in local demand are largely uncorrelated with retailers’ marginal cost, so
that the increase in retail prices we observe mostly reflects higher markups. This interpretation arises
naturally from the changes in shopping behavior we document in Section 2.4, and can also rationalize
the homeownership interactions in Section 2.2.

2.3.1   Direct Evidence on Wholesale Costs and Markups

We next provide three separate pieces of evidence that our results are not driven by variation in whole-
sale costs in response to local demand shocks. Since these wholesale costs make up the vast majority
of all marginal costs, this provides strong support for an interpretation of our pricing results as driven
by markup variation in response to these local demand shocks.

Nielsen PromoData: We begin by considering the Nielsen PromoData described in Section 1.2. We
first examine the unconditional distribution of wholesale costs across markets. For each UPC observed
                                                              w
in at least two markets, we compute w imt =                              ,   where wimt is the average wholesale price of
                                                               imt
                                    d                             wimt
                                                          ∑m∈ M   | M|
item i in market m in quarter t, and M indexes the set of markets in which this item is sold in quarter
t. That is, w
            d imt tells us how far a particular item’s wholesale cost in a given market is from that item’s

average cost across all markets. Finally, to measure overall variation in wholesale costs across markets,
we compute the average of w
                          d imt across all items sold in market m in quarter t, Imt , and then average
                                                                                        1               w  imt 29
this over all quarters in which we observe that market: wm = ∑t∈T                      |T |   ∑i∈ Imt
                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                        | Imt |
                                                                                                                .
     Overall, we find that 26 out of 32 markets have average wholesales cost within 1% of the national
average: wm < 0.01. The market with the most expensive wholesale costs, Indianapolis, is 2.9% above
the national average, while the market with the least expensive wholesale costs, Seattle, is 2.3% below
the national average. In addition, we also calculate the fraction of individual items that are sold at
the cross-market modal price in a given quarter. Overall, wholesale costs for 78% of items are exactly
equal to the modal price, and more than 90% of items are within 5% of the modal price.30
     These findings imply that, while wholesale costs are not perfectly equal across space, their spatial
variation is very small. This is especially true once individual items are aggregated to the market
averages relevant for our analysis. It is also important to note that even if wholesale costs did vary
substantially across space, this would not necessarily alter our interpretation of whether house prices
affect retail prices through moving markups or marginal costs. Indeed, our interpretation requires only
the much weaker condition that wholesale costs not rise with house prices. However, PromoData has
a limited time dimension with which to test this condition, and many markets are only in the sample
for one or two years. In addition, we cannot compare any variation in observed wholesale costs to
  29 Computing    these numbers quarter by quarter produces similar results. Note, also, that since PromoData contains only
prices and not quantities, we weight all items equally.
  30 It is also important to note that this empirical finding of little wholesale cost variation is highly consistent with a legal

restriction against such variation. In particular, the Robinson-Patman Anti-Price Discrimination Act explicitly limits the
extent to which wholesalers can charge different prices to different retail customers.


                                                               17
variation in retail prices or markups, since we do not observe this information in PromoData.

Large Retailer Data Thus, to provide further evidence that we are capturing changes in markups
rather than the pass-through of marginal costs, we turn to the data from a large U.S. retail chain de-
scribed in Section 1.2. These data include a complete measure of wholesale costs (inclusive of various
vendor rebates and discounts), which the retailer uses when determining prices and thus markups.
     We begin by repeating the above procedure to compute the across-MSA variation in wholesale
costs in this data set. The range of MSA-level deviations of wholesale cost from the national average
is between -1.4% and +2.6%, with the majority of markets clustered extremely close to the national
average. This is in line with the findings from PromoData, and is substantially less variation than
we observe for markups: Indeed, when we compute MSA-level deviations of the markup from the
national average, we find that the range of markup deviations is 6 times larger than that of wholesale
cost deviations, with an across-MSA variance that is nearly 30 times larger.31
     We next turn to a direct test of our question of interest: do changes in house prices lead to changes
in marginal costs or changes in markups? As discussed, a law of one price for wholesale costs is
sufficient but not necessary to interpret our retail price effects as markup changes. We instead require
only the much weaker condition that marginal cost does not rise with house prices. To explore whether
this condition holds, we use the data from our large retailer to construct zip code-level price, marginal
cost, and markup indices from January 2004 to June 2007.32 We then run regression 3, using changes
in the price index, the markup index, and the marginal cost index as the dependent variables.
     Table IV presents the results. Column 1 shows that, on average, zip codes with higher house price
growth see an increase in retail prices. Interestingly, despite the fact that these data only cover one
retailer, and a different time period, the estimated elasticity is similar to that in Table II, which was
estimated using the broader IRI data. Importantly, columns 2 and 3 show that this increase in retail
prices represents an increase in markups, rather than a pass-through of marginal cost.33
     Columns 4 through 6 of Table IV interact house price changes with the homeownership rate in
the zip code. Columns 7 through 9 also control for the interaction of house price changes with demo-
graphic variables such as population density and age composition. Consistent with results in Section
2.2, the response of markups and prices to changes in house prices is increasing in the homeownership
  31 The retailer agreement does not allow us to report the actual levels of markups for specific stores. While we compute
a slightly different statistic from Gopinath et al. (2011) and use all products instead of those matched between the U.S. and
Canada, our results are consistent with their Table 2. This shows that prices vary significantly more across stores than costs.
We also reproduce their result that prices respond significantly to non-local costs, after controlling for local costs. However,
the economic magnitude of this effect is small. Adding non-local costs only increases the regression R2 from 0.42 to 0.43,
which is consistent with local costs capturing most information about non-local costs.
  32 Since our data only contain information from 39 MSAs with house price information, many with a single store, we do

not repeat the MSA level analysis.
  33 The negative house price coefficient on marginal cost likely reflects volume discounting: when house prices increase,

the resulting increase in demand allows the retailer to take advantage of discounts from wholesalers. Since marginal cost in
our primary specification includes vendor discounts and rebates, this can generate the observed negative relationship. If we
instead use costs excluding discounts and promotions as the dependent variable, this negative coefficient disappears.


                                                              18
rate of the zip code.34 In zip codes with the lowest homeownership rates, increases in house prices
actually cause retail prices and markups to fall.

Products with Large Component of Local Marginal Cost While the previous results document that
changes in local wholesale costs are not quantitatively important in general, and are uncorrelated
with house price changes, certain products do have a larger local cost component. If changes in local
marginal costs were important, we would expect that those goods would contribute significantly to our
estimated elasticity. In column 1 of Table III, we repeat the empirical analysis from Table I using a retail
price index which excludes product categories classified as "perishable" or as "liquid" by Bronnenberg,
Kruger and Mela (2008). Perishable products, such as milk, are more likely to be sourced locally while
liquid products, such as carbonated beverages, are frequently bottled locally, which might make their
costs more sensitive to local shocks. However, we obtain very similar elasticities when excluding these
potentially problematic product categories from our local retail price indices, confirming that a pass-
through of local marginal costs is unlikely to explain our findings.

2.3.2   Labor Costs

The previous sections documented that wholesale costs, which constitute the vast majority of retailers’
marginal costs, vary little across geographies and do not rise with local house price shocks. We next
address two other cost pass-through channels: labor costs and retail rents. If there was an increase in
the shadow cost of labor, for example because of higher wages, retail prices might increase as retailers
pass through this (small) component of marginal cost.
     However, the controls for changes in the unemployment rate, average weekly wages, and employ-
ment shares in our baseline regressions in Table I already suggest that our findings are unlikely to be
explained by pass-through of labor costs. In addition, columns 3 and 4 of Table III show the robust-
ness of the results in Table I to alternative labor market measures. First, local unemployment measures
can be sensitive to measured local labor force participation, but using changes in the employment-to-
population ratio leaves our results unchanged. Second, grocery stores tend to hire labor which is less
educated than the average population, but controlling for changes in wages or unemployment among
those with at most a high school diploma in the ACS yields nearly identical results.
   34 Our results might seem surprising in light of Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2011)’s finding that this “retailer resets

its reference prices so that variations in the realized markup fall within a reasonably small interval." However, their finding
refers to variation in markups within a given reference price spell, while our statistic computes markup variation both within
and across spells. Small markup variation within a given reference price spell is consistent with substantial markup variation
when reference prices change. Furthermore, even if there was no across-spell variation, one can still generate relatively large
increases in markups of 22%, while remaining within the +/-10% within-spell markup interval they document.




                                                              19
2.3.3   Retail Rents

We next explore whether a pass-through of higher commercial rents can explain the retail price re-
sponse to house prices.35 The most important piece of evidence against this channel is that the re-
sponse of house prices to retail prices grows with local homeownership rates, and is essentially zero in
areas with mainly renters (see Section 2.2). An increase in local rents should affect a firm’s costs in the
same way whether the firm is located in an area with many or few homeowners. Thus, an explanation
for our price patterns which relies on pass-through of local land prices into commercial rents and retail
prices will struggle to explain the observed homeownership interaction.
     Nevertheless, we next directly control for changes in retail rents in our empirical specifications,
using data on annual effective retail rents that we obtained from REIS for 45 MSAs. Appendix Figure
A2 shows the relationship between changes in house prices and changes in retail rents over our sample
period. The elasticity of cumulative changes in retail rents to cumulative changes in house prices over
the housing boom is 0.2, and is 0.08 in the housing bust. This relatively low pass-through of house
prices to retail rents is consistent with the long duration of retail lease contracts. As a first back-of-the-
envelope calculation, even if retail rent made up an unrealistic 20% of marginal costs, these estimates
suggest that rent pass-through could explain at most one-fourth of our retail price movements.36
     To assess more formally the extent to which the (small) changes in retail rents can explain our
results, Table V includes the average retail rent as a control variable in regression 2. While the statistical
significance of the elasticity estimates declines due to the smaller sample size, our results suggest that
the increase in retail prices in response to higher house prices is not driven by the pass-through of
higher retail rents. If anything, controlling for changes in retail rents increases the estimated response
of retail prices to changes in house prices. As further evidence, in column 5 of Table III we exclude
the six MSAs in our data with the largest level of retail rents, as identified in the 2012 Retail Research
Report provided by Colliers International. In these markets, retail rents are likely to make up a larger
fraction of total costs; therefore, if the pass-through of higher retail rents were a significant factor in
explaining our results, we would expect the estimated elasticity to be smaller when excluding cities
with high retail rents. Contrary to this, the estimated elasticity is unchanged.

2.3.4   Demographic Changes & Gentrification

We next explore whether our results are driven by migration and changing demographics rather than
by changes in the behavior of individuals already living in a location. If richer, less price-sensitive
  35 Whether  rent is a fixed or marginal cost depends on the time-horizon. In the short-run, rents are largely a fixed cost
(Gopinath et al., 2011). With entry and exit at longer horizons, an increase in fixed overhead costs would lead to a decline
in the number of stores, and the resulting reduction in competition should lead to an increase in markups. As long as other
costs remained constant, this pass-through channel would still represent an increase in markups.
  36 If 20% of marginal costs are retail rents, and the rent elasticity is 20%, then a doubling of house prices will increase

marginal costs by 20% × 20% = 4%. This is only one-fourth of the total increase in retail prices observed in our regressions.



                                                             20
households moved into a location when house prices increase, or if retailers responded to an overall
increase in demand due to more people living in an MSA, then this could change the interpretation of
our results. In column 6 of Table III we control for changes in income, and in column 7 for changes
in the fraction of population that has completed at least high-school or at least a bachelor degree. In
column 8 we control for population growth over our sample period. Our estimates are unaffected
by the addition of these control variables. Consistent with this, Section 2.4 shows that the shopping
behavior of the same household does indeed change in response to house price movements.

2.3.5   Grocery Retail Entry

As discussed in Section 2.1, the most pertinent potential challenge to using housing supply elasticity as
an instrument for house price changes is that changes in the competitiveness of the retail sector might
be correlated with both the housing supply elasticity and with changes in retail prices. In particular, in
areas where it is difficult to build new houses, it may also be difficult for new retail establishments to
enter. In that case, areas with a low housing supply elasticity might see greater retail price growth both
due to greater house price growth (our effect of interest), but also because of less retail competition.
     In Appendix A we formalize this potential concern, but show that these confounding effect can be
explicitly dealt with by using data on the number of local grocery retail establishments as an additional
control in our regressions. Column 9 of Table III directly controls for the change in the number of retail
establishments per inhabitant (in addition to the share of grocery retail employment that is controlled
for in all regressions reported in Table III).37 If anything, the estimated elasticity is slightly larger. Thus,
the response of retail prices to house price movements in our IV regressions is not explained by the
simple effect of housing supply elasticity on local retail competition. This does not imply that supply
elasticity does not affect entry, but it does imply that any such effects do not drive our house price
elasticities. In addition, in order for entry effects to explain the interaction of house price changes
with local homeownership rates in Section 2.2, there would need to be a strong relationship between
entry and owner occupancy rates. However, when we include an additional interaction between entry
and house price changes in regression 3, this does not affect our previous results. Finally, Appendix
Table A6 shows that much of the response of retail prices to house prices occurs at relatively high
frequencies, where entry is unlikely to be of quantitative significance.
     While changes in grocery retail entry therefore cannot explain our findings, they are interesting
in their own right, and provide additional support for markup variation. In Appendix Table A4 we
show the effects of house prices and supply elasticity on entry. Overall, we find that, if anything,
there is more entry during the housing boom in the less elastic regions that experienced larger in-
creases in house prices. This provides further evidence that those regions experienced increases in
   37 We obtain similar results when using changes in the absolute number of establishments and when controlling for estab-

lishment levels rather than changes. Similar controls in our OLS specification also slightly increase our elasticity estimates.



                                                              21
retail markups: without an increase in profitability it is hard to explain why there would be more en-
try in less elastic regions where entry is more restricted. Of course, this need not imply that lower
supply elasticity increases entry holding all else equal. Our previous regressions show that areas with
lower housing supply elasticity had higher house-price-induced retail price growth during the hous-
ing boom, which makes entry more attractive. Columns 4 and 5 show that after controlling for house
price growth, greater housing supply elasticity has an insignificant effect on entry.

2.3.6   Product or Store Quality

It is worth re-emphasizing, at this point, that none of our results are explained by either changes in
the composition of stores, or by changes in the composition of products within a store. This is because
our price indices measure price changes for the same UPC in the same store. If a low-quality product
is replaced with a higher-quality product with a higher price, this product substitution itself does not
affect our price index. Similarly, if higher house prices lead to the entry of higher-quality stores which
charge higher prices, this also does not affect our price index.
      A second concern might be that changes within a particular store could affect the quality of the
same UPC over time. However, while it might be conceivable that, as house prices go up, stores
increase the “freshness” of their produce, this is much less likely for the the type of processed foods
and toiletries that we observe in our data. Furthermore, this would result in higher shipping and
inventory cost, yet we observe no change in marginal cost in our large retailer data.
      Finally, one might be concerned about time-varying changes in the “shopping experience” of buy-
ing identical goods. Even if these were important, many changes to the shopping experience, such
as upgrading the store, are fixed costs, so a pass-through of these costs would reflect an increase in
markups. Conversely, most changes to the shopping experience that increase the marginal cost of sell-
ing a particular product, such as hiring more staff to reduce checkout lines, should be picked up by
the controls for labor shares and other measures of marginal cost. Finally, while grocery stores might
be renovated during housing boom periods, it is unlikely that store owners actively degrade stores
during the housing bust, and differential depreciation during the housing bust would operate on a
longer time scale, and thus cannot explain the results at quarterly frequency described in Appendix B.

2.4     Shopping Behavior

In the previous sections we documented a positive, causal relationship between house prices and retail
prices. We argued that this relationship is not driven by an increases in retailers’ marginal costs, and is
therefore best explained by an increase in retail markups. In this section, we provide further evidence
on why retailers raise markups following house price increases, arguing that this is the optimal re-
sponse to a decrease in the overall price elasticity. In particular, we show that higher house prices lead
homeowners to increase their nominal spending and to become less price sensitive; while renters, if


                                                    22
anything, exhibit the opposite behavior. Such a demand elasticity response is a natural feature of many
models in which the value of leisure rises with wealth, so that wealthier households allocate less time
to shopping for cheaper prices and thus become less price-sensitive (see Alessandria, 2009; Aguiar,
Hurst and Karabarbounis, 2013; Kaplan and Menzio, 2013; Huo and Ríos-Rull, 2014). This decrease in
the demand elasticity faced by firms increases their optimal markup.
     We use household-level information on purchasing behavior from Nielsen Homescan to analyze
how changes in house prices affect household shopping behavior. Motivated by the differential re-
sponse of retail prices to house prices in zip codes with different homeownership rates, we allow
homeowners and renters to respond differently to house price changes.38 The dependent variable in
regression 4 captures the shopping behavior of household i, in zip code z, in quarter q.39


            ShoppingOutcomei,z,q = ψi,z + ξ q + β 1 log( HousePrices)z,q + β 2 Homeowneri,q +                                (4)

                                               β 3 log( HousePrices)z,q × Homeowneri,q + γXz + ei,q


In our baseline estimates, we measure local house prices at the quarter × zip code level, but our results
are robust to measuring house prices at the quarter × MSA level. We include quarter fixed effects, ξ q ,
to control for any aggregate time-trends. Importantly, we also control for household × zip code fixed
effects, ψi,z . This keeps constant any household-specific determinants of shopping behavior, such as the
disutility from comparing prices or the baseline preference for generic goods. In addition, it ensures
that the effects are not driven by changes in households’ shopping behavior as they move to zip codes
with different levels of house prices. Instead, our estimates come from observing how the behavior
of the same household living in the same zip code changes as house prices vary. The parameter β 1 is
informative for how changes in house prices affect the shopping behavior of renters, while β 3 captures
the differential effect of house prices on homeowners.
     Columns 1 and 2 of Table VI show that increases in house prices lead to more retail spending by
homeowners, but to somewhat reduced spending by renters (though that effect is not statistically sig-
nificant). Due to household fixed effects in regression 4 the coefficient on homeowner, β 2 , is only iden-
tified off households that change tenure, so the negative coefficient suggests that households spend
less after a house purchase, perhaps due to downpayment constraints. Our results are insensitive
to dropping these households, and if we remove household fixed effects, homeowners have higher
expenditures and are less price sensitive than renters. Overall, the estimate of β 3 is consistent with
homeowners consuming out of their increased housing wealth.40 These estimates highlight the first of
  38 We identify households in one-family non-condo buildings as homeowners and those in 3+ family, non-condo buildings
as renters. Replacing household-level homeownership with zip code-level homeownership rates delivers similar results.
  39 A quarterly specification rather than the previous long-difference specification is necessary in homescan data because

panel turnover means that only a small and selected set of households are observed over the full sample. To facilitate
comparability, Appendix Section B presents quarterly specifications of our retail price results.
  40 Given our previous findings that higher house prices also cause higher retail prices, it is interesting to ask what fraction



                                                               23
two channels through which higher house prices reduce the average price elasticity faced by retailers.
As house prices increase, the share of total expenditure coming from lower-elasticity homeowners in-
creases relative to the share of expenditures from higher-elasticity renters. In addition to this "extensive
margin" effect, we document below an "intensive margin" effect, whereby each individual homeowner
becomes even less price elastic as house prices increase.
     One potential concern with the specifications in columns 1 and 2 is that the differential behavior by
homeowners might also be picking up differential behavior along other dimensions that are correlated
with homeownership, such as income and age. To test whether this is the case, in column 3 we include
additional controls for the interaction of log house prices with household income, age of the household
head, race of the household head, marital status of the household head, and education level of the
household head. Reassuringly, the coefficient on the interaction of homeownership status and log
house prices remains unaffected.41 This supports the interpretation that our estimates are picking up
differential wealth effects of house price changes for homeowners and renters.42
     We now turn to "intensive margin" effects, showing that individual homeowners become less price
sensitive as house prices rise, consistent with our previous findings that retail prices increase more with
house prices in areas with more homeowners. In columns 4 to 6 of Table VI, the dependent variable is
the expenditure share on goods that are on sale. We find that, as house prices increase, homeowners
are less likely to purchase goods that are on sale. In columns 7 to 9, we use the share of purchases of
cheaper generic goods as the dependent variable. A higher share of generic purchases again suggests
higher price sensitivity. In columns 10 to 12, the dependent variable is the share of purchases made
with a coupon, another measure of how intensely consumers substitute time for lower prices. As
of this increase in nominal expenditures is driven by higher prices. We find that across those individuals living in areas for
which we can construct an IRI price index, the house price effect on real expenditures is about 30% smaller than the effect
on nominal expenditures. However, we only observe an IRI price index for the locations of about 70% of respondents in the
Homescan data. When we construct an alternative price index based on Homescan transaction prices, the real share of the
nominal increase falls slightly. See Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2016) for recent related estimates.
  41 We also control for uninteracted levels of these characteristics. Due to household fixed effects, these are only identified

in the small number of cases when there is a within-household change in these variables. In the interest of space, we do not
report coefficients on the additional controls, or their interactions with house prices. Since we include interactions of house
prices with these additional controls, the single coefficient, β 1 , loses its interpretation as the effect of house prices on renters.
  42 It is interesting to consider other dimensions of heterogeneity which might predict different responses to house price

changes. Unfortunately, theoretical predictions for other characteristics in our data are ambiguous. To see this, decompose
the total expenditure response to house prices into two components, the expenditure response to wealth (or borrowing
                                                                                                              dExp         dExp
constraint) changes, and the response of wealth (or borrowing constraints) to house price changes: dHP = dWealth+ Borrow ×
dWealth+ Borrow             dWealth+ Borrow                                                                      dExp
     dHP        .   Since        dHP          has (weakly) opposite signs for homeowners and renters, and   dWealth+ Borrow   is (weakly)
                                                  dExp
positive for everyone, the difference in       for homeowners and renters follows naturally. However, many other sources
                                                  dHP
of within-homeowner heterogeneity give rise to ambiguous predictions. For example, consider young vs. old homeowners.
Since both parts of the decomposition are positive for homeowners, any differential age effects depend on how magnitudes
rather than signs vary with age. In the SCF, housing wealth is a relatively constant share of total wealth among owners
                                                                                                         dExp
over the life-cycle except at the very end of life. Therefore, we would expect the life-cycle profile of dHP to be driven by
                                    dExp
the life-cycle profile of dWealth+ Borrow . However, there is no consensus on this profile, either in the data or in theory (see
Sahm, Shapiro and Slemrod, 2010; Kaplan and Violante, 2014; Berger et al., 2015, and papers cited therein). Other household
characteristics in our data (e.g., income) involve similar ambiguity, so we restrict attention to the difference between renters
and homeowners.


                                                                     24
before, both measures of price sensitivity decrease with house prices for homeowners, but do not
move significantly for renters.
    One might be concerned that changing expenditure shares could reflect changes in the compo-
sition of goods purchased by households as their housing wealth increases, rather than changes in
households’ shopping intensity and price sensitivity for a given good. For example, a decline in the
expenditure share on sale items could either reflect a reduction in the shopping intensity devoted to
the same goods, or a change in the composition of purchases towards goods that are less often on sale.
In the latter case we would see changes in expenditures share, but this would not necessarily indicate
a decline in price sensitivity. To show this is not the case, Appendix Table A7 presents results from a
version of regression 4 in which the unit of observation is a shopping outcome for each household ×
quarter × product category. As before, we include household × zip code fixed effects, but also add
product category × quarter fixed effects.
    Columns 1-3 show that, for homeowners, higher house prices lead to higher total expenditures
within each product category; higher house prices lead to lower expenditures for renters, though the
effect is again not statistically significant. The magnitude is similar to that in Table VI. Columns 4-
6 show that the share of products bought on sale within each product category varies with house
prices in the same way as when we pool across product categories. Similar results are obtained when
looking at the share of goods purchased with a coupon, and the share of generic goods purchased.
This suggests that the observed changes in expenditure shares are truly driven by changing household
price sensitivity, and not by compositional changes in the types of products purchased.
    Finally, one might be interested in analyzing the extent to which our findings are driven by changes
in the share of goods that are on sale (or changes in the local availability of generics or coupons), rather
than by changes in households’ effort in searching for these sales. That is, we want to isolate changes
in purchases which are driven by changes in household behavior from those driven by changes in
firm behavior. To do this, we would ideally like to include zip code × quarter fixed effects to capture
time-variation in the propensity of goods in a zip code to be on sale. However, this removes almost all
of the variation, since we often only observe one household per zip code. In Appendix Table A8 we
thus repeat regression 4 including MSA × quarter fixed effects, both with and without including other
household characteristics interacted with the log of house prices. This controls for MSA-level changes
in the share of goods offered on sale in response to changes in house prices. The estimated interaction
between house prices and homeownership status remains economically and statistically significant,
and is, if anything, slightly larger in magnitude than that in Table VI.
    The evidence in this section shows that wealth effects from higher house prices make homeown-
ers less price elastic and renters more price elastic. Therefore, as house prices increase, retailers can
increase their markups, in particular in areas with many homeowners.


                                                    25
2.5    Interpretation and Discussion of Magnitude

In the previous sections, we concentrated on establishing a causal relationship between changes in
house prices and changes in markups, and on documenting changes in the price elasticities of home-
owners in response to house price increases. We next interpret the magnitude of our effects and their
implications for price variation across locations, as well as for aggregate inflation. An important first
step is to discuss the external validity of our findings, since the scanner data that allow us to precisely
measure local prices and establish causality is limited to mostly food items, and other prices could
potentially respond differently to house price changes.
      There are several reasons why we believe our results extend to prices in general. Panel C of Fig-
ure I shows that, across cities, the BLS food-at-home CPI moves closely with the broader CPI, which
suggests that the price movements we identify generalize to a large set of goods. We also run a simple
OLS regression of changes in these BLS price indices on changes in local house prices. Despite only
having 25 observations in this regression, we find significant responses of both the broad CPI and the
food-at-home CPI to house price movements. The implied elasticities are nearly identical both to each
other as well as to our regressions using IRI data.43 Finally, in addition to the pooled results discussed
in Section 2.4, we found that our measures of household shopping intensity respond similarly to house
price movements across a large variety of product categories, so there is reason to believe that markups
should also respond similarly.44 Thus, we believe that our estimated elasticities provide a reasonable
baseline for the response of more general price levels to house price movements.
      Over the housing boom, the 90-10 percentile difference in house price growth across MSAs was
45%. Multiplying this difference by our estimated boom elasticities of 15-23% implies that moving
from the 10th percentile of MSA house price growth to the 90th percentile of MSA house price growth
generates an increase in relative retail prices of 7-10%. This compares to an overall 90-10 difference
in retail price changes of 12%. The same calculation in the housing bust implies that house price
differences generate a 5-6% 90-10 retail price movement, compared with an actual 90-10 difference of
8.4%. Given that the differential housing boom-bust across locations was one of the most important
regional factors during this time period, we think it is indeed plausible that a substantial part of the
regional variation in retail price changes can be explained through this channel.
  43 Specifically, when we use the overall CPI, we find elasticities of 0.106 (SE = 0.040) for the full period (2001-2011), as well
as elasticities of 0.079 (SE = 0.020) for the boom, (2001-2006) and elasticities of 0.051 (SE = 0.026) for the bust (2007-2011).
When we analyze the food-at-home CPI, elasticities are 0.062 (SE = 0.018) for the boom, 0.042 (SE = 0.054) for the bust, and
0.085 (SE = 0.034) for the full period. The estimated elasticities for the bust period in this sample are significantly downward
biased by the outlier of Miami, which has by far the largest house price drop, but has about average retail price increases.
When dropping this observation, elasticities during the bust increase to 0.095 (SE = 0.054) for the food-at-home CPI and to
0.083 (SE = 0.023) for the overall CPI. Dropping Miami leaves the estimates for the other elasticities relatively unaffected.
  44 One might be concerned that since food spending rises less with wealth than other consumption, implied price responses

in other categories might be implausibly large. However, even if the level of demand for different goods responds differently
to shocks, this need not imply that the elasticity of demand also does so. We believe it is plausible that the elasticity of demand
for food falls substantially with wealth shocks, even if most of the additional consumption occurs in non-food items.



                                                                26
     How much did the increase in housing values over the boom contribute to aggregate inflation? In
order to assess this, we can multiply the national increase in house prices by our estimated elasticity
and then compare this to the total change in retail prices. In performing this calculation, it is important
to remember that our elasticity is estimated using cross-location data and so should be interpreted
as measuring the response to an increase in the relative price of housing. That is, we assume that
measured house price growth should be deflated by the overall CPI so that if house prices grew at the
overall inflation rate they would generate no changes in household shopping behavior or markups.
     Using CoreLogic data, house prices grew by 36.5% from 2001-2006, while the overall CPI increased
by 14.5%.45 Thus, real house prices increased by 22%. Multiplying this change by our IV elasticities
of 15-23% implies that house price movements and their associated effects on retail markups explain
roughly one-fourth to one-third of the overall increase in retail prices during this period, so that if there
was no housing boom, then retail prices would have risen by 9-11% instead of 14.5%.
     Thus, house price movements generate significant but plausible changes in retail prices. It is im-
portant to note that in addition to house price movements, there are many factors such as oil prices,
trade patterns and monetary policy that influence aggregate inflation, so one would not expect the
aggregate price level to mirror the housing boom and bust. Indeed, Beraja, Hurst and Ospina (2015)
argue that the presence of offsetting aggregate shocks is crucial for understanding aggregate inflation.
For example, during the housing boom, increasing imports from China likely held down overall retail
price increases despite upward pressure from house prices. Conversely, during the housing bust and
the Great Recession, increasing financial frictions likely pushed prices to increase.
     Is the magnitude of markup variation implied by these price movements plausible?46 If markup
variation explains all of the observed elasticities, then this implies markup changes of 3-5 percentage
points over the housing boom and bust. We directly observe an average markup of roughly 45% for
our large anonymous retailer, so a 3-5 percentage point movement does not seem unreasonable.47 As-
suming a constant elasticity of substitution, this implies a reduction from 3.22 to 3.09 in this elasticity.
     Finally, it is important to note that all of our empirical estimates measure the response of prices and
markups to house prices at medium-run business cycle frequencies. Section 2.3.5 shows that for the
time horizons in our sample, store entry plays only a small role. However, over longer time horizons,
entry should diminish these initial markup responses. That is, our conclusion that natural markups are
procyclical does not imply that there will be trend growth in markups in the long-run, even if average
  45 This 36.5% increase is less than that measured by the Case-Shiller Index but is in line with the nationally-representative
OFHEO index. Since, our elasticity is estimated using the variation in CoreLogic data, this is the appropriate variation to use
when scaling to a national elasticity.
  46 Our conclusion that across space, stores are varying markups substantially might seem at odds with the conclusion in

Kaplan and Menzio (2013) that store-specific pricing effects only explain 10% of overall price variation. However, overall
price variation across households is huge in their data, so the 10% which is due to the store-specific component is still large
in an absolute sense. More importantly, their analysis computes price dispersion within a market rather than across markets,
and so most of our effects of interest would not be captured in their price measures.
  47 In the Census of Retail Trade, the average retail markup is only modestly lower at 39%.



                                                              27
household wealth increases over time.

3   Conclusion
We link detailed geographically-disaggregated data on local house prices, retail prices, and household
shopping behavior to provide new evidence on how the economy responds to changes in demand.
We argue that increases in house prices lead to changes in demand for homeowners who become less
price sensitive, and that firms respond by raising markups. Consistent with this interpretation, we
find much stronger retail price responses to changes in house prices when homeownership rates are
high. We also find evidence of differential shopping responses to house price changes for homeowners
and renters. The economic magnitude of our price effect is large but not implausible: we estimate
elasticities of retail prices to house prices of 15%-20%, and show that this channel can explain a large
fraction of geographic variation in retail price changes. As discussed in the introduction (and in more
detail in Appendix D), the conclusion that household price-sensitivity declines with housing wealth,
and that this leads firms to raise markups, has wide ranging implications for business cycle modeling,
industrial organization, and urban economics.




References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. 2013. “House prices, collateral and self-
 employment.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis. 2013. “Time use during the great recession.”
 American Economic Review, 103(5): 1664–1696.

Alessandria, George. 2009. “Consumer search, price dispersion, and international relative price fluc-
  tuations.” International Economic Review, 50(3): 803–829.

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2015. “The Regional Evolution of Prices and Wages
  During the Great Recession.”

Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “House Prices and
  Consumer Spending.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bils, Mark. 1987. “The cyclical behavior of marginal cost and price.” American Economic Review, 838–
  855.

Bronnenberg, Bart J, Michael W Kruger, and Carl F Mela. 2008. “Database paper-The IRI marketing
  data set.” Marketing Science, 27(4): 745–748.

Chevalier, Judith A, Anil K Kashyap, and Peter E Rossi. 2003. “Why Don’t Prices Rise during Periods
 of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data.” American Economic Review, 15–37.

Christiano, Lawrence J, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2010. “Financial Factors in Economic
 Fluctuations.”



                                                  28
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong. 2014. “The cyclicality of sales, regular
 and effective prices: Business cycle and policy implications.” American Economic Review, forthcom-
 ing.

Davidoff, Thomas. 2013. “Supply Elasticity and the Housing Cycle of the 2000s.” Real Estate Economics,
 41(4): 793–813.

Domowitz, Ian, R Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C Petersen. 1986. “Business cycles and the relationship
 between concentration and price-cost margins.” Rand Journal of Economics, 1–17.

Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. “Reference Prices, Costs, and Nominal
  Rigidities.” The American Economic Review, 234–262.

Gagnon, Etienne, and David Lopez-Salido. 2014. “Small Price Responses to Large Demand Shocks.”
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J David Lopez-Salido. 2007. “Markups, gaps, and the welfare costs of
 business fluctuations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 44–59.

Gicheva, Dora, Justine Hastings, and Sofia Villas-Boas. 2010. “Investigating Income Effects in Scan-
 ner Data: Do Gasoline Prices Affect Grocery Purchases?” American Economic Review, 480–484.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M Mueller. 2015. “Firm leverage and unemployment during the great
 recession.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Glaeser, Edward L. 2013. “A nation of gamblers: Real estate speculation and American history.” Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research.

Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li. 2011. “International
 prices, costs, and markup differences.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2450–2486.

Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. 2008. “A new measure of the local regulatory
 environment for housing markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index.” Urban
 Studies, 45(3): 693–729.

Handbury, Jessie. 2012. “Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-Homotheticity and the Cost of
 Living Across US Cities.”

Handbury, Jessie, and David E Weinstein. 2015. “Goods Prices and Availability in Cities.” Review of
 Economic Studies, 82(1): 258–296.

Huo, Zhen, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. 2013. “Paradox of thrift recessions.” National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research.

Huo, Zhen, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. 2014. “Tightening Financial Frictions on Households, Reces-
 sions, and Price Reallocations.”

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2011. “Investment shocks and
  the relative price of investment.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1): 102–121.

Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L Violante. 2014. “A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimu-
 lus payments.” Econometrica, 82(4): 1199–1239.

Kaplan, Greg, and Guido Menzio. 2013. “Shopping externalities and self-fulfilling unemployment
 fluctuations.” National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                 29
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante. 2016. “Non-durable Consumption and Hous-
 ing Net Worth in the Great Recession: Evidence from Easily Accessible Data.” National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Krueger, Alan B, and Andreas Mueller. 2010. “Job search and unemployment insurance: New evi-
  dence from time use data.” Journal of Public Economics, 94(3): 298–307.

Manova, Kalina, and Zhiwei Zhang. 2012. “Export prices across firms and destinations.” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 127: 379–436.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US House-
 hold Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, 101(5): 2132–56.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014a. “House Price Gains and US Household Spending from 2002 to 2006.”
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014b. “What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment?” Econometrica,
 82(6): 2197–2223.

Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the
 Economic Slump.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4): 1687–1726.

Nakamura, Emi, and Dawit Zerom. 2010. “Accounting for incomplete pass-through.” Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 77(3): 1192–1230.

Nekarda, Christopher J, and Valerie A Ramey. 2013. “The cyclical behavior of the price-cost markup.”
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Nevo, Aviv, and Arlene Wong. 2014. “The Elasticity of Substitution Between Time and Market Goods:
 Evidence from the Great Recession.”

Rotemberg, Julio J, and Michael Woodford. 1999. “The cyclical behavior of prices and costs.” Hand-
 book of Macroeconomics, 1: 1051–1135.

Sahm, Claudia R, Matthew D Shapiro, and Joel Slemrod. 2010. “Household Response to the 2008
  Tax Rebate: Survey Evidence and Aggregate Implications.” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 24.
  69–110. The University of Chicago Press.

Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The geographic determinants of housing supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  125(3): 1253–1296.

Sinai, Todd. 2013. “House Price Moments in Boom-Bust Cycles.” Housing and the Financial Crisis, 19.

Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
 DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586–606.

Vavra, Joseph. 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Inter-
  pretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 215–258.

Warner, Elizabeth J, and Robert B Barsky. 1995. “The timing and magnitude of retail store mark-
 downs: evidence from weekends and holidays.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 321–352.




                                                 30
                                                                                  Figure I: Price Index vs. BLS




                                                   .3     .2
                                          Retail Price Level
                                          .1       0




                                                               2001q3               2004q1             2006q3                           2009q1               2011q3

                                                                                     IRI Price Index                               Food-at-Home CPI


                                                                                  (A) IRI Data vs. Food-at-Home CPI
           .35




                                                                                                                                   Correlation: 0.58
                                                                                                                  .3




                           Correlation: 0.66
           .3
   Food-at-Home CPI




                                                                                                          CPI All Products
                                                                                                                      .25
           .25




                                                                                                                  .2
           .2
           .15




                                                                                                                  .15




                      .2                    .25                              .3                .35                           .15             .2              .25          .3   .35
                                                           IRI Price Index                                                                             Food-at-Home CPI


      (B) Metro-Level Comparison: log( P2011 ) − log( P2001 )                                                (C) Metro-Level Comparison: log( P2011 ) − log( P2001 )


Note: Figure shows comparisons of our price indices produced with IRI data to price indices provided by the BLS. Panel
A compares our aggregate price index to the food-at-home CPI. Panel B compares the change in prices between 2001 and
2011 using our local price indices to the change in the metro area food-at-home price indices provided by the BLS for the
set of MSAs where we have overlapping data. Panel C compares the change in prices between 2001 and 2011 of metro
area food-at-home prices to the change in “all product” prices from the BLS.




                                                                                                     31
                                                                      Figure II: Retail Prices vs. House Prices




                                                                                                                  1.15
                1.08  1.06
       Retail Price Level




                                                                                                         Retail Price Level
                                                                                                                      1.1
              1.04




                                                                                                         1.05
      1.02      1




                                                                                                                  1
                          2001q1                 2002q3        2004q1        2005q3         2007q1                         2007q1              2008q1      2009q1      2010q1        2011q1     2012q1

                                               HP Growth Quintile 5        HP Growth Quintile 1                                                HP Growth Quintile 5             HP Growth Quintile 1


                                             (A) Retail Price Level: 2001-2006                                                               (B) Retail Price Level: 2007-2011
                     .2




                                                                                                                      .2
                              .15
        Change in Retail Prices




                                                                                                          Change in Retail Prices
                                                                                                                           .15
             .05     .1




                                                                                                             .1
       0             -.05




                                                                                                                      .05




                                     0             .2           .4           .6            .8                                         -.8           -.6            -.4         -.2             0
                                                        Change in House Prices                                                                            Change in House Prices


                                    (C) Retail Prices vs. House Prices: 2001-2006                                                   (D) Retail Prices vs. House Prices: 2007-2011
                  1.3




                                                                                                                    1.3
       1.1 1.15 1.2 1.25




                                                                                                          1.1 1.15 1.2 1.25
      Retail Price Level




                                                                                                         Retail Price Level
                  1.05




                                                                                                                    1.05
                  1




                                                                                                                    1




                                    2001q3        2004q1       2006q3       2009q1         2011q3                                   2001q3        2004q1         2006q3         2009q1         2011q3

                                                    HP growth Q4            HP Growth Q1                                                            HP growth Q4                HP Growth Q1


                          (E) Retail Price Level – Q1 of Homeownership                                                     (F) Retail Price Level – Q4 of Homeownership


Note: The top row shows the average retail price level over time for MSAs in the top quintile (solid black line) and bottom
quintile (dashed blue line) of house price appreciation for the period 2001-2006 (Panel A), and the period 2007-2011 (Panel
B). The middle row shows the MSA-level correlation between changes in house prices and changes in retail prices for the
period 2001-2006 (Panel C), and the period 2007-2011 (Panel D), as well as the line of best fit. The bottom row shows the
average retail price level over time for zip codes in the top quartile (solid black line) and bottom quartile (dashed blue
line) of house price appreciation between 2001 and 2011. Panel E shows results of zip codes in the bottom quartile of
the homeownership rate distribution, Panel F shows results of zip codes in the top quartile of the homeownership rate
distribution.


                                                                                                    32
                     Table I: Retail Prices vs. House Prices: MSA-Level Analysis

                                                                PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001 - 2006
                                                              D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                                        OLS                      IV Saiz                IV Wharton
                                                (1)             (2)        (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)
∆ House Prices                               0.057∗∗∗      0.068∗∗∗     0.129∗∗∗      0.153∗∗∗     0.224∗∗∗      0.230∗∗∗
                                              (0.020)         (0.023)    (0.042)       (0.058)      (0.048)       (0.048)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                              -0.068                   0.132                     0.219
                                                              (0.360)                  (0.376)                   (0.391)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                 0.073                   -0.082                     -0.130
                                                              (0.182)                  (0.175)                   (0.174)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                -0.060                   0.012                     0.039
                                                              (0.098)                  (0.114)                   (0.130)

∆ Unemployment                                                0.039∗∗                 0.070∗∗                    0.095∗∗∗
                                                              (0.018)                 (0.029)                     (0.026)

∆ Wage                                                         0.039                    0.038                     -0.005
                                                              (0.055)                  (0.060)                   (0.061)
Number of Observations                          125            125         112             112        112          112


                                                                 PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011
                                                              D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                                        OLS                      IV Saiz                IV Wharton
                                                (1)             (2)        (3)             (4)        (5)           (6)
∆ House Prices                               0.085∗∗∗      0.086∗∗∗     0.124∗∗∗      0.146∗∗∗     0.147∗∗∗      0.157∗∗∗
                                              (0.015)       (0.018)      (0.041)       (0.049)      (0.048)       (0.043)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                              -0.090                   0.008                     -0.000
                                                              (0.264)                  (0.275)                   (0.282)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                 0.086                   -0.000                     -0.003
                                                              (0.139)                  (0.169)                   (0.172)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                0.050                   -0.024                     -0.040
                                                              (0.127)                  (0.135)                   (0.147)

∆ Unemployment                                                 0.000                    0.017                     0.019
                                                              (0.011)                  (0.015)                   (0.014)

∆ Wage                                                         -0.030                  -0.060                     -0.063
                                                              (0.044)                  (0.048)                   (0.049)
Number of observations                          126            126         112             112        112          112

Note: Table shows results from the following OLS regression: ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice)m + γXm + ε z in
columns 1 and 2, and from instrumental variables regression 2 in the other columns. The unit of observation is an MSA,
the dependent variable is the change in retail prices in 2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B). We instrument for the
change in house prices using measures of the housing supply elasticity provided by Saiz (2010) in columns 3 and 4, and the
Wharton Regulation Index described in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) in columns 5 and 6. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

                                                              33
                                             Table II: Retail Prices vs. House Prices: Zip Code-Level Analysis

                                                                                         D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                                                       P ERIOD : 2001-2006                                            P ERIOD : 2007-2011
                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)                (4)             (5)             (6)          (7)               (8)
     ∆ House Prices                                  0.023∗∗∗        0.048∗∗∗         -0.045          -0.170∗         0.040∗∗∗        0.030∗∗∗        -0.035         -0.072
                                                     (0.007)         (0.009)          (0.032)         (0.095)          (0.007)         (0.008)        (0.033)        (0.084)
     ∆ Unemployment                                                  0.056∗∗∗        0.059∗∗∗         0.057∗∗∗                        -0.015∗∗        -0.016∗∗       -0.014∗
                                                                      (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.013)                         (0.008)         (0.008)       (0.008)
     ∆ Wage                                                          0.058∗∗           0.048           0.047                            0.011          0.006          0.007
                                                                     (0.029)          (0.029)         (0.029)                          (0.024)        (0.025)        (0.025)
     ∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                                -0.230           -0.252          -0.241                           0.131          0.119          0.078
                                                                     (0.300)          (0.297)         (0.295)                          (0.225)        (0.222)        (0.216)
     ∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                   0.080            0.095           0.085                            0.018          0.026          0.037
                                                                     (0.123)          (0.123)         (0.122)                          (0.101)        (0.101)        (0.101)
     ∆ Share Construction Employment                                 -0.152∗∗       -0.177∗∗∗        -0.184∗∗∗                          0.072          0.078          0.114
34




                                                                      (0.065)        (0.065)          (0.071)                          (0.071)        (0.071)        (0.076)
     Homeownership Rate                                                              -0.063∗∗        -0.120∗∗∗                                         0.030          0.021
                                                                                      (0.027)         (0.046)                                         (0.019)        (0.030)
     ∆ House Prices                                                                  0.142∗∗∗         0.222∗∗∗                                        0.095∗∗        0.123∗
     × Homeownership Rate                                                             (0.047)          (0.081)                                        (0.047)        (0.071)
     Population Density                                                                                0.001                                                          -0.000
                                                                                                      (0.002)                                                        (0.001)
     ∆ House Prices                                                                                   -0.002                                                          0.002
     × Population Density                                                                             (0.003)                                                        (0.003)
     Share below 35 years                                                                             -0.002∗∗                                                       -0.000
                                                                                                       (0.001)                                                       (0.001)
     ∆ House Prices                                                                                   0.003∗                                                          0.000
     × Share below 35 years                                                                           (0.002)                                                        (0.002)
     N                                                 708             708             708              708             846             846             846            846

     Note: Table shows results from regression 3. The unit of observation is a zip code, the dependent variable is the change in retail prices in 2001-2006 in columns 1 - 4,
     and the change in retail prices in 2007-2011 in columns 5 - 8. Population density is measured in 1000 inhabitants per square mile. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
     Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                                                                 Table III: Markup or Marginal Cost?

                                                                              D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES

                               (1)                (2)                (3)                  (4)               (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)
                                                                PANEL A: I NSTRUMENT WITH S AIZ S UPPLY E LASTICITY; 2001 - 2006
      ∆ House Prices         0.145∗∗∗           0.115∗∗            0.111∗∗              0.168∗∗          0.159∗∗∗       0.148∗∗       0.163∗∗∗      0.157∗∗∗       0.151∗∗∗
                              (0.065)           (0.046)            (0.047)              (0.048)           (0.059)       (0.058)        (0.056)       (0.058)        (0.058)

                                                                PANEL B: I NSTRUMENT WITH S AIZ S UPPLY E LASTICITY; 2007 - 2011
      ∆ House Prices         0.121∗∗∗           0.131∗∗∗           0.137∗∗∗              0.109           0.127∗∗       0.129∗∗∗       0.140∗∗∗      0.152∗∗∗       0.134∗∗∗
                             (0.059)            (0.039)             (0.044)             (0.075)          (0.049)        (0.043)        (0.051)       (0.046)        (0.045)

                                                             PANEL C: I NSTRUMENT WITH W HARTON R EGULATION I NDEX ; 2001 - 2006
      ∆ House Prices         0.194∗∗∗           0.196∗∗∗           0.195∗∗∗            0.265∗∗∗          0.224∗∗∗      0.259∗∗∗       0.272∗∗∗      0.262∗∗∗       0.223∗∗∗
                             (0.052)            (0.045)             (0.042)             (0.087)           (0.048)       (0.051)        (0.055)       (0.053)        (0.047)

                                                             PANEL D: I NSTRUMENT WITH W HARTON R EGULATION I NDEX ; 2007 - 2011
35




      ∆ House Prices         0.246∗∗∗           0.155∗∗∗           0.165∗∗∗            0.145∗∗∗          0.152∗∗∗      0.159∗∗∗       0.149∗∗∗      0.140∗∗∗       0.154∗∗∗
                             (0.054)            (0.042)             (0.044)             (0.054)           (0.045)       (0.042)        (0.043)       (0.043)        (0.042)


      Controls                  X                  X                  X                   X                 X             X              X             X              X

      Robustness         Exclude liquids       Average          Control for        Control for low      Drop high     Control for   Control for    Control for    Control for
                         and perishable     unemployment       Employment to      education wage &      retail rent   changes in    changes in     population       Entry
                             goods               rate           Population         unemployment           cities       income       education       growth

     Note: Table shows results from regression 2. The unit of observation is an MSA, the dependent variable is the change in retail prices in 2001-2006 (Panels A and C) and
     2007-2011 (Panels B and D). In Panels A and B we instrument for the change in house prices using the housing supply elasticity measure provided by Saiz (2010); in Panels
     C and D we instrument for house price changes using the Wharton Regulation Index described in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008). All specifications control for changes
     in the unemployment rate, changes in wages, and changes in the employment share in the construction, non-tradable, and grocery retail sector. Column 1 drops all product
     categories classified as “perishable” in Bronnenberg, Kruger and Mela (2008), as well as all liquids from our construction of the local price index. Column 2 controls for
     the average unemployment rate over the sample, rather than for changes in the unemployment rate. Column 3 controls for changes in the employment-to-population
     ratio, rather than changes in the unemployment rate. Column 4 controls for changes in the wage and unemployment of lower-educated people in the ACS, defined as
     those with at most a high school diploma. Column 5 drops the 6 cities with the highest level of retail rents (Boston, MA; Chicago, IL, New York, NY; Los Angeles, CA;
     San Franisco, CA; Washington, DC). Column 6 controls for changes in income using data from the IRS. Column 7 controls for changes in the share of people who have
     completed high school, and changes in the share of people who have completed a bachelor degree. Column 8 controls for population growth using data from the annual
     population estimates for Metropolitan Statistical Areas produced by the U.S. Census. Column 9 controls for changes in the number of grocery retail establishments per
     1,000 citizens. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                                                        Table IV: Zip Code Pricing Results - Large Retailer

                                       (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)               (6)            (7)             (8)               (9)
                                      ∆ RP          ∆ Markups           ∆ MC            ∆ RP         ∆ Markups           ∆ MC           ∆ RP          ∆ Markups           ∆ MC
     ∆ House Prices                  0.018∗∗         0.039∗∗∗         -0.022∗∗∗        -0.065∗          -0.032           -0.035          -0.093         -0.132∗           0.041
                                     (0.008)          (0.007)          (0.007)         (0.036)         (0.031)          (0.033)         (0.083)         (0.077)          (0.080)

     ∆ Unemployment                  0.029∗∗         0.044∗∗∗          -0.014∗         0.028∗          0.043∗∗          -0.014∗         0.026∗          0.045∗∗∗         -0.018∗∗
                                     (0.014)          (0.017)          (0.007)         (0.014)         (0.017)          (0.008)         (0.014)          (0.017)          (0.008)

     ∆ Wage                          0.049∗∗         0.058∗∗∗           -0.006        0.050∗∗         0.058∗∗∗           -0.005        0.053∗∗          0.051∗∗           0.006
                                     (0.019)          (0.019)          (0.015)        (0.019)          (0.020)          (0.015)        (0.021)          (0.023)          (0.016)

     ∆ Share Retail                   -0.112           0.315           -0.415∗∗         -0.119          0.309           -0.418∗∗         -0.099          0.278           -0.365∗∗
     Employment                      (0.156)          (0.226)           (0.163)        (0.152)         (0.225)           (0.164)        (0.152)         (0.214)           (0.161)

     ∆ Share Nontradable             0.193∗∗          0.181∗            0.022         0.182∗∗           0.174            0.018         0.176∗∗          0.182∗            0.004
     Employment                      (0.091)          (0.108)          (0.064)        (0.088)          (0.106)          (0.064)        (0.088)          (0.101)          (0.063)

     ∆ Share Construction             0.094           -0.119           0.218∗∗∗         0.089           -0.123         0.217∗∗∗          0.074           -0.118          0.195∗∗∗
     Employment                      (0.077)          (0.077)           (0.053)        (0.075)         (0.077)          (0.053)         (0.077)         (0.078)           (0.054)
36




     Homeownership Rate                                                                -0.016           -0.017           0.000         -0.038∗∗         -0.041∗∗          0.003
                                                                                       (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.012)         (0.019)          (0.019)         (0.020)

     ∆ House Prices                                                                   0.115∗∗          0.098∗∗           0.019         0.146∗∗          0.172∗∗∗          -0.026
     × Homeownership Rate                                                             (0.047)          (0.041)          (0.045)        (0.072)           (0.065)         (0.068)

     Population Density                                                                                                                  -0.001          0.001           -0.002∗
                                                                                                                                        (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)

     ∆ House Prices                                                                                                                      0.005          -0.000            0.005
     × Population Density                                                                                                               (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.004)

     Share below 35 years                                                                                                                -0.000         -0.001∗           0.001
                                                                                                                                        (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.001)

     ∆ House Prices                                                                                                                      -0.001          0.002            -0.003
     × Share below 35 years                                                                                                             (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)
     R-squared                        0.071            0.277            0.156          0.092            0.284            0.150          0.088            0.284            0.160
     N                                 192              192              192            192              192              192            192              192              192

     Note: Table shows results from regression 3. The unit of observation is a zip code, the dependent variable is the change in retail prices (columns 1, 4, and 7) , the change
     in retail markups (columns 2, 5, and 8), and the change in marginal costs (columns 3, 6, and 9) for a large national retailer between January 2004 and June 2007. See
     Section 2.3.1 for a discussion of what is included in this measure of marginal cost. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗
     (p<0.01).
                                      Table V: Controlling for Retail Rent

                                                      PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001 - 2006
                                                 D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                   OLS                                IV (S AIZ )                     IV (W HARTON )
                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)

∆ House Prices       0.063∗∗     0.084∗∗      0.074∗∗      0.088∗        0.138       0.122    0.188∗∗∗    0.459∗    0.470∗
                     (0.028)     (0.034)      (0.036)      (0.052)      (0.131)     (0.139)    (0.059)    (0.238)   (0.269)

∆ Retail Rent                      -0.101      -0.092                    -0.221      -0.194                -1.192    -1.216
                                  (0.122)     (0.122)                   (0.413)     (0.421)               (0.771)   (0.846)

∆ Wage                                         0.115                                 0.097                          -0.036
                                              (0.173)                               (0.170)                         (0.160)
N                       45          45          45           42           42          42        42          42         42

                                                      PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011
                                                 D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                   OLS                                IV (S AIZ )                     IV (W HARTON )
                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)

∆ House Prices       0.104∗∗∗    0.114∗∗∗    0.109∗∗∗      0.105∗∗∗    0.114∗∗∗     0.105∗∗   0.132∗∗     0.129∗∗   0.119∗∗
                      (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.023)       (0.041)     (0.044)     (0.041)   (0.052)     (0.053)   (0.051)

∆ Retail Rent                      -0.121      -0.120                    -0.233      -0.232                -0.275    -0.270
                                  (0.123)     (0.121)                   (0.180)     (0.163)               (0.209)   (0.193)

∆ Wage                                        0.133∗                                0.125∗                           0.120
                                              (0.077)                               (0.069)                         (0.074)

N                       45          45          45           42           42          42        42          42         42

Note: Table shows results from regression 2. The unit of observation is an MSA, the dependent variable is the change in
retail prices in 2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B). We show results from an OLS specification (columns 1-3), as
well as instrumental variables specifications that instrument for the change in house prices using the Saiz (2010) measure of
housing supply elasticity (columns 4-6) and the Wharton Regulation Index described in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008)
(columns 7-9). The sample is restricted to MSAs for which we observe retail rents in the REIS data. Robust standard errors
in parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).




                                                             37
                                                       Table VI: Effect of House Prices on Shopping Behavior

      D EPENDENT VARIABLE :                   LOG (E XPENDITURE )                      S HARE "D EAL "                       S HARE G ENERIC                        S HARE C OUPON
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)          (11)         (12)
      log(House Price)                -0.024        -0.012     0.408∗∗∗      -0.004         0.002         0.026       0.002       0.002         -0.017     0.001         -0.000       0.021
                                      (0.016)       (0.016)     (0.077)     (0.005)        (0.006)       (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)

      1 Homeowner                   -0.209∗∗∗      -0.203∗∗∗   -0.253∗∗∗   0.085∗∗∗       0.084∗∗∗       0.073∗∗    0.036∗∗      0.036∗∗       0.033∗∗   0.049∗∗∗      0.048∗∗∗      0.028∗∗
                                     (0.077)        (0.077)     (0.080)     (0.028)        (0.028)       (0.028)    (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.015)    (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.014)

      log(House Price)               0.048∗∗∗      0.046∗∗∗    0.055∗∗∗    -0.017∗∗∗      -0.017∗∗∗      -0.014∗∗   -0.007∗∗∗   -0.007∗∗∗   -0.007∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗     -0.005∗
      ×1 Homeowner                    (0.015)       (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.006)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)

      Unemployment Rate                            0.384∗∗∗    0.420∗∗∗                   0.097∗∗∗       0.091∗∗∗                 -0.015        -0.019                 -0.045∗∗∗   -0.046∗∗∗
                                                    (0.083)     (0.083)                    (0.026)        (0.025)                (0.015)       (0.015)                  (0.015)     (0.015)

      Average Weekly Wage                            0.013       0.016                    -0.017∗∗∗   -0.017∗∗∗                   -0.004        -0.004                  -0.005∗      -0.005∗
                                                    (0.016)     (0.016)                    (0.005)     (0.005)                   (0.003)       (0.003)                  (0.003)      (0.003)

      Share Grocery Retail                          -0.008       0.020                     -0.014        -0.019                   0.005         0.003                    0.015        0.013
      Employment                                    (0.082)     (0.082)                    (0.026)       (0.026)                 (0.016)       (0.016)                  (0.015)      (0.015)
38




      Share Nontradable                             0.120∗∗    0.108∗∗                     0.027∗        0.028∗                   0.009         0.009                    0.003        0.003
      Employment                                    (0.048)    (0.048)                     (0.015)       (0.015)                 (0.009)       (0.009)                  (0.008)      (0.008)

      Share Construction                           0.171∗∗∗    0.167∗∗∗                    -0.013        -0.016                   0.005         0.007                   -0.015∗      -0.015∗
      Employment                                    (0.049)     (0.049)                    (0.015)       (0.015)                 (0.009)       (0.009)                  (0.008)      (0.008)

      Quarter Fixed Effects             X             X             X         X              X              X          X            X            X          X             X            X

      Household × Zip Code FE           X             X             X         X              X              X          X            X            X          X             X            X

      Household Characteristics          ·             ·            X          ·              ·             X           ·           ·            X           ·             ·           X
      × log(House Price)
      R-squared                       0.721          0.721      0.722       0.872          0.872          0.872      0.740        0.740      0.741        0.770         0.770       0.771
      ȳ                              6.698          6.698      6.698       0.277          0.277          0.277      0.176        0.176      0.176        0.077         0.077       0.077
      N                              839,176        839,176    839,176     839,176        839,176        839,176    839,176      839,176    839,176      839,176       839,176     839,176

     Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The unit of observation is a household-quarter, the sample is 2004 to 2011. The dependent variables are the log of total household
     expenditure (columns 1-3), the expenditure share of products that are on sale (columns 4-6), the expenditure share of generic products (columns 7-9), and the expenditure
     share of products purchased with a coupon (columns 10-12). House prices are measured at the zip code level. All specifications include household × zip code fixed effects
     and quarter fixed effects. In columns 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, and 12 we also include additional control variables. In columns 3, 6, 9, and 12, we additionally control for the
     following household characteristics interacted with log house prices: household income, age of the head of the household, race of head of household, marital status of head
     of household, education level of head of household. Each observation is weighted by the household sampling weight. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × quarter
     level. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
        H OUSE P RICES , L OCAL D EMAND , AND R ETAIL P RICES
                                         O NLINE A PPENDIX
                             Johannes Stroebel              Joseph Vavra

A    Identification Concerns and Instrumental Variables
In Section 2.1 we presented results from an instrumental variables regression to estimate the elasticity
of changes in retail prices to changes in house prices. In this appendix we formalize the endogeneity
concern inherent in the OLS specification, and provide a more detailed, formal discussion of the exclu-
sion restriction required to use housing supply elasticity as an instrument for house price changes.
    Imagine that retail prices are affected by house prices, observable characteristics or shocks, Xm ,
and unobservable characteristics or shocks, Dm :

                    ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice)m + γXm + ψDm + ωm .
                                                                      | {z }
                                                                               εm


Since we cannot control for Dm , it gets subsumed in the OLS error term, ε m . The OLS regression will
then produce a biased estimate of the coefficient β if Dm also affects changes in house prices, that
is, if the regressor is correlated with the error. For example, imagine that productivity increases in a
particular location, which would lead to an increase in house prices and a decrease in retail prices.
Omitting controls for productivity from the OLS regression would therefore bias down our estimate of
the true elasticity of house prices to retail prices.
    The well-known idea of an instrumental variables research design is that if we can find a vari-
able that predicts house price changes, but that is uncorrelated with Dm , we can obtain unbiased es-
timates of β. In Section 2.1 we introduced measures of the housing supply elasticity as instruments
for the change in house prices. The idea of these instruments is that during the housing boom period,
when there was a national housing demand shock, house prices in less elastic areas increased by more
in response to this shock. During the reversal period, it was precisely those areas that experienced
the biggest house price increases that then saw the largest house price declines. This suggests that
cov(SupplyElasticitym , ∆log( HousePrice)m ) 6= 0 across both periods. We can verify this “inclusion
restriction” by running the first-stage regression A1 (also regression 1 in the paper).

                         ∆log( HousePrice)m = ρSupplyElasticitym + δXm + em .                      (A1)

Put differently, even though our supply elasticity instrument is time-invariant, our empirical spec-
ification, which splits the sample into the boom and bust, means that predicted house price move-
ments vary over these periods. The intuition for the instrument suggests that we would expect ρ to be
negative when predicting price changes during the boom period, and positive when predicting price
changes during the bust period. This is verified in Appendix Table A2, which shows the first-stage
coefficients ρ for both instruments in both the boom and the bust periods.
    It is worth re-emphasizing that this inclusion restriction is driven by the interaction between the

                                                        1
instrument and a national housing demand shock – this is a difference from more traditional instru-
mental variables strategies, where the instrument is correlated with the endogenous variable indepen-
dently of the presence of other shocks. In other words, the supply elasticitity instrument generates
variation in house prices which is otherwise orthogonal to local shocks because local supply elasticity
changes the propagation of aggregate shocks into local house prices. However, this does not change
the causal interpretation of the resulting estimates. The identifying assumption, or the “exclusion re-
striction,” does not depend on this distinction, and requires that the instrument is uncorrelated with
any unobserved shocks that affect both house prices and retail prices, Dm .

                                     Cov(SupplyElasticitym , Dm ) = 0.                                 (A2)

The exclusion restriction is inherently untestable: if we observed Dm we would control for it directly
by including it in Xm , thereby avoiding the omitted variables problem. For example, in Section 2.3.5
we argue that changes in competition could potentially bias both our OLS and IV specifications. In
particular, suppose that:

              ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice)m + γ∆log(establishments) + ε m ,

so that retail prices are driven by both local house prices and changes in the local level of competition.
If we did not control for ∆log(establishments)m , the IV exclusion restriction would require that:

                            Cov(SupplyElasticitym , ∆log(establishments)m ) = 0,

which might be violated, since locations where it is difficult to build housing might also face more
restrictions on new retail entrants. Thus, if ∆log(establishments)m was unobserved, then this would
be problematic for our estimates. Fortunately, we can directly measure ∆log(establishments)m using
county business patterns data to control for this bias. That is, running the IV regression

             ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice
                                           \         )m + γ∆log(establishments) + ε m
             ∆log( HousePrice)m = ρSupplyElasticitym + δ∆log(establishments) + em

can produce an unbiased estimate of β, even if supply elasticity is correlated with local retail entry.
We also control for many other possible observable confounders in our regression, including changes
in income, and changes in demographics. Indeed, while we believe that effects on local competition
are the most potent challenge to the exclusion restriction, the fact that controlling for many observable
characteristics in Tables I and III does not affect the estimated coefficient for β lends credibility to the
validity of the instrument. Furthermore, in Section 2.2 we present an alternative identification strategy
using the interaction of house price changes with homeownership rates. To also explain these results,
the unobserved shock Dm would have to differentially affect house prices in zip codes with different
homeownership rates.




                                                     2
B     Price-Setting Behavior - High Frequency Results
In Section 2.1 we presented our baseline results using “long-difference” specifications in which we
estimate the effect of changes in house prices over longer periods on changes in retail prices over
the same period. We next provide more temporally disaggregated results. We document a strong
relationship between house prices and retail prices at quarterly frequencies, suggesting that our results
are relevant even for high-frequency business cycle analysis. In regression A3, the unit of observation
is an MSA-quarter, and the key dependent variable is the log of the retail price level in that quarter.

                     log( RetailPrice)m,q = βlog( HousePrice)m,q + γXm,q + ξ m + δq + ε m,q                            (A3)

Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table A6 show the results from this OLS regression. All specifications
include quarter fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the MSA level to account for se-
rial correlation in prices.1 The estimated elasticity is 5%, which suggests that much of the long-run
response of retail prices to house prices occurs at relatively high frequencies.
     While our instruments for house price changes in Section 2.1 vary only in the cross-section, and,
as discussed in Appendix A, only work if they differentially propagate a shock, we also conduct an
instrumental variables version of regression A3. To do this, we follow Bartik’s (1991) intuition and
instrument for log( HousePrice)m,q with the product of the MSA-level housing supply elasticity and
the U.S.-wide house price level as measured by the seasonally-adjusted purchase-only OFHEO house
price index. While changes in aggregate housing demand (for example due to changes in interest rates)
will move U.S.-wide house prices, the local house price response to this national shock will depend
on the local elasticity of housing supply. The exclusion restriction requires that changes in U.S.-wide
house prices interacted with local supply elasticity affect local retail prices only through their effect on
local house prices. Columns 3 and 4 of Appendix Table A6 present the results from the IV regression,
using the housing supply elasticity measures provided by Saiz (2010) and Gyourko, Saiz and Summers
(2010), respectively. Just as in the long-difference specifications, the estimated elasticities in this IV
regression are highly significant and about twice as large as in the OLS regressions. Columns 5-8 of
Appendix Table A6 show results from the quarterly zip code-level analysis in regression A4.

     log( RetailPrice)z,q = βlog( HousePrice)z,q + δlog( HousePrice)z,q × HomeownershipRatez +                         (A4)
                              γXm,q + ξ z + δq + ε q,z

Columns 5 and 6 show the relationship between house prices and retail prices with and without ad-
ditional control variables. As before, comparing these numbers to columns 1 and 2, we find smaller
elasticities at the zip code level than at the MSA level. The main specifications of interest at the zip code
level are shown in columns 7 and 8, where we include the interaction of the zip code homeownership
rate with house prices. This evidence confirms that increases in house prices translate into higher retail
prices primarily in zip codes with high homeownership rates.
   1 Quarter fixed effects imply that we are identifying off of cross-sectional differences across MSAs rather than movements

across time, so that general increases in the price level do not contaminate our results.




                                                             3
Discussion While our findings using this “high frequency” specification are highly consistent with
the “long difference” estimates, there are four reasons why we prefer the latter as our primary esti-
mates. First, the high frequency measures of house price and retail price changes are likely to contain
substantially more measurement error than the long difference measures. Higher measurement error
in retail prices will increase standard errors; higher measurement error in house prices is even more
problematic, and will bias our results due to attenuation bias. Second, we expect there to be some time
lag between the actual house price changes, and households’ response to them, for example because
it takes time to learn about the house price changes, and because it takes time to extract home equity.
Similarly, sticky prices might induce a delay between firms observing a change in their demand elas-
ticity, and their ability to adjust prices (see Appendix Section D.2 for a discussion of how the presence
of sticky prices might affect the interpretation of our results). The long difference specification allows
us to estimate the full response, rather than a partial response. Fourth, most of our control variables
are only reported at the annual level, and so the long difference specifications allow us to control, for
example, for changes in income, unemployment, and wages at the same frequency as we are measur-
ing price changes. Fourth, the long difference estimates correspond to the specifications in many of the
seminal papers that have estimated nominal consumption responses to house price changes during
the Great Recession (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2011, 2014). By aligning our specifications with those of the
existing literature, our estimates can be used to evaluate to what extent the consumption responses
in those papers capture increases in real consumption, and to what extent they capture increases in
prices.

C      Price Index Construction – Robustness
In Section 1.1, we provide a description of our benchmark price index construction. In this Appendix,
we expand on that description, and discuss what features of the data can drive changes in our price
index. More importantly, we discuss alternative price index construction methods, and show that our
benchmark results are essentially unchanged under alternative methods. The analysis begins with
individual weekly price observations, which are themselves weekly unit values computed as the ratio
of total sales to total units sold for a given UPC in a given store in a given week. In our baseline results,
we move from this weekly data to a quarterly sample by only retaining price observations for the last
week of each quarter.2
     To construct our benchmark price indices, we first construct category-level price indices which
    2 Whilethis potentially induces some additional measurement error, it substantially reduces the computational burden
in the index construction and also eliminates the possibility that price changes arise from within quarter intertemporal
substitution by households rather than from posted price changes by retailers. However, we have verified that we obtain
nearly identical results when instead using all prices within a quarter. We have also implemented the exact methodology
suggested by Gagnon, Lopez-Salido and Sockin (2016) which makes various alternative choices about missing prices and
winsorizing and again arrive at nearly identical results.




                                                           4
aggregate up these individual price observations.3 :
                                                                             ωi,l,c,y(t)
                                           Pl,c,t+1              Pi,l,c,t+1
                                            Pl,c,t
                                                    =   ∏         Pi,l,c,t
                                                                                                 .
                                                         i

We then construct overall location-specific price indices by weighting these category price indices by
                                                                     ∑i∈c TSi,l,c,y(t)
the revenue share of a particular category, ωl,c,y(t) =               ∑i TSi,l,y(t)
                                                                                         :

                                                                           ωl,c,y(t)
                                             Pl,t+1              Pl,c,t+1
                                              Pl,t
                                                    =   ∏         Pl,c,t
                                                                                             .
                                                         c

In this benchmark specification, revenue shares are updated annually and vary across locations. We
choose this specification for our benchmark, because it most closely reflects the inflation rate for the
products that are actually being purchased in a particular location at a specific time. Furthermore, it
also follows the construction of regional CPI price indices by the BLS.
     What does this specification imply for the sources of price index variation? First, permanent differ-
ences in product availability, quality, or price across locations will not show up as variation in our price
indices, since all variation is driven by price relatives across time. To see this most clearly, assume that
all products in city 1 are high quality, high price items, but that prices do not change across time, and
that all products in city 2 are low quality, low price items, which also do not change prices across time.
Since only location-specific price relatives contribute to location-specific price index changes, the price
index in both cities in period 0 is normalized to 1, and the price index remains equal to 1 for all future
dates. That is, permanent differences across location are essentially absorbed into a fixed effect that
is differenced out of all of our empirical exercises. Similarly, product switching towards high quality,
high price items also results in no change in the measured price index as long as these prices are not
increasing differentially. This point is important to remember when comparing our evidence in Section
2.4, which showed that there are important changes in shopping behavior in response to house price
movements, with the evidence below, which shows that using alternative expenditure weights does
not affect the relationship between house prices and retail prices.
     Only two sources of variation can generate movements in retail price indices across locations.
First, holding revenue weights constant, individual posted prices can increase. If ω is constant and
posted prices in a location rise, then that location’s relative price index will increase. This is the pri-
mary source of price variation that we are interested in. However, in our benchmark specification,
prices can also change for second reason. If some items have high inflation and some items have low
inflation, the relative price level in a location will rise across time if households in that location sub-
stitute more towards the high inflation goods than households in other locations. (If households in
all locations substitute towards higher inflation goods, each price index will rise more but there will
be no change in relative prices across locations). While we want to capture these substitution-driven
price index changes in our benchmark, since they will be relevant for households’ cost of living as well
   3 Inorder to limit the influence of outliers we winsorize individual price relatives at ±1 log point, we winsorize the top
and bottom 1% of category price relatives and we winsorize local quarterly price changes at ±0.025 log points. In addition,
since zip codes vary substantially in the number of price observations, we weight all zip code level regressions by the total
number of items measured in that zip code. None of these choices have important effects on our results.


                                                                 5
as for understanding aggregate inflation, the two sources of variation have different interpretations in
models. That is, location-specific price indices can rise either because firms increase prices or because
household substitute towards items which have more rapid inflation.
    To investigate which channel is the primary driver of our results, we have also constructed price
indices under two alternative assumptions. First, we have constructed a pure fixed-basket Laspeyres
Index. That is, instead of constructing price indices using ωi,l,c,y(t) , we instead use a consumption
basket in each location which is fixed at initial-period weights: ωi,l,c,y(t) = ωi,l,c,y(0) . In this case, changes
across time in household shopping behavior, by construction, will have no effect on price indices across
time. Table A9 recomputes our baseline results for this alternative specification, and shows that our
results are essentially unchanged. Thus, product-switching behavior does not mechanically drive our
location-specific price effects. Prices for a fixed basket of goods are actually rising faster in the high-
house-price-growth areas.
    However, it could still be the case that households in high-house-price-growth locations simply
happen to purchase more items that exhibit higher inflation. For example, if there are two prod-
ucts, one with permanently high inflation and one with permanently low inflation, it may be the
case that households in the high-house-price-growth location always purchase the high-inflation item
and households in the low-house-price-growth location always purchase the low inflation-item. This
would show up as a change in relative prices across time in both our benchmark and in the fixed bas-
ket specification, even though household behavior and firm behavior do not change across time. To
investigate whether this is driving our results, we construct a version of the price index using common
national revenue weights. That is, ωi,l,c,y(t) = ωl,c,y(t) , so that all locations place the same weight on
each item in the price index. In this case, differences in households’ shopping baskets across location
are ignored when constructing price indices, so differences in these shopping baskets or in shopping
behavior cannot explain our results. Table A10 recomputes our baseline results for this specification,
and again shows that it does not affect our results.
    In addition to these robustness checks, we have also experimented with constructing price in-
dices at higher and lower time-frequencies, using different product mixes, excluding temporary price
changes, including goods that were observed more than once but not in consecutive quarters, and us-
ing alternative treatments of missing price observations which occur in weeks with no sales. None of
these alternatives substantively affected our results. Thus, our broad conclusion is that while various
features of weighting or measurement of price indices could potentially be important for our results,
these details ultimately have little quantitative importance. Together, the various alternative price
indices we have constructed strongly support our interpretation of the retail price-house price link:
When house prices rise, firms actually raise prices in response.

D     Additional Discussion on Implications
In this section, we provide a more detailed discussion of the implications of our empirical results.
We divide this discussion into two parts. In the first part, we discuss implications that arise from
procyclical “flexible price” natural markups. While we believe that we have made a strong case for
interpreting our empirical results as markup variation, a number of important implications of our
findings do not rely on this interpretation. Therefore, after describing the implications of markup

                                                        6
variation, we turn to implications of price variation that would persist even if marginal costs had
changed significantly.

D.1     Implications of Markup Variation for Business Cycle Modeling
In many business cycle models, firm markups play an important role in determining the real response
to expansionary monetary policy (Goodfriend and King, 1997). For example, many New Keynesian
models assume that firm i produces differentiated products, and faces demand of the form:
                                                                 −θ
                                                           Pti
                                                       
                                             cit   =                   Ct,
                                                           Pt

where θ is the elasticity of substitution,

                                             Z             θ −θ 1
                                                    1−1/θ
                                                  i
                                        Ct =     ct       di

is a consumption aggregate, Pti gives the firms’ own nominal prices, and the aggregate price-level is
given by:
                                              Z            1−1 θ
                                                     1− θ
                                                   i
                                         Pt =     pt      di         .

With flexible prices, profit maximization implies that firms should set prices as a constant markup over
nominal marginal cost, Ψt . This markup varies with the price elasticity faced by the firm:

                                                                   θ
                                                       Pti =          Ψt .
                                                                  θ−1
                                                          θ
In the discussion in the paper we have called           θ −1      the “natural markup.” The average realized markup
in the economy is, in turn, crucial for determining real output. If we define the average markup as the
                                                           Pt
ratio of the price level to marginal cost, µt =            Ψt ,   the cost-minimizing solution for labor input, given
demand for a firm’s product, must satisfy:

                                                                  ∂F (nt , k t )
                                               Wt = Ψt                           .
                                                                     ∂nt

Substituting from the above definition then gives that

                                                    Wt   ∂F (nt , k t )
                                               µt      =                ,
                                                    Pt      ∂nt

so a higher average realized markup corresponds to a higher marginal productivity of labor, and a real
reduction in output.
      In practice, there are at least two reasons why average realized markups can change with the busi-
ness cycle. First, the presence of sticky prices may prevent some firms from adjusting prices when their
marginal costs move, holding firms’ desired or natural markups constant. In other words, average
markups can move because the “markup gap” between the realized and the natural markup moves.
In the traditional New Keynesian mechanism, θ (and thus the natural markup) is typically held con-


                                                                  7
stant and countercyclical realized markups arise entirely from the countercyclical forces generated by
sticky-price-induced markup gaps. In this paper we identify a separate channel that puts procyclical
pressure on natural markups, and thereby on realized markups: during boom periods, households be-
come less price-sensitive, θt falls, and firms’ natural markups increase. Holding marginal cost constant,
this then leads actual markups to increase as long as prices are not completely fixed.
     While a vast literature studies the implications of sticky prices, comparatively little attention has
been devoted to studying cyclicality of the elasticity of demand. In practice, both sticky-price forces
and price-sensitivity forces are likely at work in determining aggregate markups over the business
cycle, and their relative importance depends, for example, on the particular shocks considered, or the
specific time period studied. For example, since we show that marginal cost does not respond to our
local house-price-induced demand shocks, this means that actual realized markups are procyclical in
response to these shocks. However, it is important to note that aggregate demand shocks may generate
substantially more upward pressure on marginal cost than the local shocks we study. If marginal costs
do rise with aggregate demand, and if prices are at least partially sticky, then the New Keynesian sticky
price channel will put downward pressure on markups.4 The actual realized markup will then depend
on the importance of the movement in the natural markup relative to that of the markup gap.
     The presence of these competing forces also has implications for the large literature using aggre-
gate time-series data to measure the cyclicality of markups. Nekarda and Ramey (2013) review that
literature. While looking at time-series variation in total markups might be the right approach for
measuring the total effects of a policy change, if one is interested in isolating the effects of sticky prices
in order to test New Keynesian models, one needs to hold price elasticity θt fixed. If firms’ natural
markups are constant, then realized markups only move due to sticky prices, but once θt changes
across time, then this no longer holds. If price flexibility also varies across time, as suggested by Vavra
(2014), then so will the decomposition of the total markup into a “natural markup effect” and a “sticky
price effect.” Time-variation in the strength of these effects could thus potentially reconcile conflicting
evidence on the response of total markups to demand shocks. For example, Gali, Gertler and Lopez-
Salido (2007) find that markups fall in response to expansionary monetary policy. However, using an
identical methodology, Nekarda and Ramey (2013) show that this result changes when using revised
data for the last few years of the sample.
     Thus, the countercyclical shopping intensity channel we identify need not imply that the sticky
price effect is unimportant, and it does not imply that the total aggregate markup is procyclical; how-
ever, this shopping intensity channel nevertheless has important implications for the conduct of mone-
tary policy. To see this, consider the DSGE models in Smets and Wouters (2007), Christiano, Motto and
Rostagno (2010), and Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2010). These models allow for exogenous
“cost-push” shocks to the natural markup, and find they play an important role in explaining inflation
dynamics. However, there is an important distinction between markup movements in these papers
and in ours. In these DSGE models, movements in the natural markup are interpreted as exogenous
“structural” shocks, and as such they do not respond to policy. In contrast, we provide evidence for
endogenous natural markups: during booms, households become less price-sensitive, and firms raise
   4 While, in our setting, the local house price shocks do not appear to have a significant effect on local marginal costs, many

business cycle shocks are likely to move both θ and marginal costs together.


                                                               8
markups in response. This is an important distinction, because our results imply that natural markups
will work against the traditional expansionary effects of stimulus policy. Expansionary monetary pol-
icy may lower markups through a traditional New Keynesian channel, which will in turn drive up
output. However, as output begins to rise, households will become less price-sensitive, which puts
upward pressure on markups. Treating movements in the natural markup as exogenous structural
shocks shuts down this feedback. That is, a standard Lucas critique applies to treating the endoge-
nous response of households as policy invariant. Our empirical evidence suggests that more attention
should be paid to modeling the effects of cyclical price-sensitivity on the economy.

D.2     Implications of Sticky Prices for our Interpretation
If prices are fully flexible, then our retail price responses provide a direct measure of the change in θ.
However, in the presence of sticky prices, changes in the “flexible price” natural markups arising from
variation in θ cannot be immediately realized, because not all firms can immediately increase their
prices to the new, desired level. In this case, our elasticities represent a lower bound on the response
of flexible price natural markups.
      Our benchmark analysis focuses on multi-year differences where sticky prices are unlikely to be
important. In Appendix B we show that elasticities remain large and significant at quarterly frequen-
cies but are reduced by roughly one-third relative to our long-difference analysis. We now show
that this is consistent with the presence of some shorter-run pricing frictions. To highlight differ-
ent sources of variation, we decompose the actual realized markup into those markups set by fully
flexible-price firms (natural markups) and those set by firms subject to some pricing frictions: µt =
        f lex                sticky
µ + f µt        + (1 − f ) µ t        . Fraction f of firms set prices fully flexibly. The first term in the sum, µ =             θ
                                                                                                                                θ −1
                                                                                                                                     ,
                                                f lex
                                           θt −1 − θ −1 be the deviation of the natural markup from the
                                             θt        θ
is the steady-state markup. Let µt                      =
                                                sticky
                                   sticky     P
steady-state markup. Finally, let µt      = tΨt − θ −θ 1 be the contribution of sticky prices to the total
                                                                               sticky
markup. The average price chosen by firms subject to pricing frictions, Pt            , will in turn be a mix
of prices that are currently fixed and prices that reset in the current period. In the presence of pricing
frictions, these reset prices will be increasing in expected marginal cost and in expected flexible price
                                                                                                     sticky
natural markups. If Ψt does not respond to local increases in demand, then µt                                 will only rise if there
is an increase in flexible price markups. Thus, if marginal cost is constant, our empirical evidence can
                                                              f lex
only be rationalized through an increase in µt                        .
      Now consider the response of the price level to a local change in demand Dl in a standard New
Keynesian setup. Let f be the fraction of firms with flexible prices in the economy. Assume that the
remaining firms are Calvo price setters with probability of adjustment (1 − α) and choose price P∗
when adjusting. Then

                       ∂ log P                ∂ log P f lex                     ∂ log P∗
                                       =    f               + (1 − f ) (1 − α )
                       ∂ log Dl                ∂ log Dl                         ∂ log Dl
                                                                                                h             i
                                                                                                    f lex
                                              ∂ log µ Ψ                               ∞     log           Ψ
                                                      f lex 
                                                                                         ∂E       µ t       t
                                       =    f                  + (1 − f ) (1 − α) ∑ φt                          ,
                                                  ∂ log Dl                          t =0     ∂ log Dl

where φt is a standard kernel that weights future marginal costs according to firms’ discount rates


                                                                          9
                                                                              h       i
                                                                                f lex
                                                                        ∂E log µt Ψt
together with the probability of future price adjustment.                     ∂ log Dl    is the expected response of flex
price markups and marginal cost to the demand shock for today and all future periods. If goods are
not produced locally, local demand should have no effect on marginal cost:                     ∂Ψt
                                                                                               ∂Dl     = 0 ∀t and we get

                                                                        ∞                      f lex
                        ∂ log P      ∂ log µ f lex                         ∂E log µt
                                 = f               + (1 − f ) (1 − α) ∑ φt           .
                        ∂ log Dl      ∂ log Dl                        t =0  ∂ log Dl

                                    f lex          f lex
Finally, note that ∑∞
                             ∂E log µt
                    t=0 φt       ≤ ∂∂log
                              ∂ log Dl
                                         µ
                                      log Dl , with equality holding only when the effect of the demand
shock on flex price markups is permanent. This then implies that

                                                                    ∂ log P
                                            ∂ log µ f lex          ∂ log Dl
                                                          ≥                       .
                                             ∂ log Dl       f + (1 − f ) (1 − α )

This simple inequality provides a back-of-the-envelope way to convert the observed response of prices
to local demand shocks into implied changes in flexible price markups. For example, assume that the
demand shock is permanent, that 25% of grocery store prices are fully flexible, and that the quarterly
frequency of adjustment is roughly 40% for the remaining items, as in our IRI data. This implies that

                                                             ∂P
                                 ∂ log µ f lex          ∂ log Dl           ∂ log P
                                               =                     ' 2.5          .                                  (A5)
                                  ∂ log Dl       [0.25 + 0.75(0.40)]       ∂ log Dl

In this scenario, the long-run elasticity with fully-flexible prices should be roughly 80% larger than the
quarterly elasticity with sticky-prices, which is in line with our empirical estimates.
      While we previously argued that assuming a constant marginal cost is sensible in our empirical
context, the above formula can also be used to assess the plausibility of marginal cost movements for
explaining our empirical results. If there was no change in µ f lex , and instead all results were driven
by variation in marginal cost, then we would need an elasticity of marginal cost of 40% in response to
housing wealth shocks. If 90% of the marginal cost is cost of goods sold, which if anything have a mild
negative demand elasticity due to volume contracts with wholesalers, this means that an elasticity of
local wages or other components of marginal cost of more than 400% would be required to explain
our price responses. This is an implausibly large elasticity, especially since there is little relationship
between average local wage growth and local housing wealth shocks.

D.3     Industrial Organization of Wholesale-Retail Relationships
Our paper also provides novel evidence on the organization of wholesaler-retailer relationships, as
well as on the nature of local competition. Much of the prior empirical literature studying retail pricing
has emphasized the importance of wholesalers in pricing decisions, and has generally concluded that
retailers play a largely passive role in the pricing process. For example, Nakamura and Zerom (2010)
show that a large fraction of incomplete pass-through of coffee commodity prices into retail prices
arises from incomplete pass-through into wholesale costs. Andreson et al. (2013) show that prices for
a confidential retailer typically respond rapidly to changes in costs. Similarly, it is standard in New
Keynesian models to introduce pricing power and sticky prices at the level of the intermediate goods


                                                             10
producer rather than at the level of the final goods producer.
      Our evidence shows that this passive view of retailers is incomplete. In particular, the prior liter-
ature focuses on the response to cost shocks. We show that the passive role of retailers does not hold
when one instead focuses on the response to demand shocks. More concretely, suppose that retail prices
are fully flexible and that retailers are subject to both wholesale cost shocks and shocks to the elasticity
of demand. In this case, at each point in time, the retailer will set price

                                                        θt
                                             Pt =           αt wct .
                                                     θt − 1

where θt is the current standard CES elasticity of demand, αt is an additional variable markup/ incom-
plete pass-through parameter, and wct is the current wholesale cost, which in turn is given by

                                                wct = γt ct .

                                                                                                    dP
with commodity cost ct and pass-through parameter γt . The existing literature has studied          dct   and
                                               dP
concluded that at medium-run frequencies         < 1, and that this incomplete pass-through is largely
                                               dct
driven by γt < 1 while αt ≈ 1. Thus, retailers generally passively pass-through shocks to their costs in
the medium-run. However, this does not imply that retailers are passive in general, and that one can
fully understand final goods prices by focusing on wholesalers. Our evidence shows that retail prices
respond strongly to changes in θt while wholesale prices do not. This implies that fully understanding
the behavior of prices requires a comprehensive analysis of the interaction of retailers and their sup-
pliers. Retailers are crucial in determining how prices and markups respond to changes in customer
demand, while wholesalers play a crucial role in transmitting upstream cost shocks into final prices.
     The fact that wct does not respond to changes in θt also suggests that local variation in profits is
fully absorbed by retailers rather than split between wholesalers and retailers. That is, local declines
in the elasticity of demand lead to higher markups and unit profits for the retailer but no increase
in wholesale costs or unit profits for the wholesaler. This is an empirical result of our paper shown
most explicitly in 2.3.1, rather than any assumption on our part, but it has interesting implications for
the nature of retailer-wholesaler interactions. One potential explanation for this result is that retailers
likely have much more information on their local customer demand than any wholesaler does. This
may allow retailers to exploit their market power more fully without it being appropriated by increases
in wholesale costs. This variation in retailer profits is highly consistent with our results in 2.3.5 that
entry is mildly higher in locations where supply elasticity is low and markups rise more quickly. Seeing
more entry in locations where it is ex-ante more difficult to enter only makes sense if these locations
are also more profitable for retailers.

D.4     Implications of Price Variation
We next discuss a number of implications of our findings that do not depend on the decomposition of
overall observed price changes into changes in markups and changes in marginal costs.




                                                       11
D.4.1   Housing Wealth Effect, and Aggregate Implications
First, our analysis contributes to the literature that has analyzed the effects of house price changes
on household consumption behavior (e.g., Case, Quigley and Shiller, 2011, and Carroll, Otsuka and
Slacalek, 2011). From a theoretical perspective, it is unclear whether changes in house prices should
induce significant wealth effects for homeowners. For example, Sinai and Souleles (2005) argue that
while house price increases lead to higher housing asset values, these effects are undone by an increase
in the houses’ implicit rent so that consumption should be unchanged. However, Berger et al. (2016)
show that if borrowing constraints and realistic substitution effects are added to this framework, then
there can be substantial consumption response to house price movements. Our empirical results join
a growing body of work consistent with this more general framework, as it shows that homeowners
substantially change their behavior in response to house price changes.
    More importantly, the fact that local prices are also responding to these local housing wealth shocks
means that one should use caution when trying to learn from cross-sectional variation about the ag-
gregate response of consumption to changes in housing wealth. Without local price indices, nominal
spending responses cannot be decomposed into real consumption growth and inflation. Mian and
Sufi (2014) specifically make this point when extrapolating their local estimates to consider the ag-
gregate effects of the housing boom and bust. In particular, they caution that the inflation response
to demand shocks is a critical input to this aggregate calculation for which they do not have direct
empirical evidence. Our results suggest that such caution is indeed warranted. In particular, we find
that house-price-induced demand shocks lead to higher retail prices, explaining at least some of the
observed increases in nominal consumption. Most directly, our analysis of expenditures using the
Homescan data suggests that about 30% of nominal expenditure increases reflect higher prices.
D.4.2   Implications for Urban and Labor Economics
The response of local retail prices to local house prices can also help inform important parameters in
models of urban economics (e.g., Shapiro, 2006, and Albouy, 2009). In equilibrium models along the
lines of Roback (1981), households and firms have to be indifferent between locating in different areas.
Each area is endowed with its own productivity and consumption amenities. Wages must be higher
in more productive locations, otherwise firms would want to move there. Housing costs also have to
be higher in those more productive regions to discourage all households from moving there. Land
prices capitalize consumption amenities, making it more expensive to live in more desirable regions.
The utility consequences of a change in land prices depend on whether this change has an impact on
the cost of traded and non-traded consumption goods. This affects the adjustment mechanism to local
shocks, as well as the incidence of these shocks. Our causal estimate of the impact of house prices on
retail prices therefore directly informs the calibration of these equilibrium models.
    A related literature considers the extent to which local price changes provide insurance against
local shocks. For example, Notowidigdo (2011) argues that negative labor market shocks cause house
prices to fall, which can help households smooth consumption by reducing housing expenditures. Our
findings suggest that local retail prices provide a general equilibrium channel that further dampens
the effects of negative local wealth or productivity shocks: local productivity shocks that reduce house
prices and housing wealth will cause retail prices to fall, making it cheaper to live in that area.

                                                    12
Appendix References
Albouy, David. 2009. “What are cities worth? Land rents, local productivity, and the value of ameni-
ties.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anderson, Eric, Benjamin A Malin, Emi Nakamura, Duncan Simester, and Jon Steinsson. 2013. “In-
formational rigidities and the stickiness of temporary sales.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?”
Berger, David, Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, and Joseph Vavra. 2015. “House Prices and
Consumer Spending.” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carroll, Christopher D, Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek. 2011. “How large are housing and financial
wealth effects? A new approach.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(1): 55-79.
Case, Karl E, John M Quigley, and Robert J Shiller. 2011. “Wealth effects revisited 1978-2009.” Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2010. “Financial Factors in Eco-
nomic Fluctuations.”
Gagnon, Etienne, David Lopez-Salido, and J Sockin. 2016. “The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular, and
Effective Prices: Comment” Working Paper.
Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J David Lopez-Salido. 2007. “Markups, gaps, and the welfare costs of
business fluctuations.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 44-59.
Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King. 1997. “The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of mone-
tary policy.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, Volume 12. 231-296. MIT Press.
Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. 2008. “A new measure of the local regulatory en-
vironment for housing markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index.” Urban Studies,
45(3): 693-729.
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2011. “Investment shocks and
the relative price of investment.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14(1): 102-121.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the US House-
hold Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, 101(5): 2132-56.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. “House Price Gains and US Household Spending from 2002 to 2006.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nakamura, Emi, and Dawit Zerom. 2010. “Accounting for incomplete pass-through.” Review of
Economic Studies, 77(3): 1192-1230.
Nekarda, Christopher J, and Valerie A Ramey. 2013. “The cyclical behavior of the price-cost markup.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Notowidigdo, Matthew J. 2011. “The incidence of local labor demand shocks.” National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, rents, and the quality of life.” Journal of Political Economy, 1257-1278.
Saiz, Albert. 2010. “The geographic determinants of housing supply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
125(3): 1253-1296.
Shapiro, Jesse M. 2006. “Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of human
capital.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2): 324-335.

                                                   13
Sinai, Todd, and Nicholas S Souleles. 2005. “Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent
Risk.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2):763-789.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586-606.
Vavra, Joseph. 2014. “Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss
Interpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 215-258.




                                              14
Appendix Figures

                           Figure A1: Location of Retail Stores in IRI Sample




Note: Figure shows the location of the zip codes in which we observe stores in the IRI sample. Most major U.S. population
                     centers are covered, with notable omissions of Florida, Nevada, and Colorado.




                                                           15
                                Figure A2: Changes in Apartment and Retail Rents vs. Changes in House Prices
                 .25




                                                                                                              0
                                     Slope = 0.2                                                                              Slope = 0.08
                 .2
    Change in Retail Rents




                                                                                                 Change in Retail Rents
                                                                                                                   -.05
        .1        .15




                                                                                                   -.1
                 .05




                                                                                                              -.15
                 0




                                 0                  .2           .4               .6   .8                                    -.8             -.6           -.4            -.2   0
                                                         Change in House Prices                                                                    Change in House Prices


                                               (A) Retail Rents: 2001-2006                                                              (B) Retail Rents: 2007-2011




                                                                                                              .15
                 .4




                                                                                                                              Slope = 0.10
                                     Slope = 0.34
    Change in Apartment Rents




                                                                                                 Change in Apartment Rents
                           .2




                                                                                                                     .1
                0




                                                                                                     .05
    -.2




                                                                                                              0
                 -.4




                                 0                  .2           .4               .6   .8                                    -.8             -.6           -.4            -.2   0
                                                         Change in House Prices                                                                    Change in House Prices


                                           (C) Apartment Rents: 2001-2006                                                           (D) Apartment Rents: 2007-2011


Note: Figure shows changes in house prices and changes in retail rents (Panels A and B) and apartment rents (Panels C
and D) for the periods periods 2001-2006 (Panels A and C) and 2007-2011 (Panels B and D).




                                                                                            16
Appendix Tables

                   Table A1: Summary Statistics, MSA Level "Long Differences"


                                                                       PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001 - 2006


                                                              Mean       St. Dev.    P25       P50      P75       N

∆ Retail Prices (% as decimal)                                0.080       0.045     0.052    0.079      0.111    125
∆ House Prices (% as decimal)                                 0.366       0.186     0.227    0.349      0.514    125
∆ Unemployment Rate (% as decimal)                            0.138       0.216     -0.007   0.143      0.310    125
∆ Wage (% as decimal)                                         0.231       0.071     0.195    0.218      0.256    125
∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment (absolute)                  -0.005      0.015     -0.011   -0.004     0.002    125
∆ Share Nontradable Employment (absolute)                     -0.008      0.030     -0.027   -0.007     0.013    125
∆ Share Construction Employment (absolute)                    0.092       0.037     0.066    0.086      0.113    125
∆ Retail Rent (% as decimal)                                  0.116       0.057     0.076    0.111      0.147     45
∆ Retail Establishments per 1000 people                       0.081       1.086     -0.074   -0.031     0.014    123
∆ Share population with at least highschool (absolute)        0.032       0.017     0.019    0.030      0.041    125
∆ Share population with at least bachelor (absolute)          0.025       0.015     0.016    0.025      0.034    125


                                                                       PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011


                                                              Mean       St. Dev.    P25       P50      P75       N
∆ Retail Prices (% as decimal)                                0.137       0.030     0.116    0.137     0.160     126
∆ House Prices (% as decimal)                                 -0.202      0.150     -0.274   -0.190    -0.094    126
∆ Unemployment (% as decimal)                                 0.507       0.216     0.377    0.520     0.658     126
∆ Wage (% as decimal)                                         0.111       0.057     0.090    0.114     0.138     126
∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment (absolute)                  0.003       0.011     -0.001   0.002     0.006     126
∆ Share Nontradable Employment (absolute)                     0.012       0.023        0     0.011     0.024     126
∆ Share Construction Employment (absolute)                    -0.029      0.024     -0.044   -0.025    -0.014    126
∆ Retail Rent (% as decimal)                                  -0.045      0.029     -0.061   -0.039    -0.024     45
∆ Retail Establishments per 1000 people                       -0.039      0.052     -0.065   -0.035    -0.013    124
∆ Share population with at least highschool (absolute)        0.033       0.018     0.019    0.030     0.041     126
∆ Share population with at least bachelor (absolute)          0.025       0.015     0.016    0.025     0.034     126

Note: Table shows summary statistics for the key dependent and independent variables in regression 2 over the periods
2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B).




                                                         17
                       Table A2: Instrumental Variables Regression – First Stage

                                     T IME P ERIOD : 2001-2006                           Time Period: 2007-2011
                            (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)         (8)
 Saiz Elasticity         -0.099∗∗∗     -0.088∗∗∗                              0.055∗∗∗    0.048∗∗∗
 Measure                  (0.015)       (0.016)                                (0.012)     (0.012)

 Wharton Regulation                                0.124∗∗∗      0.126∗∗∗                            -0.071∗∗∗    -0.088∗∗∗
 Index                                              (0.017)       (0.016)                             (0.017)      (0.015)

 Controls                                  X                        X                        X                       X
 R-squared                 0.284         0.315       0.252         0.357       0.130       0.260       0.120        0.334
 N                          112           112         112           112         112         112         112          112

Note: Table shows results from the first-stage instrumental variable regression 1. The unit of observation is an MSA, the
dependent variable is house price growth over 2001-2006 in columns 1 - 4, and house price growth over 2007-2011 in columns
5 - 8. In even columns we also control for the same control variables as in columns 4 - 6 of Table I. For the Saiz Elasticity
Measure, higher values signal an MSA with more elastic housing supply. For the Wharton Regulation Index, lower values
signal an MSA with more elastic housing supply. Robust standard errors are presented in parantheses. Significance levels: ∗
(p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).




                                                              18
        Table A3: Retail Prices vs. House Prices: Zip Code-Level Analysis (Robustness)

                                                   T IME P ERIOD : 2001-2006               T IME P ERIOD : 2007-2011
                                             (1)               (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)
 ∆ House Prices                            -0.170∗          -0.169∗         -0.124     -0.072        -0.082        -0.005
                                           (0.095)          (0.094)        (0.123)    (0.084)       (0.082)       (0.097)

 Homeownership Rate                       -0.120∗∗∗         -0.113∗∗       -0.100∗     0.021         0.044         0.040
                                           (0.046)           (0.050)       (0.053)    (0.030)       (0.032)       (0.033)

 ∆ House Prices                            0.222∗∗∗         0.220∗∗        0.197∗∗    0.123∗        0.157∗∗       0.137∗
 × Homeownership Rate                       (0.081)         (0.091)        (0.096)    (0.071)       (0.078)       (0.077)

 ∆ Unemployment                            0.057∗∗∗         0.057∗∗∗      0.057∗∗∗    -0.014∗        -0.011        -0.013
                                            (0.013)          (0.013)       (0.013)    (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)

 ∆ Wage                                     0.047           0.051∗         0.049∗      0.007         0.003         0.008
                                           (0.029)          (0.030)        (0.030)    (0.025)       (0.025)       (0.025)

 ∆ Share Retail Employment                 -0.241           -0.244         -0.251      0.078         0.098         0.142
                                           (0.295)          (0.297)        (0.298)    (0.216)       (0.213)       (0.219)

 ∆ Share Nontradable Employment             0.085            0.091          0.094      0.037         0.025         0.018
                                           (0.122)          (0.123)        (0.124)    (0.101)       (0.102)       (0.103)

 ∆ Share Construction Employment          -0.184∗∗∗         -0.190∗∗      -0.199∗∗     0.114         0.127         0.110
                                           (0.071)           (0.076)       (0.078)    (0.076)       (0.078)       (0.079)

 Population Density                         0.001            0.001          0.001     -0.000         0.000         0.001
                                           (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.002)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)

 ∆ House Prices                            -0.002            -0.002         -0.002     0.002         0.003         0.005
 × Population Density                      (0.003)          (0.003)        (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)

 Share below 35 years                      -0.002∗∗         -0.002∗∗        -0.002     -0.000        -0.000        -0.000
                                            (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)

 ∆ House Prices                            0.003∗           0.003∗          0.003      0.000         0.000         -0.000
 × Share below 35 years                    (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.002)    (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)

 Median Income                                              -0.000         -0.000                   -0.000∗      -0.000∗∗
                                                            (0.000)        (0.000)                  (0.000)       (0.000)

 ∆ House Prices                                              0.000          -0.000                  -0.000        -0.001∗
 × Median Income                                            (0.000)        (0.001)                  (0.000)       (0.000)

 Share Highschool or Less                                                   0.000                                  -0.000
                                                                           (0.000)                                (0.000)

 ∆ House Prices                                                             -0.001                                -0.001∗
 × Share Highschool or Less                                                (0.001)                                (0.001)

 Share White                                                                -0.011                                 0.005
                                                                           (0.023)                                (0.018)

 ∆ House Prices                                                             0.028                                  0.067
 × Share White                                                             (0.046)                                (0.042)
 R-squared                                  0.084            0.082          0.078      0.046         0.049         0.059
 N                                           708              708            708        846           846           846

Note: Table shows results from regression 3. The unit of observation is a zip code, the dependent variable is the change in
retail prices in 2001-2006 in columns 1 - 3, and the change in retail prices in 2007-2011 in columns 4 - 6. Columns 1 and 4
correspond to columns 4 and 8 in Table II, respectively. Median income is measured in $1,000. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

                                                              19
           Table A4: E NTRY – ∆ G ROCERY R ETAIL E STABLISHMENTS                         PER   1000    PEOPLE


                                                           PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001-2006
                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
 ∆ House Prices                     0.070*                                                     0.152**              0.059
                                    (0.037)                                                    (0.069)             (0.052)

 Saiz Elasticity                                       -0.014**                                 0.008
                                                        (0.006)                                (0.013)

 Wharton Regulation                                                          0.017                                  0.018
                                                                            (0.011)                                (0.026)

 ∆ House Prices ×                                                                              -0.058
 Saiz Elasticity                                                                               (0.040)

 ∆ House Prices ×                                                                                                   -0.020
 Wharton Regulation                                                                                                (0.054)
 N                                    121                109                 109                 109                109


                                                          PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011

                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
 ∆ House Prices                      -0.027                                                     -0.004              -0.023
                                    (0.027)                                                    (0.089)             (0.046)

 Saiz Elasticity                                         0.005                                  0.004
                                                        (0.005)                                (0.011)

 Wharton Regulation                                                          0.002                                  0.004
                                                                            (0.007)                                (0.016)

 ∆ House Prices ×                                                                              -0.019
 Saiz Elasticity                                                                               (0.043)

 ∆ House Prices ×                                                                                                   0.019
 Wharton Regulation                                                                                                (0.071)
 N                                    124                111                 111                 111                111

Note: Table shows results from an OLS regression, where the dependent variable is change in the number of retail establish-
ments per 1,000 inhabitants over the periods 2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B). The unit of observation is an MSA.
Robust standard errors are presented in parantheses. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).




                                                            20
                                               Table A5: Instrumental Variables Analysis - Robustness Checks

                                                                    D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES

                                   (1)                    (2)                      (3)                  (4)                (5)                   (6)                 (7)
                                                     PANEL A: I NSTRUMENT WITH S AIZ S UPPLY E LASTICITY; 2001 - 2006
      ∆ House Prices             0.164∗∗               0.171∗∗∗                 0.174∗∗∗             0.188∗∗∗           0.169∗∗∗              0.195∗∗∗            0.170∗∗
                                 (0.083)                (0.066)                  (0.057)              (0.064)            (0.064)               (0.069)            (0.070)

                                                     PANEL B: I NSTRUMENT WITH S AIZ S UPPLY E LASTICITY; 2007 - 2011
      ∆ House Prices            0.160∗∗∗                0.142∗                   0.101∗∗             0.145∗∗∗           0.159∗∗∗               0.139∗             0.131∗∗∗
                                 (0.053)                (0.077)                  (0.051)              (0.053)            (0.054)               (0.074)             (0.045)

                                                 PANEL C: I NSTRUMENT WITH W HARTON R EGULATION I NDEX ; 2001 - 2006
      ∆ House Prices            0.261∗∗∗               0.274∗∗∗                 0.223∗∗∗             0.235∗∗∗           0.266∗∗∗              0.274∗∗∗            0.267∗∗∗
                                 (0.066)                (0.063)                  (0.045)              (0.052)            (0.063)               (0.057)             (0.068)
21




                                                 PANEL D: I NSTRUMENT WITH W HARTON R EGULATION I NDEX ; 2007 - 2011
      ∆ House Prices            0.167∗∗∗                0.196∗∗                 0.147∗∗∗             0.161∗∗∗           0.185∗∗               0.181∗∗             0.175∗∗∗
                                 (0.045)                (0.091)                  (0.043)              (0.041)           (0.072)               (0.071)              (0.045)


      Controls                      X                      X                        X                   X                  X                     X                   X

      Robustness             Coast Dummy           4 Census Region         9 Census Division         Exclude       Exclude outliers        Drop bubble          Non-linear
                                                     Fixed Effects            Fixed Effects           sales         in house price            states           instruments
                                                                                                                       changes             (CA, AZ, FL)            in IV

     Note: Table shows results from regression 2. The unit of observation is an MSA, the dependent variable is the change in retail prices in 2001-2006 (Panels A and C) and
     2007-2011 (Panels B and D). In Panels A and B we instrument for the change in house prices using the housing supply elasticity measure provided by Saiz (2010); in
     Panels C and D we instrument for house price changes using the Wharton Regulation Index described in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008). All specifications control
     for changes in the unemployment rate, changes in wages, and changes in the employment share in the construction, non-tradable, and grocery retail sector. Column 1
     includes a coast dummy. Column 2 includes fixed effects for four census regions. Column 3 includes fixed effects for nine census divisions. Column 4 excludes sales prices
     in the construction of the retail price index. Column 5 excludes those MSAs with the 5% largest and smallest house price changes over the period. Column 6 excludes
     observations from the “bubble states” Arizona, California and Florida. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. In column 7 we use the measure of supply elasticity as well
     as the measure squared and cubed as instrumental variables. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                                                               Table A6: Quarter-by-Quarter Analysis

                                                                              MSA L EVEL                                                   Z IP C ODE L EVEL
                                                             OLS                 IV (S AIZ )      IV (W HARTON )                                    OLS
                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)                 (4)                  (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
     log(House Prices)                            0.047∗∗∗         0.051∗∗∗       0.108∗∗∗            0.156∗∗∗            0.010∗∗∗       0.017∗∗          -0.019∗       -0.018
                                                   (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.029)              (0.035)             (0.001)        (0.005)         (0.011)       (0.011)

     Unemployment Rate                                              0.068         0.283∗∗             0.443∗∗∗                             0.004                         0.004
                                                                   (0.094)        (0.140)              (0.151)                            (0.004)                       (0.004)

     Average Weekly Wage                                           -0.007         -0.010                -0.019                             0.004                         0.003
                                                                   (0.025)        (0.026)              (0.027)                            (0.008)                       (0.008)

     Share Grocery Retail Employment                                0.167         0.180∗                0.157                              0.003                        -0.002
                                                                   (0.110)        (0.104)              (0.107)                            (0.089)                       (0.089)

     Share Nontradable Employment                                  -0.151∗∗      -0.171∗∗∗             -0.172∗∗                            0.008                         0.015
                                                                    (0.061)       (0.065)               (0.067)                           (0.054)                       (0.054)
22




     Share Construction Employment                                 -0.080∗∗       -0.116∗∗            -0.139∗∗∗                            -0.019                        -0.032
                                                                    (0.041)        (0.050)             (0.053)                            (0.030)                       (0.031)

     log(House Prices)                                                                                                                                  0.052∗∗∗       0.053∗∗∗
     × Homeownership Rate                                                                                                                                (0.017)        (0.017)

     Fixed Effects                                Q, MSA           Q, MSA         Q, MSA              Q, MSA               Q, Zip         Q, Zip          Q, Zip        Q, Zip
     N                                              5,546           5,546          4,959                4,959              43,914         43,914          43,914        43,914

     Note: Table shows results from regression A3. The unit of observation is an MSA-quarter in columns 1 - 4, and a zip code-quarter in columns 5 - 8. The dependent
     variable is the log of retail prices. Columns 3 and 4 present results from an instrumental variables regression; we instrument for log(House Prices) with the interaction of
     the MSA-specific housing supply elasticity measures provided by Saiz (2010) and Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008), respectively, with the seasonally-adjusted OFHEO
     national house price index. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level in columns 1 - 4, and the zip code level in columns 5 - 8. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗
     (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                             Table A7: Effect of House Prices on Shopping Behavior - Disaggregated by Product Category

      D EPENDENT VARIABLE :                  LOG (E XPENDITURE )                      S HARE "D EAL "                          S HARE G ENERIC                        S HARE C OUPON
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)            (6)         (7)           (8)           (9)       (10)          (11)         (12)
      log(House Prices)              -0.025        -0.021     0.264∗∗∗      -0.007         -0.002         0.030       0.004         0.003         0.014      0.002         0.000        0.006
                                     (0.017)       (0.017)     (0.079)     (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.023)     (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.015)    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.013)

      1 Homeowner                    -0.202∗∗     -0.195∗∗    -0.233∗∗∗   0.063∗∗        0.063∗∗         0.053∗     0.031∗∗        0.030∗∗        0.024    0.049∗∗∗      0.048∗∗∗      0.033∗∗
                                      (0.083)      (0.083)     (0.086)    (0.027)        (0.027)         (0.028)    (0.015)        (0.015)       (0.016)    (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.013)

      log(House Prices)              0.046∗∗∗     0.044∗∗∗    0.050∗∗∗    -0.012∗∗       -0.012∗∗        -0.010∗     -0.006∗       -0.006∗        -0.004   -0.009∗∗∗     -0.009∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗
      ×1 Homeowner                    (0.017)      (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.006)     (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)     (0.003)

      Unemployment Rate                           0.253∗∗∗    0.277∗∗∗                   0.098∗∗∗       0.094∗∗∗                  -0.039∗∗    -0.041∗∗                   -0.043∗∗∗   -0.044∗∗∗
                                                   (0.090)     (0.090)                    (0.024)        (0.024)                   (0.016)     (0.016)                    (0.013)     (0.013)

      Average Weekly Wage                          0.030∗      0.032∗                    -0.012∗∗∗      -0.013∗∗∗                   -0.001        -0.001                   -0.004      -0.004∗
                                                   (0.017)     (0.017)                    (0.004)        (0.004)                   (0.003)       (0.003)                  (0.002)      (0.002)

      Share Grocery Retail                          0.011       0.036                    -0.058∗∗       -0.062∗∗                    -0.019        -0.020                   0.018        0.017
      Employment                                   (0.092)     (0.092)                    (0.025)        (0.025)                   (0.017)       (0.017)                  (0.013)      (0.013)
23




      Share Nontradable                            0.107∗∗     0.098∗                    0.042∗∗∗       0.042∗∗∗                    0.013         0.013                    -0.001       -0.000
      Employment                                   (0.052)     (0.052)                    (0.014)        (0.014)                   (0.010)       (0.009)                  (0.007)      (0.007)

      Share Construction                          0.218∗∗∗    0.214∗∗∗                    -0.007         -0.009                   -0.022∗∗    -0.023∗∗                    -0.013∗       -0.012
      Employment                                   (0.054)     (0.054)                    (0.014)        (0.014)                   (0.010)     (0.010)                    (0.007)      (0.007)

      Product Category ×                X            X             X         X              X              X           X             X
      Quarter Fixed Effects

      Household × Zip Code FE           X            X             X         X              X              X           X             X
      R-squared                       0.560         0.560       0.560       0.521          0.521          0.521       0.283         0.283       0.283        0.351         0.351       0.351
      ȳ                              3.902         3.902       3.902       0.265          0.265          0.265       0.185         0.185       0.185        0.070         0.070       0.070
      N                             7,520,617     7,520,617   7,520,617   7,520,617      7,520,617      7,520,617   7,520,617     7,520,617   7,520,617    7,520,617     7,520,617   7,520,617

     Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The unit of observation is a household-quarter-product category, the sample is 2004 to 2011. The dependent variables are the log of
     total household expenditure (columns 1 and 2), the expenditure share of products that are on sale (columns 3 and 4), the expenditure share of generic products (columns 5 and
     6), and the expenditure share of products purchased with a coupon (columns 7 and 8). House prices are measured at the zip code level. All specifications include household
     × zip code fixed effects and product category × quarter fixed effects. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 we also include additional control variables. Each observation is weighted by
     the household sampling weight and the expenditure share of the product category in the household’s total expenditure. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × quarter
     level. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).
                          Table A8: Effect of House Prices on Shopping Behavior - Include MSA × Quarter Fixed Effects

      D EPENDENT VARIABLE :                            LOG (E XPENDITURE )               S HARE "D EAL "              S HARE G ENERIC                S HARE C OUPON
                                                        (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
      log(House Prices)                                -0.017        0.371∗∗∗        0.027∗∗∗        0.060∗∗         0.002          -0.024∗       0.012∗∗∗        0.028∗
                                                      (0.021)         (0.077)         (0.007)        (0.024)        (0.004)         (0.014)        (0.004)        (0.015)

      1 Homeowner                                    -0.188∗∗        -0.224∗∗∗       0.081∗∗∗        0.063∗∗        0.040∗∗∗       0.037∗∗        0.050∗∗∗        0.029∗∗
                                                      (0.077)         (0.080)         (0.027)        (0.028)         (0.014)       (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.014)

      log(House Prices)                              0.043∗∗∗        0.049∗∗∗        -0.016∗∗∗       -0.013∗∗      -0.008∗∗∗       -0.007∗∗       -0.009∗∗∗       -0.005∗
      ×1 Homeowner                                    (0.015)         (0.016)         (0.005)         (0.006)       (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)

      MSA × Quarter Fixed Effects                        X              X                X              X              X              X               X              X

      Household × Zip Code Fixed Effects                 X              X                X              X              X              X               X              X

      Household Characteristics                          ·              X                ·              X               ·             X               ·              X
      × log(House Price)
24




      R-squared                                       0.728           0.729            0.876          0.876          0.747          0.748           0.776          0.776
      ȳ                                              6.698           6.698            0.277          0.277          0.176          0.176           0.077          0.077
      N                                              839,176         839,176          839,176        839,176        839,176        839,176         839,176        839,176

     Note: Table shows results from regression 4. The unit of observation is a household-quarter, the sample is 2004 to 2011. The dependent variables are the log of total
     household expenditure (columns 1-2), the expenditure share of products that are on sale (columns 3-4), the expenditure share of generic products (columns 5-6), and the
     expenditure share of products purchased with a coupon (columns 7-8). House prices are measured at the zip code level. All specifications include household × zip code
     fixed effects, and MSA × quarter fixed effects. In columns 2, 4, 6, and 8, we additionally control for the following household characteristics interacted with log house
     prices: household income, age of the head of the household, race of head of household, marital status of head of household, education level of head of household. Each
     observation is weighted by the household sampling weight. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × quarter level. Significance levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗
     (p<0.01).
               Table A9: Retail Prices vs. House Prices – Fixed Weights Across Time

                                                              PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001 - 2006
                                                            D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                               OLS       IV Saiz     IV Wharton         OLS       IV Saiz     IV Wharton
                                               (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
∆ House Prices                               0.056∗∗∗    0.144∗∗∗      0.239∗∗∗       0.066∗∗∗    0.167∗∗∗      0.239∗∗∗
                                              (0.021)     (0.042)       (0.052)        (0.024)     (0.057)       (0.051)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                                                      -0.140       0.052         0.132
                                                                                       (0.365)     (0.384)       (0.398)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                                          0.092      -0.047        -0.091
                                                                                       (0.185)     (0.179)       (0.179)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                                        -0.103      -0.017         0.007
                                                                                       (0.109)     (0.129)       (0.145)

∆ Unemployment                                                                        0.041∗∗     0.080∗∗∗      0.102∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.020)      (0.031)       (0.029)

∆ Wage                                                                                  0.062       0.049         0.010
                                                                                       (0.059)     (0.063)       (0.065)
Number of Observations                         125          112           112           125          112           112


                                                               PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011
                                                            D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                               OLS       IV Saiz     IV Wharton         OLS       IV Saiz     IV Wharton
                                               (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
∆ House Prices                               0.079∗∗∗    0.105∗∗       0.115∗∗∗       0.081∗∗∗    0.132∗∗∗      0.136∗∗∗
                                              (0.014)    (0.042)        (0.045)        (0.017)     (0.050)       (0.039)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                                                      -0.052       0.105         0.102
                                                                                       (0.265)     (0.257)       (0.261)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                                          0.046      -0.109        -0.110
                                                                                       (0.154)     (0.158)       (0.158)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                                        -0.012      -0.105        -0.111
                                                                                       (0.131)     (0.142)       (0.142)

∆ Unemployment                                                                         -0.003       0.013         0.014
                                                                                       (0.013)     (0.015)       (0.013)

∆ Wage                                                                                 -0.036      -0.067        -0.068
                                                                                       (0.046)     (0.048)       (0.048)
Number of observations                         126          112           112           126          112           112

Note: Table shows results from the following OLS regression: ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice)m + γXm + ε z in
columns 1 and 4, and from instrumental variables regression 2 in the other columns. The retail price index is constructed
using regional expenditure weights that are fixed over time. The unit of observation is an MSA, the dependent variable is the
change in retail prices in 2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B). We instrument for the change in house prices using
measures of the housing supply elasticity provided by Saiz (2010) in columns 2 and 5, and the Wharton Regulation Index
described in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) in columns 3 and 6. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Significance
levels: ∗ (p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

                                                             25
             Table A10: Retail Prices vs. House Prices – Fixed Weights Across Space

                                                             PANEL A: T IME P ERIOD : 2001 - 2006
                                                           D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                              OLS        IV Saiz     IV Wharton        OLS       IV Saiz    IV Wharton
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
∆ House Prices                               0.056∗∗    0.134∗∗∗       0.227∗∗∗      0.068∗∗∗    0.160∗∗      0.234∗∗∗
                                             (0.022)     (0.049)        (0.051)       (0.024)    (0.065)       (0.049)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                                                      -0.142     0.043         0.125
                                                                                      (0.372)    (0.381)       (0.395)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                                         0.154      -0.001        -0.047
                                                                                      (0.197)    (0.181)       (0.184)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                                        -0.076     0.003         0.028
                                                                                      (0.101)    (0.120)       (0.134)

∆ Unemployment                                                                        0.037∗     0.072∗∗      0.095∗∗∗
                                                                                      (0.019)    (0.030)       (0.027)

∆ Wage                                                                                 0.017      0.012         -0.028
                                                                                      (0.058)    (0.062)       (0.060)
Number of Observations                         125         112           112            125        112           112


                                                              PANEL B: T IME P ERIOD : 2007 - 2011
                                                           D EPENDENT VARIABLE : ∆ R ETAIL P RICES
                                              OLS        IV Saiz     IV Wharton        OLS       IV Saiz    IV Wharton
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
∆ House Prices                              0.072∗∗∗     0.078∗        0.133∗∗∗      0.078∗∗∗    0.091∗       0.141∗∗∗
                                             (0.014)     (0.040)        (0.046)       (0.017)    (0.048)       (0.042)

∆ Share Grocery Retail Employment                                                      -0.294     -0.046        -0.081
                                                                                      (0.295)    (0.273)       (0.280)

∆ Share Nontradable Employment                                                         0.129      -0.056        -0.068
                                                                                      (0.183)    (0.165)       (0.169)

∆ Share Construction Employment                                                        0.028      0.031         -0.044
                                                                                      (0.120)    (0.132)       (0.136)

∆ Unemployment                                                                         0.004      0.013        0.024∗
                                                                                      (0.012)    (0.015)       (0.014)

∆ Wage                                                                                 -0.039     -0.042        -0.057
                                                                                      (0.044)    (0.045)       (0.046)
Number of observations                         126         112           112            126        112           112

Note: Table shows results from the following OLS regression: ∆log( RetailPrice)m = β∆log( HousePrice)m + γXm + ε z in
columns 1 and 4, and from instrumental variables regression 2 in the other columns. The retail price index is constructed
using fixed national expenditure weights. The unit of observation is an MSA, the dependent variable is the change in retail
prices in 2001-2006 (Panel A) and 2007-2011 (Panel B). We instrument for the change in house prices using measures of
the housing supply elasticity provided by Saiz (2010) in columns 2 and 5, and the Wharton Regulation Index described
in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) in columns 3 and 6. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Significance levels: ∗
(p<0.10), ∗∗ (p<0.05), ∗∗∗ (p<0.01).

                                                            26
