THE REAL EFFECTS OF CAPITAL CONTROLS:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM A POLICY EXPERIMENT
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Fabio Kanczuk
WORKING PAPER 20726

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE REAL EFFECTS OF CAPITAL CONTROLS:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE FROM A POLICY EXPERIMENT
Laura Alfaro
Anusha Chari
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 20726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20726

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014, Revised June 2017

Previously circulated as "The Real Effects of Capital Control Taxes: Firm-Level Evidence from a
Policy Experiment." We thank George Alessandria, Alessandra Bonfiglioli, Robin Greenwood,
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,Nicolas Magud, Elias Papaioannou, James Kalori, Seppo Pynnonen, Adi
Sunderam, participants at the NBER-CBRT pre-conference and conference on Monetary Policy
and Financial Stability, the Barcelona GSE-Summer Forum-International Capital Flows
Conference, the Exchange Rates and External Adjustment Conference in Zurich, LACEA, the
Indian Ministry of Finance’s NIPFP-DEA conference, AEA Meetings-San Francisco and seminar
participants at the IMF, UNC-Chapel Hill, University of Sao Paulo-FEA, Harvard- DRCLAS for
helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Hayley Pallan, Elizabeth Meyer and Hilary
White for excellent research assistance and HBS for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Laura Alfaro, Anusha Chari, and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Real Effects of Capital Controls: Firm-Level Evidence from a Policy Experiment
Laura Alfaro, Anusha Chari, and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 20726
December 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. F3,F4,G11,G15,L2
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the effects of capital controls on firm-level stock returns and real investment
using data from Brazil. On average, there is a statistically significant drop in cumulative
abnormal returns consistent with an increase in the cost of capital for Brazilian firms following
capital control announcements. Large firms and the largest exporting firms appear less negatively
affected compared to external-finance-dependent firms, and capital controls on equity inflows
have a more negative announcement effect on equity returns than those on debt inflows. Overall,
the findings have implications for macro-finance models that abstract from heterogeneity at the
firm level to examine the optimality of capital control taxation.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br

1. Introduction
The massive surge of foreign capital to emerging markets in the aftermath of the global
financial crisis of 2008–2009 has led to a renewed debate about the merits of the free flow of
international capital. Given the very low interest rates in developed economies, investors were
attracted to the higher rates in Brazil, Chile, Taiwan, Thailand, South Korea, and many other
emerging markets (Fratzscher 2012). To stem the flow of capital and manage the attendant risks
several emerging markets imposed taxes or controls to curb inflows of foreign capital.1 Further,
in December of 2012, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) released an official statement
endorsing a limited use of capital controls (IMF 2012).
The case for capital controls primarily rests on macro-prudential measures designed to
mitigate systemic risk as well as the volatility of foreign capital inflows. However, controls can
also have an implicitly protectionist or mercantilist motive to maintain persistent currency
undervaluation (Pasricha, 2017; Jeanne, Subrahmanian and Williamson, 2012; Magud, Reinhart,
and Rogoff, 2011; Magud and Reinhart, 2007). Policy makers from emerging Asia and Latin
America expressed concerns that massive foreign capital inflows can lead to an appreciation of
the exchange rate and loss of competitiveness, with potentially lasting effects on the export
sector.
Our paper is the first to provide direct empirical evidence of the costs of controls on
foreign capital inflows using firm-level data from Brazil seen as a poster child for the recent
policy changes. Previous research shows that a variety of barriers can segment international
capital markets (Stulz 2005; Henry 2007). Legal constraints, institutional quality, foreign
ownership restrictions, discriminatory taxes, and transaction costs such as information
asymmetries affect international portfolio choice. The type of international investment barrier we
study in this paper is the effect of discriminatory taxation of foreign investors. The Brazilian

1

According to the governor of Taiwan’s central bank, Perng Fai-Nan “The US printed a lot of money, so there’s a
lot of hot money flowing around. We see hot money in Taiwan and elsewhere in Asia. . . .These short-term capital
flows are disturbing emerging economies.” Similarly, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Raghuram Rajan
warned of the risk of a global market "crash" should foreign investors start bailing out of their risky asset positions
in emerging markets generated by the loose monetary policies of developed economies.

1

Imposto Sobre Operações Financeiras (IOF) constitutes such a discriminatory tax as it
contributes explicitly to the direct costs of foreigners investing in Brazilian financial markets.
Focusing on Brazil has several advantages. First, Brazil applied a series of capital
controls measures that ranged across debt, equity and derivative instruments between 2008-2013.
We have detailed information about the policy changes as they relate to specific instruments and
magnitudes. Second, we have a precise set of announcement dates that facilitate a clean
identification strategy to quantify the market’s reaction to the capital control announcements.
Third, stock market data and comprehensive firm-level financial statement data provide us with a
rich and unique setting to examine the impact of these policy changes on Brazilian firms.
The data offer valuable cross-sectional variation to test for (a) cost of capital and
exchange rate effects, and (b) the impact of external finance dependence and credit constraints in
the aftermath of the controls. Importantly, firm-level data have the advantage that they can shed
light on the channels through which capital controls affect Brazilian firms. Fourth, we have
access to proprietary export data from the Brazilian export authority (Secex) for the listed
Brazilian firms. The firm-level export data allow us to examine both the firm-level response to
capital flows as well as the impact of capital controls on the competitiveness of exporting firms.
Theoretically, when a country imposes capital controls taxes, expected returns on the
risky assets subject to the tax would increase. Capital controls impose investment barriers that
segment international capital markets, creating a price wedge that drives up the expected return
relative to the benchmark return under full integration (Stulz 1981). Further, capital controls can
affect the cost of external finance and therefore firms that rely on external finance to fund their
investment opportunities (Rajan and Zingales 1998). Using firm-level data, we also test whether
external finance dependent firms (or industries) in Brazil are more adversely affected by capital
controls. In particular, we conduct an event-study analysis using capital control announcement
dates together with stock prices and firm-level data from Datastream, Worldscope, and Secex.
The key results are as follows. First, consistent with an increase in expected returns or the
cost of capital, on average, there is a significant decline in cumulative abnormal returns for
Brazilian firms following the imposition of capital controls on foreign portfolio inflows in 2008–
2009. Evidence about the mechanism by which the cost of capital rises suggests that on average

2

market interest rates increase significantly in the aftermath of the controls. It is worth noting that
these interest rates increase against the backdrop of quantitative easing in the US and other
developed countries that put downward pressure on the world interest rate. We also use imputed
cost of capital measures to provide corroborating evidence that the cost of capital goes up
significantly following capital control announcements.
Second, the data suggest that large firms are less affected by the controls, perhaps
consistent with large-firm access to internal capital markets or alternative sources of finance.
Third, we find that exporting firms are less adversely affected by controls. The coefficient
estimates suggest that the larger exporting firms, in particular, are somewhat shielded. Fourth,
we find that external-finance dependent firms that are more dependent are more adversely
affected by the capital controls.
Fifth, controls on debt flows are associated with less negative returns, suggesting that the
market views equity and debt flows as different. Historically, Brazil experimented with the IOF
tax exclusively on debt flows, extending the purview to include equity instruments was done for
the very first time in October 2009 (see Goldfajn and Minella 2007). The market’s reaction may,
therefore, be capturing the element of surprise or unexpected nature of the policy change to
include equity flows.
Earlier studies primarily focused on foreign ownership restrictions where either a subset
of domestic assets or certain share classes are made available to foreign investors (Chari and
Henry 2004, 2008; Henry 2007). In contrast, our paper provides systematic evidence on the
impact of discriminatory taxation of foreign investors via the IOF on the stock market valuation
of Brazilian firms. A related paper, Forbes, Fratzscher, Kostka, and Straub (2016), shows that an
increase in Brazil’s tax on foreign investment in bonds causes investors to significantly decrease
their portfolio allocations to Brazil in both bonds and equities. Investors simultaneously decrease
allocations to countries viewed as more likely to use capital controls. Similarly, Forbes (2007a)
studies the impact of Chilean Encaje experiment with unremunerated reserve requirements in the
1990s on the financial constraints that small, traded firms face. (See also Forbes 2007b.)
More generally, a growing theoretical macro literature posits the benefits of capital
controls albeit focusing exclusively on debt rather than equity to motivate the model frameworks

3

(Bianchi and Mendoza 2010, Farhi and Werning 2014, Korinek 2010). On the empirical front,
Klein (2012) casts doubts about assumptions behind recent calls for a greater use of episodic
controls on capital inflows and finds, with a few exceptions, there is little evidence of the
efficacy of capital controls.
Similarly, contrary to prescriptions put forth in the recent theoretical macro literature,
Fernandez, Rebucci, and Uribe (2013) do not find evidence of capital controls implemented as
macro-prudential tools in the period 2005-2011. In a related paper, Glick, Guo and Hutchison
(2006) find that countries with liberalized capital accounts experience a lower likelihood of
currency crises. Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2005) find that historical data bear out the
constraints implied by the trilemma between exchange rate stability, monetary policy autonomy
and capital mobility.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the macroeconomic conditions in
Brazil in the 2000s and provides information about the recent use of capital controls measures.
Section 3 provides a brief theoretical motivation and details about the event study methodology.
Section 4 describes the data and summary statistics. Section 5 presents the results and additional
tests to ensure the robustness of our findings. Section 6 concludes.

2. Background: Brazil in the 2000s and the Recent Use of Capital Control Taxes
Except for a brief recession during the last two-quarters of 2008, caused by the global
financial crisis, the Brazilian economy expanded throughout the 2000s due to a commodity
exports and consumer boom. The impact of the financial crisis was short lived, and Brazil’s
economy swiftly returned to growth by the second quarter of 2009. The commodity boom, paired
with increased inflows of foreign capital, placed upward pressure on the Brazilian currency, the
Real.2 In 2008, the Real appreciated by 50% to 1.6 R$/US$ from a low of 3.1 R$/US$ in 2004.3
In an attempt to prevent an excessive inflow of foreign capital, stabilize the exchange
rate, and reduce the upward trend in inflation, Brazil’s government adopted a system of capital
2

The International Institute of Finance estimated that foreign capital inflows increased from US$11.2bn in 2006 to
US$79.5bn in the following year. Brazil emerged as the biggest recipient of foreign capital in Latin America and the
second highest among emerging markets after China.
3
Banco Central Do Brasil accessed November 29, 2012.

4

controls on inflows from abroad. In March 2008, the government established the Imposto Sobre
Operações Financeiras (IOF), a financial transaction tax of 1.5% placed on incoming foreign
fixed-income investments effectively immediately, as a means of quelling the flow of capital into
the economy.
Note that the IOF is a tax that can be levied on a range of financial operations including
foreign credit, foreign exchange, securities, and so on. Also, it is a tax over which the executive
branch has very broad powers regarding triggering events and applicable rates.4 Under the
Brazilian Constitution, the National Congress by law has to approve most tax increases and
changes usually take effect after ninety days. However, the IOF is an exception— a “policy
decree” can modify the tax that ranks below a law and does not require Congressional
ratification. On a discretionary basis, the Finance Ministry can overnight change the IOF tax that
becomes effective immediately from its enactment date. Using data from investor interviews,
Forbes, Fratzscher, Kostka, and Straub (2016) document that investors did not anticipate the
controls. Appendix A provides specific details about the IOF tax legislation.
By October of 2008, the wide-reaching effects of the international financial crisis were
becoming clear. Net foreign capital inflows dropped from US$88.3 billion in 2007 to US$28.3
billion in 2008. In particular, net foreign portfolio investments of debt and equity fell from
US$48.1 billion in 2007 to –US$0.77 billion in 2008. To stem the outflow of investment the
government eliminated the IOF.
However, Brazil recovered quickly from the economic downturn, and during the first
nine months of 2009, approximately US$20 billion of primarily US-led foreign investments
entered the Brazilian equities market.5 With the resumption of massive capital inflows, capital
controls were imposed again as early as February of 2009. On October 20, 2009, Brazilian
authorities expanded the IOF tax to a 2% rate on fixed income, in addition to portfolio and equity
investments. The IOF did not apply to inflows of direct investment.
Since its re-introduction in October of 2009, the IOF tax was repeatedly raised and
expanded to include other forms of investments by the Brazilian government to control the influx
4

See www.receita.fazenda.gov.br/aliquotas/impcresegcamb.htm.
“Brazil Increases Tax on Foreign Exchange Transactions Related to Foreign Investments in the Financial and
Capital Markets,” Memorandum, Simpson Thatcher & Bartlet LLP, October 22, 2009.
5

5

of foreign capital (see Table 1 for a detailed list). By late 2010, the Real continued to appreciate,
emerging as one of the strongest performing currencies in the world. On October 5, 2010, the
IOF on fixed-income instruments was raised to 4%; less than two weeks later the tax was raised
to 6%.
In early 2011, the exchange rate remained at R$1.6 against the U.S. dollar, and the blame
for Brazil’s currency appreciation was targeted on incoming foreign capital originating in
developed markets with US flows accounting for the largest fraction of these flows. The
government decided to raise the IOF to 6% on foreign loans with a minimum maturity of up to
360 days in March 2011. By early April, the IOF was extended to loans with a maturity of up to
two years. The increase in tax rate represented a shift away from a dependency on high interest
rates to combat the growing levels of inflation in Brazil. In an attempt to depreciate the value of
the Real, the Central Bank also aggressively cut its overnight rate (Selic). Over a ten-month
period, the Selic rate was cut eight consecutive times, from 12.5% in late August 2011 to 8% in
July 2012.6
In early December 2011, however, the 2% IOF tax on equities was removed. In the first
week of June 2013, Brazil removed the tax on foreign investments in local debt and the 1% tax
charged currency derivatives.7,8 On July 1st, the government further eliminated reserve
requirements on short dollar positions held by local banks.9
Details about the implementation procedure for the IOF tax (Appendix A) suggest that
the capital controls announcements surprised most market participants. A candidate explanation
for the element of surprise is also that the set of instruments that were included under the
umbrella of capital controls was extended to equity and other instruments previously not been
subject to them. Previous experiments were restricted to debt instruments. Now the purview was
broadened to include equity, ADRs, derivative contracts and other instruments. Moreover, the

6

Chamon and Garcia (2016) show that the while controls were effective in partially segmenting the Brazilian
financial market from the international markets, they do not seem to have deterred the appreciation of the real when
capital inflows were strong.
7
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-13/brazil-dismantles-capital-control-as-real-drops-to-four-yearlow.html.
8
http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/06/05/brazil-tax-iof-idUSL1N0EG23E20130605.
9
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-06-25/brazil-eliminates-reserve-requirement-on-bets-against-thedollar.html.

6

rates were changed in an ad hoc fashion. It is possible that after the first controls had been
announced in March 2008, the market might have anticipated that the economy was in a new
capital controls regime. However, these controls were quickly removed in light of the Lehman
collapse and the global financial crisis.10 Subsequently the controls were reintroduced in October
2009 and implemented with a widening reach in the two and a half years that followed.
It is nevertheless important to acknowledge that any policy change that results in winners
and losers would be subject to media attention as various constituents in a democracy express
their views about an impending change or trend in policy direction. If capital controls were
expected to drive up the cost of capital, external finance dependent firms and smaller firms
would stand to lose and be opposed to the controls. Similarly, if there was an unprecedented
move to implement controls on equity flows, firms listed on the stock market or stock exchange
executives may voice their opposition to the controls. For example, the decision to place capital
controls on incoming foreign investments was not unanimously supported. Edemir Pinto, chief
executive of the Brazilian Stock Exchange, called on the government to remove some of the
existing capital controls because the IOF was damaging the stock market. Over half of the capital
raised by Brazilian companies from IPOs originated from foreign investors, and Pinto claimed
the tax on financial transactions was choking foreign inflows of capital.11
On the other hand, as a result of the massive capital inflows the constituent firms most
likely to be hurt by a Real appreciation are exporters whose competitiveness would be adversely
affected in world markets. Exporting firms would, therefore, stand to gain if the implementation
of capital controls led to a reversal of the Real appreciation. Also note that the IOF tax rate is
zero on foreign exchange transactions related to the inflow of revenue derived from the export of
goods and services and outflow of funds derived from the import of goods. To assess whether
different constituents expressed opinions in the media, we undertook a detailed survey of
Brazilian newspapers, business journals, and other press sources. Appendix B presents a sample
of these articles. Please note that most of these articles are in Portuguese.
10

On October 22nd 2008, the IOF tax was removed but this coincides with a massive decline in the US stock market
in the midst of the global financial crisis—the S&P 500 index fell by 6.1% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average
recorded a loss of 514 points, or 5.7%. Given that we do not want this date to confound the results, we exclude this
event date from our estimations. Note that the results remain robust to the inclusion of this event (not reported but
available upon request).
11
Robert Cookson and Joe Leahy, “Call to ease Brazil’s capital controls” Financial Times, October 25, 2011.

7

The next section briefly discusses the theoretical underpinnings and the empirical
methodology.
3. Theoretical Underpinnings and the Event Study Methodology
In addition to offering domestic investors an expanded opportunity set for portfolio
diversification purposes, international investment entails two unique dimensions that are not
particularly relevant in the context of purely domestic investments namely exchange rate risk and
the problem of market segmentation. With respect to market segmentation, international asset
pricing models incorporate capital flow restrictions (for instance, Black 1974; Stulz 1981;
Lessard et al. 1983) and analyze the pricing effects of investment barriers.
Barriers to international investment may take many forms such as exchange and capital
controls by governments, which restrict the access of foreigners to the local capital markets,
reduce their freedom to repatriate capital and dividends, and limit the fraction of a local firm's
equity that foreigners may own (Chari and Henry 2004). Foreign investors may face a lack of
information, expropriation fears, or more importantly subject to discriminatory taxation. It
follows that the existence of such barriers will constrain portfolio choice by affecting the de facto
international investment opportunity set facing investors. Therefore, the resulting optimal
international portfolio allocation could well be very different from that under perfect integration.
In other words, barriers such as discriminatory taxation of foreign investments can segment
international financial markets by constraining portfolio choice.
Given the variety of barriers to international investment, the challenge for researchers is,
therefore, to isolate and quantify important barriers and then investigate their impact on portfolio
behavior and on asset pricing relationships (Solnik, 1974). For instance, Black (1974) and Stulz
(1981) construct models of international asset pricing where it is costly for domestic investors to
hold foreign securities due to discriminatory taxation. Theoretically, these models come closest
to the Brazilian IOF taxes imposed on foreign investors. Note that in the two models the barrier
may represent a transaction cost, information cost, or differential taxation. Both models assume
that proportional taxation can represent this cost and use a two-country, single-period model for
analysis. In the Black model, the tax is on an investor's net holdings (long minus short) of risky

8

foreign assets. Stulz (1981) models taxes on the absolute value of an investor’s long and short
holdings of risky foreign assets. Both models show that the world market portfolio will not be
efficient for any investor in either country. Stulz also shows that under some conditions the
domestic investor's portfolio may altogether preclude a subset of foreign securities.
Appendix C presents a modified outline of the model in Stulz (1981) to help fix ideas. To
motivate our empirical analysis in simple terms we can think of the controls as creating a price
wedge in the expected returns or a tax that drives up the expected return relative to the
benchmark return under full integration. An increase in expected returns will result in falling
stock prices. In mapping the theory to the data, in an event study framework, an increase in
expected returns and a fall in stock prices will be reflected in negative cumulative abnormal
returns (CARs) in the event windows surrounding capital control announcements. The next
subsection describes the methodology.

3.1 An Event Study with Stock Market Data
We use an event-study methodology to examine investors’ reaction to the strengthening
or weakening of capital controls.12 If capital markets are semi-strong form efficient with respect
to public information, stock prices will quickly adjust following an announcement, incorporating
any expected value changes (Andrade et al. 2001).
Event studies in finance and economics examine the reaction of asset (stock) prices to
public news events (see MacKinlay, 1997 for an excellent survey). In addition, examples of tax
applications in event studies are Cutler (1988) to examine the impact of tax reform and stock
prices and Auerbach and Hassett (2007) to evaluate the impact of dividend tax cuts on the value
of the firm.
Briefly, stock prices are present discounted values of expected future cash flows where
the discount rate or cost of capital a firm faces depends on the required rate of return investors
demand. Stock price changes in turn reflect changes in discount rates or expected future cash
flows. Stock prices fall if discount rates rise or expected future cash flows fall. Conversely, stock
prices rise if discount rate fall or expected future cash flows rise. When discount rates and cash
12

For more details, see MacKinlay 1997.

9

flows move in the same direction, they have offsetting effects—whether stock prices rise or falls
in that case depends on which effect dominates.
If markets are semi-strong form efficient, security prices will immediately reflect the
impact of news such as capital controls taxes. Financial market data therefore offer easily
measurable summary statistics that capture the economic impact of news such as changes in
policy on firm value over relatively high frequencies. It is important to note that semi-strong
form market efficiency also implies that there should be no tendency for systematically positive
or negative returns after news events, except to the extent that the events alter assets’
compensated risk exposures. It is traditional to assume that events have no effect on such risk
exposures implying that the price reaction at the time of the news event (after controlling for
other events occurring at the same time) is an estimate of the change in fundamental value of the
asset (the expected present value of its dividends, discounted at a constant rate) implied by the
news release.
In the case of capital controls announcements, the fundamental value of an asset can
change because of either compensated risk exposures (expected returns/discount rates) change as
capital controls taxes impose an international investment barrier (price wedge) or because
dividends/expected future cash flows change. We attempt to capture the effect of capital
controls announcements under the assumption of semi-strong form market efficiency.
Optimally event windows over which news reactions are measured ought to be short so
that other news about events does not contaminate the measurement of the market’s reaction to
the particular news event of interest. Typically, in studies that use daily financial data event
windows range from two-three days to twenty-one days. It is important to note that, the stock
price reaction or the announcement return in the event window is a summary statistic of expected
changes in the present discounted value of cash flows for a given firm over the entire infinite
horizon. The connection between stock prices and news therefore creates a link between the
present and the future (Henry 2013).
The benchmark model or the estimation window (280 to 30 days prior to the event) is
used to measure the “normal” expected return using the CAPM. Abnormal returns capture the
“unexpected news” or announcement effect of the policy change (capital controls). A negative

10

abnormal return implies that either the cost of capital is expected to increase or cash flows
(dividends) are expected to decrease. In either case a negative abnormal return (AR) suggests
that the market interprets the “news” of capital controls as an adverse event. These abnormal
returns are cumulated over the event window to arrive at the cumulative abnormal returns
(CARs).
Our benchmark regression analysis cumulates abnormal returns over a two-day window
while we corroborate the robustness of our results with alternate event window lengths later in
the paper. In particular, we analyze several windows (two, three, five, eleven, and twenty-one
days) but present results for the two-day windows in our main specifications as this is the most
stringent identification test we can apply to capture the announcement effect of the capital
controls with less concern about other confounding news events.
Finally, note that if the controls alter the expected value or variance of the domestic
production activities, the impact on a firm’s stock price will depend on two effects: the expected
cash flow effect and the required rate of return or cost of capital effect. A priori, some firms can
benefit from the protectionist variety of capital controls. It is possible therefore that for these
firms expected cash flows increase more than the rise in the required rate of return such that
stock prices rise, and CARs are positive following the imposition of capital controls. For
example, exporting firms may benefit from protectionist capital controls if the exchange rate
depreciates and expected future cash flows go up.

4. The Data and Summary Statistics
We examine the firm-level abnormal stock return adjusted for clustering around windows
of time surrounding the announcement of the capital control policy. Stock prices are from
Datastream. The market returns used in the benchmark estimations uses the BOVESPA return
(the most commonly quoted index in Brazil). We also analyze different broad indices available
for different sectors or classes of firms such as the IBRA index. As mentioned in the previous
subsection, our estimation period is 280 days before and up until 30 days preceding the event
date. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) sum the abnormal returns over the event window,
with abnormal returns estimated using a market model with Scholes-Williams betas that make

11

adjustments for the noise inherent in daily returns data.13 Given that the some of the events are
close in time making their estimation windows overlapping in time, we also conduct the analysis
using the estimation window prior to the October 2009 event as the benchmark return in the
CAR calculations for all the following events.
Data about firm characteristics are from Worldscope and the sample consists of quarterly
data from Q4 2007–Q4 2013. These include the log of total assets, as a proxy for size and debt to
total assets, and short-term debt to total debt as proxies for liquidity.14 In addition, we construct a
number of measures of external finance dependence beginning with the Rajan and Zingales
(1998) measure using time-series Brazilian data. We use the consumer price index (CPI) index to
deflate the data. The firm-level information is matched to export status and the range of exports
using data from the Brazilian Secretary of External Trade (Secretaria de Comercio Exterior,
Secex). The export range is in U.S. dollars (FOB) and includes firms exporting less than $1
million, between $1 million and $100 million, and more than $100 million. Given that coverage
of foreign sales data is very poor in the widely used Worldscope data, access to the proprietary
Secex data for exports is a key differentiator of our study.

4.1 Summary Statistics
Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the BOVESPA index corresponding to the different
capital controls announcements in Table 1. The table includes the capital controls announcement
dates, whether the control affected inflows of debt or equity, the change in the market return on
the BOVESPA index in the two-day post-announcement period, and a description of the event.15
Table 2 presents firm-level summary statistics for the firms in the BOVESPA index that
includes prices for the more actively traded and better representative stocks of the Brazilian stock
13

In particular, nonsynchronous trading of securities introduces a potentially serious econometric problem of errors
in variables to estimate the market model with daily returns data (Scholes and Williams 1977). To address this
problem, Scholes-Williams betas provide computationally convenient and consistent estimators for the market
model. Using a standardized value of the cumulative abnormal return, we test the null hypothesis that the return is
equal to zero.
14
Data availability varies across firms. In Brazil, with the exception of media firms, all firms are available to foreign
investors. While the government retains some shares in state-owned firms that were privatized such as Petrobras,
foreign investment is allowed in these firms.
15
The table also includes the Decree number associated with the change in the IOF. As mentioned in footnote 9, the
table excludes the removal of controls on October 22nd 2008.

12

market. In the robustness analysis, we also examine the stock price reaction for firms listed on
the alternative IBRA index. Information includes firm size, exporter status, liquidity, and
leverage measures. We report firm size, operating revenue in real terms, i.e., the nominal values
deflated by the CPI. The data show that the average firm size regarding log total assets and in
real terms. In nominal terms, this roughly translates to US$10 million at an average exchange
rate of 1.9 R$/US$ over the sample period. The average leverage ratio (debt/assets) is close to
31% while short-term debt (of less than one year) on average accounts for about 30% of total
debt.
Table 2 also reports summary statistics for log assets and operating revenues for the full
sample, exporting, and non-exporting firms Note that non-exporting firms include large utilities
and financial services firms such as large banks. About 40% of the firms in the sample are
exporters with half of them belonging to the largest exporting group (more than $100 million).
Panel B reports summary statistics for exporting firms and suggests that exporting firms are on
average slightly larger than non-exporting firms in Panel C. Exporting firms a slightly higher
debt-to-assets ratio than non-exporting firms (33% versus 30% respectively) and less short-term
debt (26% to 33%).

5. Results
5.1.1 Abnormal Returns and Firm Characteristics
Before turning to the regression analysis, a visual inspection of our data is useful. To do
so Figures 2a and 2b graphically present the stock market’s response to capital control
announcements. The horizontal axis is in event time for four days before and four days after the
capital controls announcement dates. Figure 2a shows the abnormal returns averaged across
firms by event. The abnormal returns were first averaged across firms for each event in event
time [t = -3, t = +3] and then averaged across events. Figure 2b presents the results cumulated
across firms by event and then averaged across events also in event time. Both figures visually
confirm that on average in the aftermath of capital controls announcements abnormal returns are
negative.

13

The formal regression analysis in Table 3 uses panel data (by firm and event) where the
dependent variable is the firm-specific two-day cumulative abnormal return. The basic regression
specification is:
𝐶𝐴𝑅!" = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 + 𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑚𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠!" + 𝜀!" ,

(1)

where 𝐶𝐴𝑅!" is the cumulative abnormal return for firm i over the event window t. We use a twoday event window as our benchmark specification. The constant term captures the impact of the
announcement on average returns, and firm controls include an observable set of firm-specific
characteristics such as size, leverage, and so on.
Our methodology is as follows. We construct a CAR for each firm around each event
date. We stack the firms to create a panel of firm-event observations. In the benchmark
estimation we use both tightening and loosening announcements. Subsequent estimations include
a loosening dummy to see if the market responds differentially depending on the direction of the
change in capital controls. We also conduct the estimations by including event dummies.
Since the association between abnormal returns and firm characteristics could be
explained by other documented regularities, we compute bootstrapped p-values of the OLS
regression using the method proposed in Busse and Green (2002). The results report the OLS
bootstrapped one-tailed p-values.16
Measures of two-day CARs using Scholes-Williams betas suggest a significant decline in
stock returns surrounding the capital control announcements consistent with an increase in the
cost of capital for firms listed on the BOVESPA (Table 3, Column 1). Quantitatively CARs fall
by about -0.28% on average over a two-day window for the full sample of events in Table 1. The
effect is statistically significant at the 1% level.
Column 2 includes a proxy for firm size in terms of (log) total assets lagged by one
quarter. Controlling for size, the coefficient on the constant term suggests that the CARs fall on
average by a quantitatively significant -2.66% at the 1% level, which is an order of magnitude
higher than the simple regression in Column 1 that does not control for firm size. This suggests
that firm size captures an important dimension of underlying heterogeneity at the firm level. The
16

Results are robust to using two-way clustered standard errors (available upon request).

14

size variable measured by the lagged value of total firm assets has a positive and significant
effect on abnormal returns at the 1% level. The results from the specification in Column 2,
suggest that large firms were somewhat shielded from the imposition of capital controls.
To get a sense of the quantitative importance of the estimates we further explore the
importance of size as a key dimension of underlying firm-level heterogeneity. We examine the
effects of a one standard deviation increase in firm size on the magnitude of the CAR. The mean
of log assets, our measure of firm size, is 16.69. A firm whose assets are one standard deviation
larger than the mean firm has a log asset value of 18.33 (i.e., the logged asset value of a firm
with size (µ + σ)). If we turn to column (2) in Table 3, the coefficient estimates for the mean
sized firm give a fitted two-day CAR of -0.29% (-0.0266 + 0.00142*µLog Assets). Similarly, for a
firm that is one standard deviation larger than an average-sized firm the fitted two-day CAR
equal to -0.057%. Comparing the two fitted CAR values suggests that a one standard deviation
increase in firm size results in a less negative value for the two-day CAR—the difference is
about -80.25%. The net effect of firm size therefore appears quantitatively significant. While the
overall effect is still negative for a one standard deviation increase in firm size, the magnitude of
the adverse impact appears reduced. As a benchmark for comparison of return magnitudes, the
average daily raw return for the sample period is +0.059%.
The rows at the bottom of Table 3 report the fitted CARs (and standard errors) for firms
at P25, P50, the mean, P75, P90 and P95. Consistent with the positive coefficient on log assets,
note that the fitted CAR values monotonically increase as we go from the bottom end of the
distribution of firm size to the biggest firms. Moreover the signs on the fitted mean CAR values
remain negative till the P75 for firm size and become positive for firms with size in the P90 and
above suggesting once again that the largest firms were somewhat shielded from the adverse
effects of the capital controls policies. Column (2) fitted CAR values in the 95% confidence
interval at P75 range from [+0.002%, -0.39%]. The upper bound of the confidence interval
therefore contains marginally positive values. The 95% confidence interval at P95 ranges from
[+0.57, -0.16%] suggesting that the lower bound for the very largest firms also contains negative
values. Confidence interval ranges for firm sizes below P75 are uniformly negative confirming

15

that the negative burden of capital controls policies appears to disproportionately affect smaller
listed firms.
Including controls for leverage, such as debt to total assets in Column 3 and short-term
debt to total debt, does not appear to have a significant effect on the abnormal returns. Columns
3 and 4 corroborate that, on average, CARs are significantly negative at the 1% level, while firm
size somewhat mitigates the negative effect on abnormal returns in the immediate aftermath of
capital control announcements.
Column 5 includes a variable that takes into account a firm’s exporter status. The
evidence suggests that the average effect of the capital controls announcement is negative and
significant at the 1% level while the coefficient on exporter status is positive and significant at
the 5% level. Two factors namely internal capital markets and improved competitiveness could
have shielded exporting firms from the adverse impact of the controls. First, there could be
cross-sectional variation in the cost of capital impact as well as credit constraints depending on
firm characteristics. For instance, we saw earlier that large firms may be somewhat shielded from
the adverse cost of capital impact. This may be because large firms can rely on internal capital
markets or other sources of financing to fund their operations in the aftermath of controls.
Similarly, exporting firms, especially the larger firms, may have access to internal capital
markets or foreign currency proceeds and therefore, less reliant on foreign capital investments.
Second, to the extent that the controls can curb the currency appreciation and improve the
competitiveness of exporting firms, the expected future cash flows of the exporting firms can
improve in the aftermath of the controls.17 Exporters could be in an improved competitive
position internationally, which drives up their expected cash flows and abnormal returns. The
second explanation is consistent with the argument that as a by-product of prudential capital
controls designed to mitigate the volatility of foreign capital inflows and manage endogenous
systemic risk, a depreciated currency may benefit exporting firms in the country imposing the
controls. Given that Column 5, includes controls for both firm size and exporter status, the
coefficient estimates suggests that large exporting firms are likely to be less negatively affected
by the capital controls policy.
17

Note that although the policy can in principle tax trade credits, the IOF was set to zero. See
https://www.receita.fazenda.gov.br/Legislacao/Decretos/2008/dec6339.htm

16

Column 6 further explores the impact of the capital controls announcement on exporting
firms by size groups. It is interesting to note that smaller exporters in the <$1 million revenue bin
do not experience significant returns. The coefficients on exporting firms in the $1-$100 million
revenue bin and the largest revenues, i.e., in the >$100 million in revenues are positive and
statistically significant at the 15% level for the second bin suggesting that controlling for firm
size, the magnitude of the export revenues may also matter.
The rows below the Table 3 show that the pattern of negative fitted CAR values for the
specification in Column 2 (that controls for firm size) holds for firms in all size percentile bins
barring the very largest firms in the P95 percentile. The pattern of negative fitted CARs for the
specification in Column 5 (that controls for size and exporter status) holds for exporters in all
size bins except for the largest exporters in the P90 and above size category. For non-exporters,
we report negative fitted CARs for all size bins including the very largest firms. Overall, the
evidence suggests that large firms with large export revenues are somewhat shielded from the
negative effects of capital controls announcements.
A stated goal of the controls was to protect the tradable firms from being hurt by an
overvalued exchange rate. Therefore some may argue that the net effect of the controls for an
exporting firm is a positive CAR, at the expense of a negative CAR for non-exporting firms is a
welcome distributional development of the policy (equivalent to "taxing" some firms to
"subsidize" exporters). However, our results suggest that it is the large firms and large, exporting
firms that are the less adversely affected by the capital controls policies—in fact, the estimated
coefficients suggest that the overall impact on fitted CARs are positive and significant for the
largest firms and the largest exporters. In a developing country like Brazil, it is not clear how
subsidizing large exporters at the expense of taxing small firms including smaller exporters and
in particular small, non-exporters would be viewed as a desirable. We therefore take the view
that the net positive effects on large firms and large exporters are an unintended consequence of
the capital controls policies.
Also note that systematic firm-level financial data for small, unlisted firms are not
available for these Brazilian firms. Disclosure requirements for listed firms provide access to
firm-level financial statements. Further, our empirical methodology relies on estimating

17

cumulative abnormal returns based on stock market data that are also only available for firms
that are listed on the stock market. Our results show that from the listed sample, the firms that are
most adversely affected are the small, non-exporters. This evidence therefore also suggests that
our results may suffer from attenuation bias in that we do not have the smallest, unlisted firms in
the sample. In some sense one can argue that our evidence provides a lower bound estimate of
the adverse impact of capital controls on the cost of capital for Brazilian firms.

5.1.2 Credit Constraints and Abnormal Returns
Next, we examine the hypothesis of credit constraints and external finance dependence.
Moving beyond the overall cost of capital, there is another factor to consider in the context of
liquidity or credit-constrained firms. Here, the distinction between the differential cost of
external and internal finance can also play a role. By affecting the cost of external finance, the
imposition of capital controls could affect firms that are more dependent on external finance to
fund their investment opportunities. The test then is whether firms (or industries) dependent on
external finance are more adversely affected by capital controls as measured by the market’s
reaction to the policy announcement. Consistent with arguments in Rajan and Zingales (1998),
there are two advantages to this simple test: it focuses on the mechanism by which the cost of
finance affects a firm’s growth prospects, thus providing a stronger test of causality, and it can
correct for industry effects.
Moreover, liquidity constraints at the firm level may depend on external finance
dependence, firm size, and export status. Firms with easier access to external finance or greater
access to low-cost funds may be able to overcome the barriers associated with any fixed costs of
production (Chaney 2013). To proxy for a firm’s dependence on external finance, we measure
the extent of investment expenditures that cannot be financed through internal cash flows
generated by the firm using time-series Brazilian data. In other words, we construct the Rajan
and Zingales (1998) external finance dependence measure using Brazilian firm data.
Accordingly, a firm’s dependence on external finance is defined as capital expenditures minus
cash flow from operations divided by capital expenditures. Table 4 presents the results.

18

Column 1 of Table 4 (Panel A) shows the benchmark regression, which includes controls
for firm size, exporter status, and external finance dependence. Consistent with the hypothesis
that firms that are more dependent on external finance may be affected adversely by capital
controls, the coefficient on the external finance dependence variable is negative and significant at
the 1% level. Average CARs are negative and significant, but firm size and exporter status—
consistent with results in previous tables—have positive and significant coefficients.
Panel B of Table 4 reports fitted CARs for the results in column 1 conditioning on
external finance dependence, size and exporter status. The fitted CARs suggest that conditioning
on size, exporters with high external finance dependence (P75) have a significantly more
negative CAR compared to exporters with median (P50) external finance dependence. For nonexporters the fitted CARs are consistently more negative across external finance bins. For
example in the high external finance (P75) bin, the fitted CAR value for exporters is -0.37%
while it is -0.63% for non-exporters over the two-day event window.
Column 2 of Panel A disaggregates exporting firms by the size of their exporting
revenues. External finance dependence continues to have a negative and significant effect on
abnormal returns. The evidence also suggests that while the smallest exporters (with revenues
less than $1 million) are negatively affected, the larger exporters appear to be somewhat
shielded.
Columns 3–8 examine different measures for external finance dependence. Columns 3
and 4 include a dummy variable to distinguish between firms with high and low finance
dependence relative to the mean. Columns 5 and 6 restrict the sample to manufacturing firms and
classify them according to high and low external finance dependence following the Rajan and
Zingales (1998) classification. The result that external finance dependence has a negative and
significant effect of abnormal returns is robust to these alternative measures. Turning to the
quantitative significance of the coefficients in Panel B of Table 4, we see that for firm's with an
external finance dependence that exceeds the mean, the median sized non-exporters (P50) are
affected more adversely than the larger non-exporters (P75) with fitted CARs of -0.62% and 0.57%, respectively. Large exporters (P75) have positive fitted two-day CARs across external
finance dependence measures above and below the mean. Manufacturing firms with high

19

external finance dependence are affected more adversely for both exporters and non-exporters at
the P50 and P75 size percentiles.
Also, note that in the economy, some firms rely more on equity financing (relative to debt
financing) than others. This is reflected, for example, in the substantial degree of variation in
leverage across sectors. Given that some events impose controls on debt inflows while other
events impose control on equity inflows, it is interesting to analyze whether firms that rely more
on equity financing are affected more by equity controls, and firms that rely more on debt
financing are affected more by debt controls.
To do so, we constructed a measure of equity dependence following the Rajan and
Zingales measure as the amount of common equity as a fraction of total capital expenditures. The
results suggest that the cumulative abnormal returns are inversely correlated with the equity
finance dependence but not in a statistically significant manner (Table 4, Columns 7 and 8).

5.1.3 Debt Versus Equity Events
Firms rely on both debt and equity financing. The overall cost of capital embodies the
risk-free rate (based on debt instruments) and the equity premium. If the tax on debt instruments
drives up the risk-free rate or implicitly the average cost of capital, the cost of capital increases
and holding expected future cash flows constant, drives down the stock price manifested in
negative firm-level CARs. We therefore expect that the stock market could react to controls on
debt instruments as well as equity instruments.
The recent Brazilian capital controls differentiate between debt and equity related
measures. Table 5 displays regression specifications that include a dummy variable that takes a
value of one for equity events and zero for debt-related controls events. The pattern of results
holds with highly significant negative CARs when capital control measures are announced. The
coefficient on the constant is significant at the 1% level, controlling for size and exporter status
(Columns 1 and 2). The equity dummy is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level.
Controls on equity flows display a more negative announcement effect compared to controls on
debt. A similar pattern obtains in Columns 3 and 4 that include controls for external finance
dependence.

20

Fitted CARs in Panel B show that for equity-related controls, exporters in all size
percentiles with the exception of the 95th-percentile are negative ranging from -0.46% for the
smallest exporters (P25) to -0.01% for the larger exporters (P90). The magnitude of the negative
CARs declines as we go from the 25th-percentile to the 90th-percentile of firm size. For nonexporters, the magnitude of negative CARs is much higher ranging from -0.88% for the smallest
(P25) to -0.24% for the largest (P95) non-exporters for equity related controls. For debt-related
controls, while the smallest exporters are marginally negatively affected, exporters in all other
size bins display positive CARs ranging from 0.13% to 0.51%. For non-exporters, all but the
largest exporters (>P90) display negative fitted two-day CARs ranging from -0.41% to -0.25%.
There are two explanations that can help interpret the result that controls on equity are
associated with significantly more negative CARs than controls on debt. The first explanation
relates to the fact that while Brazil historically experimented with the IOF tax exclusively on
debt flows such as in the 1990s, extending the purview to include equity instruments was done
for the very first time in October 2009 (see Goldfajn, and Minella 2007). The market’s reaction
may, therefore, be capturing the element of surprise or unexpected nature of the policy change to
include equity flows.
Second, controls on debt flows may serve to reduce financial vulnerability given that debt
is a non-contingent claim that can generate systemic risk. Since debt does not embody the risksharing aspects of international equity flows, excessive reliance on external debt (especially
foreign-currency denominated bank loans that generate currency mismatches on balance sheets)
can cause financial distress as we have seen in many an emerging-market crisis. Therefore, the
market may perceive controls on debt as a desirable means to curb systemic risk or perform a
macro-prudential function with respect to the stability of the financial system.
We also implemented regression specifications (not reported) with (i) an equity event
dummy, external finance dependence and an interaction term between equity finance dependence
and the equity event dummy and (ii) a debt event dummy, debt finance dependence measured by
leverage as well as a debt financing as a fraction of capital expenditures and an interaction term.
While the coefficient on the equity finance dependence is negative and significant, the

21

interaction term is not significant. In contrast for debt dependence, the debt finance measure is
not significant while the interaction term is negative and significant.
We interpret these results as providing corroborative evidence for our main results about
the inverse relationship between CARs surrounding capital control announcements and the
external finance dependence characteristic of firms. However, these additional results must be
interpreted with caution, for, given the number of events, the power of these tests is not very
high. An additional caveat is that some events were applied to both debt and equity instruments
and, therefore, may be interfering with clean identification when the dummy variables (equity
event, debt event) are included in a pooled regression setting.
The results in Tables 3-5 perhaps also suggest that the market views the implementation
of capital controls as being in a different or new “capital-controls regime”. Given the variation in
the instruments that fell under the purview of these controls, the fact that they were put on
(March 2008), taken off (October 2008), put on again (October 2009) and taken off again (2012)
and the consistently robust negative and significant CARs across a broad range of specifications
suggests that overall the market views these policy changes negatively.

5.2 Identifying the Mechanism
The evidence suggests that the decline in CARs following the capital control
announcements is consistent with an increase in the cost of capital. To provide corroborating
evidence we examine the change in the market interest rates in response to capital controls
announcements as a mechanism through which there is an increase in the economy-wide cost of
capital. Data on daily interest rates for the one-year, two-year and five-year interest rates are
from Bloomberg.
Panel A of Table 6 presents pooled regressions across the events to quantify the impact
on interest rates over a two-day and three day window relative to the day before the
announcement. While we find evidence of an increase in market rates (3.25 basis points) at the
one-year horizon the effects are much stronger in magnitude for the five-year interest rates. The
regression estimates suggest that on average five-year market interest rates rise by 11.8 basis
points. The increase is statistically significant at the 5 percent level of significance. The more

22

muted response of the one-year rate may be the result of it being a direct instrument of monetary
policy or the policy rate. The term-structure effects are however more direct measures of the
market’s response to the unexpected capital controls announcements. It is worth noting that these
interest rates increase against the backdrop of quantitative easing in the US and other developed
countries that put downward pressure on the world interest rate.
Additionally, Hail and Leuz (2009) present an implied cost of capital methodology using
various techniques of accounting-based models of the clean-surplus relation. We follow their
methodology and use the modified price-earnings growth (PEG) ratio model by Easton (2004) as
the basis for analysis. Here,
𝑃! =

!!!! !!!"# ∗  !!!! !!!!!
!
!!"#

,

(2)

where:
𝑃! is each firm’s stock price on the day of the event, obtained from Datastream
𝑥!!! is each firm’s forecasted EPS for the year after the event, obtained from IBES.
𝑥!!! is each firm’s forecasted EPS for two years after the event, obtained from IBES.
𝑑!!! is each firm’s forecasted DPS (dividends per share) for the year after the event, obtained
from IBES.
𝑟!"# is each firm’s estimated cost of capital, for which we solve.
Since our data varies by firm and by event, we have a maximum of 69*15 = 1,035 unique
observations. We obtained data from IBES calculated EPS forecasts for three different-length
windows both before and after the event, leading to six different observations per firm-event.
Post-event windows, we have 14, 21, and 28-day windows. All forecasts that were made on the
event date or up to 14, 21 or 28 days after the event are considered in our analysis. If there are
multiple forecasts for a firm-event, they are averaged. For the pre-event window estimates,
forecasts made on the day of the event are not considered, but those made up to 14, 21, or 28
days before the event are considered. Once again, if there are multiple forecasts for a firm-event,
they are averaged. Separate results were also calculated deflating the forecasts by the CPI of the
quarter the forecast is for. Brazilian CPI data were collected from the Brazilian Central Bank.

23

To solve for estimated cost of capital, we use the quadratic formula:
!
𝑃! ∗ 𝑟!"#
= 𝑥!!! + 𝑟!"# ∗    𝑑!!! − 𝑥!!!
!
𝑃! 𝑟!!!
−    𝑑!!! 𝑟!"# + 𝑥!!! − 𝑥!!! = 0

𝑟!"# =

−𝑏 ± 𝑏 ! − 4𝑎𝑐
,  
2𝑎

𝑐 =    𝑥!!! − 𝑥!!!   ,
𝑎 = 𝑃! ,  

(3a)

𝑏 =    −𝑑!!! ,

(3b)

Since the quadratic equation yields two roots, (3a) and (3b), roots were classified into two
groups: minimum and maximum. Both were used in the estimation.
We conduct the analysis in two steps. First, we compute the cost of capital before and
after the event using the earnings forecasts from IBES for 14, 21, 28 day windows before and
after the event. We conducted a simple t-test of means and find that the cost of capital is
significantly higher at the 10% level in the 14-day window for both the maximum and minimum
root values.
Second, to test whether the cost of capital increases after the event, we ran a series of
regression specifications with the cost of capital as the dependent variable calculated with data
from the 14, 21, 28-day windows with both maximum and minimum root values. Table 6, Panel
B shows the results. The results in Columns 3 to 8 show that the post-event dummy is positive
and statistically significant at the 10% level of significance. The specifications control for both
firm size and exporter status and suggest that the cost of capital goes up significantly following
capital control announcements. The post-event dummy is positive but not statistically significant
in the 28-day window (not reported). The evidence also suggests that the effects of
announcements are smaller for exporting firms.
To see how the exchange rate reacts to the capital control announcements we use daily
Real/dollar exchange rate data from Bloomberg. Columns (7) and (8) in Table 6, Panel A show
the results. The coefficients on the exchange rate variable are negative but not statistically
significant. A negative coefficient suggests exchange rate depreciation consistent with the
motivation behind capital controls to curb currency appreciation by stemming the inflow of

24

foreign capital. However, the lack of statistical significance precludes us from drawing robust
inference from the result.
It is worth noting that over the sample period during which the capital controls were
imposed, the Real steadily appreciated between January 2007 and July 2008 and, despite a brief
period of depreciation during the onset of the Global Financial crisis, continued to appreciate
between January 2009 and July 2011. By the first quarter of 2011, the exchange rate stood at
R$1.6 against the U.S. dollar, and Mantega, Brazil’s finance minister, blamed the currency
appreciation on incoming foreign capital originating in developed markets. In particular, he
focused his criticism on the United States, citing that quantitative easing spurred an excessive
influx of foreign capital into Brazil. Mantega stated, “The advanced countries are still running
expansionist monetary policies… The developed world is taking longer to recover than expected
and this means their currencies are still devaluing, which is causing the overvaluation of the
Real.”
An alternative view amongst international policy makers conjectured the onset of the
“currency wars” on China’s undervalued currency that had an adverse impact on the export
prospects of other countries. For example, the Western Hemisphere Director for the IMF,
Nicholas Eyzaguirre suggested, “There is a correlation [between] the fact that China pegs its
currency and pressures on the exchange rate of Brazil or Peru.” The preceding arguments suggest
that while the imposition of controls may have been motivated by trying to stem the appreciation
of the Real by curbing the inflow of foreign capital from developed countries such as the United
States, alternative international economic forces such as the undervalued Remimbi may have
rendered such attempts unsuccessful.

5.3 Robustness Checks and Additional Tests
We conduct a number of tests to ensure the robustness of our results. The firm and stock
market regressions are estimated for different windows and different methodologies for
computing returns (raw returns, CAPM) obtaining similar patterns (Table 7) and for firms listed
on the alternative IBRA stock exchange (Table 7). Note that the correlations between the betas
such as Scholes-Williams, standard CAPM, and so on are very high. The results remain robust.

25

To the extent that capital controls can drive up the aggregate cost of capital, the cost of
bank financing could also increase affecting small firms that rely exclusively on bank financing.
To examine whether the source of external financing matters, we control for the share of debt
from banks (Table 8, Panel A, Column 1). The coefficient on the variable measuring the share of
debt by banks is negative but not significant. Column 2 in Table 8, Panel A reports the results
for operating revenue as a proxy for size. The negative CAR result is robust, and the coefficient
on operating revenues is positive and significant at the 15% level. The results are also not driven
by the IPO of OGX Petróleo e Gás Participações S.A. or this firm in particular (not reported).
A potential concern that arises is that thus far we treat capital control events of different
magnitudes equally. However, the magnitudes of the changes vary across events. For example,
the October 2010 event increased the IOF tax by 33% more than the March 2008 event. To see
if the effects are stronger for the events in which the changes are larger, we added event
dummies to our baseline pooled regression specification (not reported). The results remain
robust—on average the overall effect when the event dummy is added to the constant remains
negative and significant.
We also looked at a sample of firms that are subsidiaries of multinational companies
either Brazilian-owned (headquarters in Brazil) or foreign owned (headquarters abroad),
obtaining a similar pattern of results (Table 8, Column 3). Also, note that in November 2009, a
tax of 1.5% was imposed on American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) converted into local stocks.
We also examine the impact of capital control announcements for firms that issue ADRs on the
NYSE since a large fraction (approximately 40%) of Bovespa constituents are secondarily listed
for trading in New York. The coefficient on the constant is -0.0305 and is significant at the 10%
level (Table 8, Column 4).
To identify a mechanism of impact, the ADR result is also related to the focus on debt
and equity stakeholders in the firm via the “bonding” hypothesis of Stulz (1999) and Coffee
(1999). This literature considers global exposures measured through overseas equity issuance
and trading rather than the export channel. By imposing a capital controls tax on ADRs
converted into local stocks, the controls may have introduced an additional distortion in the ADR
market thereby interfering with the benefits of bonding to markets with strong institutions via

26

listing and trading ADRs. We examine another subsample of firms that issued bonds abroad
during the period of study in Column 5 of Table 8. The data are from Bloomberg and company
reports. The patterns of negative and highly significant coefficients on the constant term and
positive and significant coefficients on size and exporter status as well as negative and
significant coefficients on external finance dependence are robust in these alternative
specifications.
Additionally in unreported results, we estimated the regressions for debt and equity
events separately as there are some events that involve controls on both debt and equity.
Examining the two sets of events separately therefore provides a cleaner identification and a
simple interpretation of the coefficient on the constant. The pattern of results showed that equityrelated controls had a significantly more negative impact on CARs than debt-related controls.
The pattern was consistent across alternative specifications and t-test of means suggest a
statistically different impact across the debt and equity-related coefficients.
An additional concern is one of market frictions. Brazil’s market, even amongst Bovespa
constituents, can be quite illiquid. The validity of standard CARs can therefore be questioned due
to market illiquidity along with different market rules governing trading. Asynchronous trading
implies that information is differentially incorporated into shares for larger and smaller stocks,
which we interpret as globally exposed versus purely local. It is plausible that that largeexporting firms may be more efficient at incorporating information than small non-exporters.
While imperfect, we use liquidity measures as a proxy for transaction costs and asynchronous
trading.
Table 8 Columns (6) to (8) include three measures of liquidity from Datastream: (i)
VO/NOSH which is turnover by volume divided by the number of shares outstanding; (ii) The
share turnover ratio (VO*P)/MV which is the turnover by volume multiplied by the stock price
(as a proxy for turnover by value) divided by the market value; and (iii) (VO*P)/MC which is the
turnover by volume multiplied by the stock price divided by the market capitalization. Please
note that for Brazilian firms, Datastream carries turnover by volume traded (VO) but not
turnover by value traded (VA). We multiplied VO by the stock price (P) to get a proxy for VA.
The results remain robust to the inclusion of the liquidity measures.

27

In Column 9, we differentiate between tightening and loosening events using a loosening
event dummy. The coefficient on the dummy is negative but not significant. The overall effect
on the CARs remains negative and significant. To further investigate the impact of the removal
of restrictions, Table 9 separates out the tightening and loosening events. The table shows that
for tightening events the pattern of results is similar to that of the benchmark specification in
Table 3. For example, Column 2 (Table 9, Panel A) which includes a proxy for firm size, the
coefficient on the constant term suggests that the CARs fall on average by a quantitatively
significant -2.27% at the 1% level, an order of magnitude higher than the simple regression in
Column 1 that does not control for firm size.
For loosening events in contrast, the constant is not significant in any specification. All
other variables that condition for firm characteristics such as size and exporter status are also not
significant. One concern of course is that the number of events and observations is substantially
reduced when limiting to loosening events, which may reduce the statistical power. With this
caveat in mind, we believe that the pattern may be consistent with the prior that the restrictions
were removed when there is limited demand for Brazilian assets and may explain the “no
response” pattern for the loosening events when considered separately. The lack of response may
also be consistent with the controls were increasingly tightened before they were gradually
removed such that there is an asymmetry in the market’s response to tightening versus loosening
controls.18
We also find that for tightening events the pattern of negative fitted CAR values for the
specification in Column 2 (that controls for firm size) holds for firms in all size percentile bins
barring the very largest firms in the P95 percentile (not reported). The pattern of negative fitted
CARs for the specification in (Column 5 that controls for size and exporter status) holds for
exporters in all size bins except for the largest exporters in the P90 and above size category. For
non-exporters and tightening events, we report negative fitted CARs for all size bins including
the very largest firms.

18

To further examine the robustness of the “no response” to loosening events, we re-estimated the results using an
invariant estimation window prior to the first event. Results remain robust. For brevity, result not reported but
available upon request.

28

To the extent that we want to isolate the impact of the policies, it is important to control
for global events or changes in global indices that can drive movements in Brazilian equities
Including the S&P500, or a global MSCI can help isolate the impact of the events on the
cumulative abnormal returns. We also conducted the estimations with the MSCI world index as
the benchmark market index in a world CAPM framework. Appendix Table 1 presents the
results and the patterns are similar to those documented in the benchmark specification.
Given the concern of overlapping windows contaminating the estimation of expected
returns, we re-estimate the benchmark specifications in Table 3 using a fixed estimation window.
The results are reported in Appendix Table 2. It is interesting to note that the CARs are
significantly more negative using the invariant window given that the first controls were put into
place given the surge in capital inflows and against the back drop of a booming stock market.
Therefore when this window is use to estimate the benchmark normal returns, the abnormal
returns in the period following the controls are even more negative and statistically significant at
the 1% level.
Finally, the usual assumption that the error term is random and uncorrelated across firms
requires further discussion. Equation (1) is estimated using a panel regression. When aggregating
abnormal returns, typical event studies assume that abnormal returns are not correlated across
firms. Assuming no correlation across firms means that the covariance between individual firm
abnormal returns is zero. Therefore, standard distributional results may be used to calculate the
variance of aggregated abnormal returns. The assumption is reasonable only if the event dates for
individual firms do not overlap in calendar time.
In the case of a capital controls event, however, all Brazilian firms share identical event
dates. Given that the capital control announcement dates are clustered in time, cross-sectional
correlation of returns may result in biased standard errors and potentially incorrect inferences
(Petersen, 2009). Standard event study methodology is therefore not appropriate for capital
control announcements, since the announcement events are not independent across firms, and the
errors from the estimation of the expected returns are correlated with one another. The
covariances between individual firm abnormal returns may be non-zero, in which case the
standard distributional results no longer obtain.

29

Moreover, there is often more than one capital control announcement to consider. To
overcome this issue, Petersen (2009) proposes a methodology that takes into account the
correlation in errors across firms and the possibility for several announcements. We base our test
on this methodology to address the issue of residuals that may be correlated across firms or
across time in panel data sets, yielding biased OLS standard errors. In particular, we use two-way
clustering by relaxing the assumption that abnormal returns are not correlated across firms and
time. Specifically, we allow the off-diagonal (covariance) elements in the variance–covariance
matrix to be different from zero. In short, the clustering procedure produces standard errors that
are appropriately adjusted to reflect the cross-firm and cross-time correlation of abnormal
returns. The estimation procedure also corrects for potential heteroskedasticity across firms. In
the interests of brevity, these results are not reported but a full set of estimations with clustered
standard errors is available from the authors.

6. Conclusion
This paper examines the effects of capital controls on firm-level stock returns using data
from Brazil. We focus on Brazil because it has taken center stage as a country that has
implemented a series of extensive controls on capital flows between 2008 and 2013.Unlike
previous capital controls episodes during emerging market financial crises designed to hinder
capital flight, Brazil’s capital controls were devised as a macro-prudential measure to stem
foreign capital inflows in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. Brazil also implemented
the controls to forestall currency appreciation whereas historically emerging market countries
implemented capital controls policies to prevent currency depreciation.19,20
19

Some previous noteworthy examples include the Unremunerated Reserve Requirements in Chile (1990s),
Colombia (1990s, 2007), and Thailand (2006). Arguably, these historical examples do not compare to the level of
active experimentation in the recent Brazilian experience.
20
In contrast to Brazil, other countries, primarily in East Asia, that also applied capital controls measures to stem the
inflow of foreign capital in the aftermath of the GFC did so in somewhat of a piecemeal manner and primarily
focused on the bond market and to some extent the banking sector. For instance, Taiwan implemented a tax on
foreign investment in time deposits. Korea implemented restrictions on FX derivatives trading, foreign-currency
denominated lending by banks, and curbed the foreign currency liquidity ratio of banks, Indonesia applied onemonth time limit on domestic bond investing, Thailand removed an exemption 15% tax on foreign investors income
from domestic bonds and finally Korea again applied a 14% tax on foreign income on government bonds.

30

We employ an event-study methodology using stock price and financial statement data to
examine cumulative abnormal returns in the aftermath of capital controls announcements. The
evidence suggests that there is a significant decline in CARs for Brazilian firms following the
imposition of capital controls on equity flows, consistent with an increase in the cost of capital.
The data also suggest that large firms and exporting firms are less affected by the controls.
However, quantitatively the data show that the decline in average returns swamps the advantages
that firm size for the firms below the 75th percentile and export status offer. Moreover, external
finance dependent firms are more adversely affected by the imposition of capital controls.
Notably, controls on debt flows are associated with less negative returns, suggesting that the
market views controls on equity and debt flows differently.
The findings in the paper have implications for macro-finance models that focus
exclusively on aggregate variables to examine the optimality of macro-prudential regulation and
abstract from heterogeneity at the firm level. In particular, the evidence in this paper suggests
that capital controls disproportionately affect small, non-exporting firms, especially those more
dependent on external finance.
A challenge for tackling the long-standing question of the benefits and costs of open
international capital markets is the tension between generalizable empirical studies based on
cross-country data and the availability of precisely identifiable policy shocks. Our paper has the
advantage that we can cleanly identify the implemented capital controls by type and magnitude
for Brazil. We take a step in furthering our understanding of the effects of capital controls on the
real economy. Future research could bring us yet nearer.

31

References
Auerbach J. Alan, and Kevin A. Hassett, 2007. “The 2003 Dividend Tax Cuts and the Value of
the Firm: An Event Study” in Auerbach, A., J. Hines, and J. Slemrod (eds.) Taxing
Corporate Income in the 21st Century.
Bianchi Javier and Enrique Mendoza. 2013. “Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential Policy,”
NBER Working Papers 19704.
Black. Fischer. 1974. “International Capital Market Equilibrium with Investment Barriers.”
Journal of Financial Economics 1(4): 337-352.
Bushnell James B., Howard Chong and Erin T. Mansur, 2013. “Profiting from Regulation: An
Event Study of the EU Carbon Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5
(4).
Busse, Jeffrey A. and T. Clifton Green. 2002. “Market Efficiency in Real Time.” Journal of
Financial Economics 65(3): 415–437.
Chamon, Marcos and Marcio Garcia. 2016. “Capital Controls in Brazil: Effective?” Journal of
International Money and Finance 61: 163-87.
Chaney, Thomas. 2013. “Liquidity Constrained Exporters.” NBER Working Paper No. 19170.
Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2004. “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment.” Journal of Finance 59(3): 1295–1324, 06.
Chari, Anusha and Peter Blair Henry. 2008. “Firm-specific Information and the Efficiency of
Investment.” Journal of Financial Economics 87(3): 636–655.
Coffee, John. 1999. “The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications.” Northwestern University Law Review 93(3): 641–707.
Cutler, David M. 1988 “Tax Reform and the Stock Market: An Asset Price Approach.” The
American Economic Review 78 (5): 1107-1117.
Easton, Peter D. 2004. “PE Ratios, PEG Ratios, and Estimating the Implied Expected Rate of
Return on Equity Capital.” The Accounting Review 79(1): 73-95.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. 1988. “Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1988(1): 141-206.
Fernández, Andrés, Alessandro Rebucci, and Martín Uribe, 2013. “Are Capital Controls
Prudential? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 76, 2015, 1-14.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning. Forthcoming. 2014 “Dilemma not Trilemma? Capital
Controls and Exchange Rates with Volatile Capital Flows,” IMF Economic Review,
forthcoming.

32

Forbes, Kristin, Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas Kostka, and Roland Straub. 2016. “Bubble Thy
Neighbor: Portfolio Effects and Externalities from Capital Controls.” Journal of
International Economics, forthcoming.
Forbes, Kristin J. 2007a. “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial
Constraints for Smaller Traded Firms.” Journal of International Economics 71(2): 294–
323.
Forbes, Kristin J. 2007b. “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free Lunch.”
In Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and
Consequences, edited by S. Edwards. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foucault, Thierry and Laurent Frésard. 2012. "Cross-Listing, Investment Sensitivity to Stock
Price, and the Learning Hypothesis." Review of Financial Studies, 25(11): 3305-3350.
Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub. 2013. “On the International Spillovers
of US Quantitative Easing.” Working Paper Series 1557, European Central Bank.
Fratzscher, Marcel. 2012. “Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial
Crisis.” Journal of International Economics 88(2): 341–356.
Glick, Reuven, Xueyan Guo, and Michael Hutchison. 2006. “Currency Crises, Capital-Account
Liberalization, and Selection Bias,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4): 698714.
Goldfajn, Ilan and André Minella. 2007. “Capital Flows and Controls in Brazil: What Have We
Learned?” In Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies,
Practices, and Consequences, edited by S. Edwards. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Hail, Luzi and Christian Leuz. 2009. “Cost of Capital Effects and Changes in Growth
Expectations around U.S. Cross-Listings.” Journal of Financial Economics 93(3): 428–
454.
He, Zhiguo and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Rollover Risk and Credit Risk.” The Journal of Finance
67(2): 391–430.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices.” The Journal of Finance 55(2): 529-564.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence and Speculation.”
Journal of Economic Literature 45(4): 887–935.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1991. "Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups." Quarterly Journal of Economics
106(1): 33-60.
Jeanne, Olivier, Subrahmanian Arvind, and John Williamson. 2012. Who Needs to Open the
Capital Account? Peterson Institute for International Economics. Washington D.C.

33

Klein, Michael. 2012. “Capital Controls: Gates Versus Walls.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall: 317-355.
Korinek, Anton. 2010. “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View.”
Working Paper.
Lessard, Donald. 1983. “Principles of International Portfolio Selection.” in I.H. Giddy and A.M.
George (eds.), International Finance Handbook, Wiley, New York.
Lins, Karl V., Deon Strickland and Marc Zenner. 2005. “Do Non-U.S. Firms Issue Equity on
U.S. Stock Exchanges to Relax Capital Constraints?” The Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 40(1): 109-133.
Nicolas Magud, and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2007. “Capital Controls: An Evaluation,” in Capital
Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and
Consequences, National Bureau of Economic Research, 645-674.
Magud, Nicolas, Carmen Reinhart, and Kenneth Rogoff. 2011. “Capital Controls: Myth and
Reality —A Portfolio Balance Approach.” NBER Working Paper No. 16805.
MacKinlay, A. Craig. 1997. “Event Studies in Economics and Finance,” Journal of Economic
Literature XXXV: 13–39.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2005. “The Trilemma in History:
Tradeoffs Among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 87 (3), 423-438.
Pasricha, Gurnain (2017). “Policy Rules for Capital Controls.” Mimeo Bank of International
Settlements/Bank of Canada.
Petersen, Mitchell A. 2009. “Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets:
Comparing Approaches.” Review of Financial Studies 22(1): 435-480.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American
Economic Review 88(3): 559–586.
Scholes, Myron and Joseph Williams. 1977. “Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data.”
Journal of Financial Economics 5(3): 309–327.
Solnik, Bruno H. 1974. “Why Not Diversify Internationally Rather Than Domestically?”
Financial Analysts Journal 51(1): 89-94.
Stulz, Rene M. 2005. “The Limits of Financial Globalization.” Journal of Finance 60(4): 1595–
1638.
Stulz, Rene M. 1999. “Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital.” Working paper.
Dice Center, Ohio State University.
Stulz, Rene M. 1981. “On the Effects of Barriers to International Investment.” Journal of
Finance 36(4): 923-934.

34

Appendix A
The IOF (“imposto sobre operacoes financeiras”, how capital controls have been enacted and
changed) is a “decree”. Under Brazilian system, a decree ranks below a law and does not require
Congress approval. The Executive can enact and change a decree, and thus the IOF taxes (up to a
maximum established by the law), at any time by the Minister of Finance.
In Brazil, some taxes, which in principle have a regulatory intent (regulatory taxes) such as
the IOF, gasoline tax, taxes on industrialized products, can be changed by decree. Other taxes
such as the income tax (IR) have revenues as the main objective, have to be changed by law, ie,
require Congressional approval. The Tax code (“Codigo tributário”) law 5172 passed in October
25th, 1966) distinguishes between taxes that can be changed by decree and those by law.
The tax code can be found at: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L5172.htm
The links below show the subsequent reforms to the law:
(i) The IOF was created by LEI No 5.143, October 20th, 1966.
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L5143.htm
(ii) Ammendment June 21st, 1994.
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L8894.htm
(iii) There were some revisions to the IOF in 2011 (e.g. giving a broader definition of
derivatives, tax treatments) and to include that the rates of the IOF could be changed (within the
maximum limits allowed by decree) considering the fiscal and monetary goals of the authorities.
“O Poder Executivo, obedecidos os limites máximos fixados neste artigo, poderá alterar as
alíquotas tendo em vista os objetivos das políticas monetária e fiscal. (Incluído pela Lei nº
12.543, de 2011)”

35

Appendix B
A sample of opinions from different constituents about capital controls is listed below. Please
note that most of these articles are in Portuguese.
1. The Institute of International Finance (the IIF) criticizes measures to control capital inflows.
Banks complain and criticize the capital controls policy as short sighted.
http://economia.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,iff-critica-medidas-para-controlar-entrada-decapital-imp-,703364
2. The industry chamber FIESP hopes that the measures will contain appreciation. They argue
that the Real appreciation has “devastated” the industry. They also worry that the market will
find ways to evade the measures used to contain appreciation.
http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/poder/951113-mercado-vai-burlar-medidas-para-contencao-docambio-diz-fiesp.shtml
3. The head of Bovespa criticizes the tax as Brazilian firm stock prices lose US$ 55 billion in
market value after the IOF announcement.
http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/mercado/2009/10/641080-empresas-brasileiras-perdem-us-55-bino-pregao-apos-anuncio-do-iof.shtml
4. Exporters repatriate dollar earnings from abroad. Interestingly, the article talks about exporters
bringing back dollar earnings from exports to Brazil. Before the controls the earnings were kept
abroad. This may reflect the difficulties in repatriating earnings and the fact that exporting firms
could repatriate their earnings without paying the IOF tax.
http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/mercado/2009/12/671425-exportador-traz-mais-dolar-e-segurareal.shtml
5. Article discusses that the government attitude towards containing dollar appreciation is more
relevant than its results.
http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/mercado/2008/03/381611-atitude-do-governo-em-conter-dolar-emais-importante-que-resultados-diz-fiesp.shtml
6. Industry associations are once again in favor of the policy to regain competitiveness eroded by
the Real appreciation. The article suggests that the capital control measures will not have
immediate impact on the exchange rate. This article makes it clear that exporters don’t pay the
IOF tax.
http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/folha/dinheiro/ult91u381325.shtml
7. Interview with Edemir Pinto, Head of Bovespa against capital controls highlighting foreign
investor dependence and the importance of the stock market especially for small and medium
size companies.
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3734fa98-0a32-11e1-85ca-00144feabdc0.html#ixzz3lwzLBX8x

36

8. Edemir Pinto, chief executive officer of BM&FBovespa, met with Finance Minister Guido
Mantega last month in Brasilia to lobby for a removal of the IOF tax. Pinto said Nov. 6 the tax
had been “harmful” to Brazilian markets.
http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=a1mzHH17Ezbo
9. Brazilian private equity funds are lobbying the government for an exclusion to the recently
increased IOF tax.
http://www.abvcap.com.br/sala-de-imprensa/noticias-abvcap.aspx?c=en-US&id=510
10. Brazilian private equity funds, known as FIPs, are lobbying the government for an exclusion
to the recently increased IOF tax.
http://www.latinfinance.com/Article/2698320/Brazil-Private-Equity-Hopes-to-Dodge-NewTax.html#.VZVs1_lVhBc
11. "Brazil's largest commodities exporters are now lobbying the government to roll back the socalled IOF tax, which is applied to foreign credit and exchange operations...."We are going to
have to find some solution,"" said Luiz Carlos Carvalho, president of Brazil's Agribusiness
Association, which is pressing the government to remove or alter the tax."
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/03/30/us-exports-brazil-financeidUSBRE82T0CV20120330
12. International investors are outraged over Brazil’s “currency war” with the US and Europe,
after Brazil’s latest attempt to manage its currency – by extending the IOF tax on all foreign
borrowings – fanned speculation it will pursue a tighter control over capital inflows in its
economy. …“If Brazil wants to be a real-world country, it should do real-world things and that
includes not jerry-rigging your currency,” says Jim Craige, international fixed-income investor in
Brazil and manager of EM fixed income funds at New York’s Stone Harbor Investment Partners.
http://www.euromoney.com/Article/2988821/Category/1/ChannelPage/0/Investors-accuseBrazilofjerryriggingcurrency.html?type=CategoryArticle&ArticleId=2988821&CategoryID=1&
PageID=0

37

Appendix C
We present a modified outline of the model in Stulz (1981) helps fix ideas and motivate
our empirical analysis. Assume there are two countries: the domestic country 𝐷 and the foreign
country 𝐹. Also assume that investors in both countries are risk averse and care only about the
expected return and variance of their investment. In an integrated world capital market with no
barriers to international investment the two countries comprise the global equity market and
expand the diversification opportunities for all investors. Since investors can invest in each
other’s stock markets, both foreign and domestic investors bear the risks associated with
domestic production.
Investor 𝑘 is a domestic (foreign) investor if we write 𝑘 ∈ 𝐷 (𝑘 ∈ 𝐹). An asset 𝑖  is a
domestic (foreign) asset if we write 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷 (𝑖 ∈ 𝐹). Also, assume that domestic investors pay a
capital controls tax 𝜃 on their risky international investments whereas foreign investors face no
barriers to international investment. If a domestic investor 𝑘 holds a foreign risky asset 𝑖 long,
the return is 𝑅! − 𝜃, where 𝑅! is the return of asset 𝑖 for a foreign investor and 𝜃, the capital
controls tax rate, represents barriers to international investment.
With the assumption of mean-variance optimization, investors act to minimize the
variance of their portfolios subject to the constraint that the expected portfolio return is greater
than an exogenously given return 𝑅! . There are 𝑁 risky assets of which 𝑛  are domestic assets
and 𝑁 − 𝑛  are foreign assets. R is the N x 1 column vector of expected returns and Σ is an
𝑁×𝑁  variance-covariance matrix of returns on risky assets. Let Let 𝑥 ! denote the 𝑁×1  vector
of shares of wealth investor 𝑘 holds in risky assets. If 𝑥!! = 0, investor 𝑘 does not hold a positive
amount of risky asset i. If 𝑒  is an 𝑁×1  vector which has zeros in the first n rows (domestic) and
ones in the remaining N-n rows, investor 𝑘  pays capital controls taxes in the amount of
′

𝑥 ! 𝑒𝜃𝑊 ! where 𝑊 ! is the investor’s total wealth. Define 𝟏 as an 𝑁×1  column vector of ones.
The investor’s problem is to minimize the variance of the portfolio subject to the
constraint on the expected return of the portfolio and the non-negativity constraint on 𝑥 ! and can
be written as:

38

1
𝑀𝑖𝑛   𝑥 !′ Σ  𝑥 !
2
s.t.
′

′

𝑥 !′ 𝑅 − 𝑥 ! 𝑒𝜃 + 1 − 𝑥 ! 𝟏 𝑅! ≥ 𝑅!
𝑥! ≥ 0

(C.1)

(C.2)

The left-hand side of equation (C.1) is the expected return of the portfolio of investor 𝑘, which is
defined as the sum of:
(a) the expected return of the investor’s holdings of risky assets in the absence of capital
controls taxes (𝑥 !! 𝑅)   less
(b) the capital controls tax on the investor’s holdings which is proportional to the absolute value
!

of the investor's holdings of foreign risky assets (𝑥 ! 𝑒𝜃) plus
!

(c) the returns on holdings of safe bonds ( 1 − 𝑥 ! 𝟏 𝑅! ).
If L! is the Lagrangean function which corresponds to the investor's optimization
problem and if λ! is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint given by (C.1), then
the domestic investor's portfolio has to satisfy the following first-order conditions:

!!!
!!!!

=   Σ. 𝑥𝑘 − λ𝑘 𝑅 − 𝑅𝑓 . 𝟏 − 𝜃𝑒 ≥ 0                  (C.3)

𝑥!

′

!!!
!!!!

=0

(C.4)

Note that for the first order conditions of the foreign investor, we set 𝜃=0 in (C.3) and (C.4).
If we use Σ! for the 𝑖-th row of Σ, equation (C.3) can be written as:
Σ! 𝑥 ! ≥ λ! 𝑅! − 𝑅! − 𝜃

(C.5)

where Σ! 𝑥 ! is the covariance between the return on asset 𝑖, 𝑅! and the return on the investor’s
portfolio of risky assets 𝑅 Equation (C.5) has to be satisfied for all 𝑅! ≥ 0, for all risky foreign

39

assets in the portfolio of the domestic investor, 𝑘. For 𝜃=0, Equation (C.5) must be satisfied for
all domestic assets 𝑖 for all investors, domestic and foreign. If 𝜃=0, (C.5) reduces to:
Σ! 𝑥 ! ≥ λ! 𝑅! − 𝑅!

(C.6)

Equation (6) shows that the excess return on domestic assets which are not subject to the tax 𝜃
on foreign risky assets is proportional to the covariance of the return on asset 𝑖 with respect to
the portfolio of risky assets. Equations (C.5) and (C.6) also represent the intuition that the share
of wealth invested in asset 𝑖 is proportional to its Sharpe ratio. Note that in (C.5) the excess
return on foreign assets is subject to the capital controls tax 𝜃.
Equation (C.5) completely characterizes asset demands in the model. Further, from (C.5)
we can show that domestic investors hold risky assets in identical proportions and this implies
that a foreign asset that is not held (non-traded) by one domestic investor is non-traded for all
domestic investors. The theoretical result that if the tax rate 𝜃 is positive, non-traded assets can
exist implies that the world market portfolio is not an efficient portfolio for all investors. In other
words, in the presence of capital controls taxes, the world market portfolio does not belong in the
set of linear combinations of portfolios that yields an efficient portfolio for domestic investors.
We can now present a version of the Sharpe-Litner pricing relationship modified to
account for the capital controls tax 𝜃.21 Since domestic stocks can be held by both domestic and
foreign investors and 𝜃=0 for domestic stocks, for domestic risky assets we can write:
𝛽!! [𝑅! − 𝑅! − 𝜃! + 𝑞! ] =    𝑅! − 𝑅!     for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐷

(C.7)

where 𝛽!! is the covariance of the a stock 𝑖 with the world market portfolio. Note that the world
market portfolio includes all risky assets traded in the two countries irrespective of whether
domestic investors hold all or a subset of them in their individual portfolios. 𝑅! is the return on
the world market portfolio. 𝑅! is the rate on the risk-free asset. 𝜃! is the weighted average of the
value of taxes that domestic investors would have to pay on one dollar invested in the world
market portfolio. 𝑞! is a constant chosen to ensure that (C.5) holds with equality (i.e. the
21

See Stulz (1981) for a detailed derivation.

40

constraint is binding)22 multiplied by the world market portfolio weights, 𝑥 ! .23 Note that foreign
investors do not face the capital controls tax on their investments in domestic or foreign assets.
The asset pricing relationship for foreign risky assets can be written as:
𝛽!! [𝑅! − 𝑅! − 𝜃! + 𝑞! ]−𝛾 ! 𝜃 + 𝛾 ! 𝑞!! =    𝑅! − 𝑅!     for (𝑖 ∈ 𝐹)

(C.8)

For risky foreign assets held by domestic investors, i.e. they are not in the subset of nontraded foreign stocks, 𝑞!! =0. Equation 8 shows that the expected returns on two foreign stocks
held in domestic investor portfolios will differ in the cross-section to the extent that they have
different betas with the world market portfolio. 𝛾 ! 𝜃 is the weighted average of taxes paid by
investors on their portfolio of risky assets. Since some risky assets are non-traded, the individual
portfolios can differ from the world market portfolio. When there are no capital controls taxes
(C.7) and (C.8) reduce to the usual Sharpe-Litner pricing relationship.
Comparing (C.7) and (C.8) also shows that all risky foreign assets held in domestic
investor portfolios will plot on a security market line which lies above the security market line
for domestic investors shifted up by 𝛾 ! 𝜃 since 𝑞!! =0 for all foreign stocks actually held. Also,
note from (C.7) and (C.8) that a foreign stock with the same world market beta as a domestic
stock will have a higher expected return. Alternatively, if a country switches regimes from
having no capital controls taxes to one where capital controls taxes are imposed, expected returns
on foreign risky assets subject to the tax will go up (eg. a move from 1 to 2 in Figure C.1).

Specifically, 𝑞! is a constant, which is a weighted average of unobservable non-negative numbers, 𝑞 ! s chosen
such that (5) holds with equality.
23 !
𝑥 is an 𝑁×1vector whose element 𝑥!! is the fraction of world wealth 𝑊 ! supplied in the form of risky asset 𝑖.
22

41

SML for Foreign Risky Assets Subject
to Capital Controls Tax

𝑅!

SML for Domestic Risky Assets

2

}

d

ϒθ

1

!!!
Figure C.1

42

Figure 1. Brazil’s Bovespa and Capital Control Events (Daily)
80000
10/4/10

70000

4/6/11
2/29/12
3/28/11

3/12/08
10/19/09

60000

10/18/10

11/18/09

12/30/2010

3/9/12
12/4/12

12/1/11

7/26/11
5/21/12

50000

6/13/12
12/23/2013

40000
30000
20000
10000
0
1/1/07 7/1/07 1/1/08 7/1/08 1/1/09 7/1/09 1/1/10 7/1/10 1/1/11 7/1/11 1/1/12 7/1/12 1/1/13 7/1/13

Source: Datastream and authors construction using capital control event dates.

43

Figure 2a: Capital Control Annoucements: Abnormal Returns in Event
Time (Daily)
0.003

Abnormal Retuns

0.002
0.002
0.001
0.001
0.000
-0.001

t=-3

t=-2

t=-1

t=0

t=+1

t=+2

t=+3

-0.001
-0.002
-0.002

Event Time
Average Abnormal Returns

Figure 2b: Capital Control Annoucements: Average Abnormal Returns
(Cumulated Across Firms by Event)
Cumulative Abnormal Returns

0.150
0.100
0.050
0.000
t=-3

t=-2

t=-1

t=0

t=+1

-0.050
-0.100
-0.150

Event Time
Average Cumulative Abnormal Returns

44

t=+2

t=+3

Table 1. Capital Controls in Brazil: 2008-2013
Source: Brazilian Legislation and Brittany A. Baumann and Kevin P. Gallagher, “Navigating Capital Flows in Brazil and Chile,” Initiative for Policy Dialogue
Working Paper Series, Columbia University, June 2012. Note: IOF (Imposto Sobre Operações Financeiras) is a tax placed on financial transactions. On October
22nd 2008, the IOF tax was removed (debt event). As this events coincides with the decline in the US stock market in the midst of the global financial crisis, we
exclude this potentially counfounding event date from our estimations. Results remain robust to the exclusion/inclusion of this event.
Annoucement
Date

% Change
Bovespa
(1-day after)

3/12/08
10/22/08
10/19/09

0.17%
-3.57%
-2.88%

Tightening
Easing
Tightening

11/18/09

-0.28%

Tightening

Event
Type

Debt
Event

Equity
Event

Effective
Date

Decree
Number

IOF tax=1.5% on fixed income investments made by non-residents
IOF tax=0% on fixed income investments
IOF tax=2% introduced on equities and fixed income securities

1
1
1

0
0
1

3/17/08
10/23/08
10/20/09

6391
6613
6983

Tax=1.5% on American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) converted into local stocks

0

1

11/19/09

7011

Event

10/4/10

1.28%

Tightening

IOF tax=4% on fixed income bonds and derivatives; 2% for equities

1

0

10/5/10

7323

10/18/10

-2.61%

Tightening

IOF tax=6% on fixed income bonds and derivatives; 2% for equities

1

0

10/19/10

7330

12/30/10

0.00%

Tightening

IOF tax=2% on American Depositary Receipts, converted into local stocks

0

1

12/31/10

7412

3/28/11

0.34%

Tightening

IOF tax=6% on overseas loans and bonds with maturities up to 1 year

1

0

3/29/11

7456

4/6/11

0.20%

Tightening

IOF tax to overseas bonds with maturities up to 2 years

1

0

4/7/01

7457

7/26/11

-1.77%

Tightening

Tax of 1% on foreign exchange derivatives; legislation allow tax to be increased up to 25%

0

1

7/27/11

7536

12/1/11

-0.44%

Easing

IOF tax=0% on variable income instrum. traded on the exchange and certain debentures

0

1

12/2/11

7632

2/29/12

1.52%

Tightening

IOF tax to cover overseas loans and bonds with maturities up to 3 years

1

0

3/1/12

7683

3/9/12

-0.48%

Tightening

IOF tax to cover overseas loans and bonds with maturities up to 5 years

1

0

3/12/12

7698

5/21/12

-2.74%

Easing

IOF tax=1.5% for individual borrowers (from 2.5%)

1

0

5/22/12

7726

6/13/12

-0.54%

Easing

IOF tax to overseas loans and bonds with maturities up to 2 years

1

0

6/14/12

7751

12/4/12

0.20%

Easing

IOF tax to overseas loans and bonds with maturities up to 1 year

1

0

12/5/12

7853

12/23/13

-1.46%

Easing

IOF tax=0% on American Depositary Receipts, converted into local stocks

0

1

12/24/13

8165

45

Table 2. Summary Statistics
Notes: Financial figures are from Q4 2007 which is the last quarter prior to the announcement regarding the
introduction of capital controls on 3/12/2008. Summary statistics correspond to benchmark estimation in Table
3.. Nominal variables at the firm-level are divided by the Consumer Price Index (x 100). The sample period is
Q4-2007-Q4-2013. Total Assets and Operating Revenue are in real terms deflated by the CPI. The average
USD/Reais exchange rate from 2008-2013 was 1.897 R$/US$. Sources: Datastream for firm-level data and
Secex for export data.
Observations
Total Assets (Log)
Debt/Assets (%)
Short-term Debt/Debt (%)
Operating Revenue (Millions of R$)
Exporter Dummy

1016
1006
928
1013
1016

Total Assets (Log)
Debt/Assets (%)

426
424

Short-term Debt/Debt (%)
Operating Revenue (Millions of R$)

410
424

Total Assets (Log)
Debt/Assets (%)
Short-term Debt/Debt (%)
Operating Revenue (Millions of R$)

590
582
518
589

46

Mean
Std. Dev.
Panel A: All Firms
16.697
1.633
31.433
15.416
30.137
24.102
1.011
2.917
0.419
0.494
Panel B: Exporting Firms
16.781
1.590
32.933
16.360

Median

26.095
20.051
1.580
3.783
Panel C: Non-Exporting Firms
16.636
1.663
30.341
14.607
33.335
26.464
0.601
1.987

19.321
0.313

16.497
29.150
22.774
0.278
0.000
16.872
29.135

16.298
29.170
25.109
0.266

Table 3. Post-Capital Control Announcement Returns are Significantly Negative
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are measured
over a two-day window using Scholes-Williams betas. Log Total Assets, Debt to Assets and Short Term Debt to Total Debt
all correspond to one year lagged values and are from Worldscope. Export data are matched from Secex. Bootstrapped
standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)

Constant

-0.00277***
(0.0011)

Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
Debt/Assets
(lag 1y)
Short-term Debt/Debt
(lag 1y)
Exporter

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
All Events
-0.0266***
-0.0263**
-0.0229**
-0.0273***
(0.0078)
(0.0128)
(0.0089)
(0.0086)
0.00142***
0.00133*
0.00122**
0.00137***
(0.0004)
(0.0007)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
0.0000447
(0.0001)
-0.00171
(0.0043)
0.00376**
(0.0018)

Export < $1 mil

Export > $100 mil

1078
0.000

1016
0.005

Column (2)
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P25
P50
Mean
P75
P90
P95

-0.0307***
(0.0099)
0.00158***
(0.0006)

-0.00299
(0.0038)
0.00765+
(0.0050)
0.00258
(0.0021)

Export $1 mil -$100 mil

Observations
R-squared

(6)

Size
Fitted CARs
-0.0042
-0.0031
-0.0028
-0.0020
0.0011
0.0020

1006
0.005

928
0.004

1016
0.008

1016
0.012

Panel B: Fitted CARs and Standard Errors
Column (5)

s.e.
0.0013
0.0010
0.0010
0.0009
0.0014
0.0017

Size and Exporter
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0017
0.0022
-0.0004
0.0020
-0.0005
0.0019
0.0005
0.0019
0.0028
0.0021
0.0034
0.0022

47

Size and Non-exporter
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0058
0.0010
-0.0049
0.0010
-0.0045
0.0010
-0.0040
0.0011
-0.0002
0.0022
0.0005
0.0025

Table 4 . External Finance-Dependent Firms are More Negatively Impacted by Capital Controls
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are measured over a two-day
window using Scholes-Williams betas. Log Total Assets corresponds to lagged values (to the closest year) taken from Worldscope. In (1)-(2),
External Finance Dependence (ExtFinDep) is measured as the difference between capital expenditures and cash flows divided by capital
expenditures as in Rajan and Zingales (1998); in (3)-(4) a dummy is used if ExtFinDep is greater than the mean of ExtFinDep; in(5)-(6) a
dummy is used for high ExtFinDep manufacturing industries; in (7)-(8) common equity to capital expenditures is created from Capital IQ.
Export data are matched from Secex. Sources: Datastream, Capital IQ, and Secex. Bootstrapped Standard Errors*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
Constant
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
Exporter

-0.0266***
(0.0094)
0.00134**
(0.0005)
0.00365**
(0.0018)

-0.0300***
(0.0085)
0.00154***
(0.0005)

(0.0031)
(0.0038)
Export $1 mil -$100 mil
0.00751*
(0.0040)
Export > $100 mil
0.0025
(0.0019)
ExtFinDep
-0.00006*** -0.00006***
(lag 1y)
0.0000
0.0000
ExtFinDep>mean
(dummy variable)
High Ext. Fin. (Manuf)
(dummy variable)
Common Equity / CapEx

-0.0186*
(0.0107)
0.00108*
(0.0006)
0.00509**
(0.0022)

Export < $1 mil

Observations
R-squared

999
0.008

Ext. Fin. Dep.
(lag 1y)
P50
P75
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P50
P75
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P50
P75
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P50
P75

999
0.012

s.e.
0.0020
0.0019

ExtFinDep<mean & Export = 1

Fitted CARs
0.0028
0.0033

-0.0305***
(0.0088)
0.00151***
(0.0005)
0.00496**
(0.0022)

(0.0064)
(0.0056)
(0.0003)
(0.0051)
-0.00649*
(0.0037)

-0.0347***
(0.0107)
0.00177***
(0.0006)

(0.0021)
(0.0049)
0.00995+
(0.0064)
0.00363*
(0.0019)

-0.00473**
(0.0024)
-0.00775**
(0.0034)

993
0.01

-0.0322**
(0.0129)
0.00236***
(0.0007)

993
0.014

494
0.013

-0.00767**
(0.0032)

494
0.017

-0.000002
0.0000

-0.000002
0.0000

940
0.011

940
0.016

Panel B: Fitted CARs and Standard Errors
Column (1)
Export = 1
Export = 0
Fitted CARs
s.e.
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0003
0.0019
-0.0046
0.0010
-0.0037
0.0027
-0.0063
0.0012
Export = 1
Export = 0
Fitted CARs
s.e.
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0004
0.0019
-0.0047
0.0010
0.0005
0.0019
-0.0039
0.0010
Column (3)
Column (5)

ExtFinDep>mean & Export = 1

Fitted CARs
-0.0004
0.0003

-0.00515**
(0.0021)

All Events
-0.0220**
-0.0191
(0.0098)
(0.0180)
0.00126**
0.0015
(0.0005)
(0.0011)
(0.0033)
(0.0045)
(0.0018)
(0.0043)
0.00842**
(0.0039)
0.00412*
(0.0024)

s.e.
0.0033
0.0031

ExtFinDep>mean & Export = 0

Fitted CARs
-0.0062
-0.0057

s.e.
0.0013
0.0014

ExtFinDep<mean & Export = 0

Fitted CARs
-0.0004
0.0032

s.e.
0.0011
0.0018

48

High ExtFinDep (Mfg.) & Export = 1 High ExtFinDep (Mfg.) & Export = 0

Fitted CARs
-0.0048
-0.0036

s.e.
0.0017
0.0015

Fitted CARs
-0.0029
-0.0022

s.e.
0.0021
0.0021

Low ExtFinDep (Mfg.) & Export = 1 Low ExtFinDep (Mfg.) & Export = 0

Fitted CARs
0.0038
0.0045

s.e.
0.0027
0.0025

Fitted CARs
0.0078
0.0079

s.e.
0.0033
0.0033

Table 5. The Market Reaction is Different For Controls on Debt vs. Equity
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns
are measured over a two-day window using Scholes-Williams betas. Log Total Assets correspond to one year
lagged values from Worldscope. External Finance Dependence (ExtFinDep) is measured as the difference
between capital expenditures and cash flows divided by capital expenditures as in Rajan and Zingales (1998).
Export data are matched from Secex. Equity is a dummy for equity events. Bootstrapped standard errors in
columns (1)-(4). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
All Events
Constant
-0.0258***
-0.0292***
-0.0251***
-0.0285***
(0.0099)
(0.0087)
(0.0091)
(0.0088)
Log Total Assets
0.00137**
0.00158***
0.00134**
0.00154***
(lag 1y)
(0.0006)
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
(0.0005)
ExtFinDep
-0.00006**
-0.00006**
(lag 1y)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
Exporter
0.00387*
0.00375+
(lag 1y)
(0.0021)
(0.0023)
Export < $1 mil
-0.00283
-0.00297
(0.0049)
(0.0040)
Export $1 mil -$100 mil
0.00778*
0.00762*
(0.0046)
(0.0046)
Export > $100 mil
0.00268
0.00259+
(0.0022)
(0.0017)
Equity
-0.00449**
-0.00449**
-0.00434*
-0.00434**
(0.0020)
(0.0018)
(0.0022)
(0.0020)
Observations
R-squared

Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P25
P50
Mean
P75
P90
P95
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
P25
P50
Mean
P75
P90
P95

1016
0.012

1016
0.016

999
0.011

999
0.015

Panel B: Fitted CARs and Standard Errors
Column (1)
Equity =1 & Export = 1
Equity =1 & Export = 0
Fitted CARs
s.e.
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0046
0.0018
-0.0088
0.0017
-0.0033
0.0016
-0.0079
0.0017
-0.0033
0.0016
-0.0074
0.0018
-0.0023
0.0015
-0.0069
0.0019
-0.0001
0.0015
-0.0028
0.0027
0.0006
0.0015
-0.0024
0.0027
Equity =0 & Export = 1
Equity =0 & Export = 0
Fitted CARs
s.e.
Fitted CARs
s.e.
-0.0001
0.0026
-0.0041
0.0013
0.0013
0.0023
-0.0034
0.0013
0.0012
0.0023
-0.0029
0.0012
0.0021
0.0021
-0.0025
0.0012
0.0044
0.0018
0.0010
0.0016
0.0051
0.0018
0.0021
0.0019

49

Table 6 Panel A. Interest Rates, Exchange Rates, and Cost of Capital Post-Capital Control Announcements
Notes: Change in the 1-year and 5-years interest rates, 2 and 3 days after the pre-announcement date in columns (1)-(4). Percentage change in the
exchange rate Brazilian Real to U.S. dollar at 2 and 3 days after announcement date in columns (5)-(6). Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15. Sources: BM&F, Bovespa, and Bloomberg.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Changes in Interest Rates and Exchange Rate Post-Capital Control Announcements
Interest Rates
Exchange Rate
1-Year
1-Year
5-Year
5-Year
% Change
% Change
[t-1,t+2]
[t-1,t+3]
[t-1,t+2]
[t-1,t+3]
[t+2]
[t+3]
All Events
0.0095
0.0325
0.0724+
0.118**
-0.00256
-0.000687
(0.0369)
(0.0444)
(0.0455)
(0.0540)
(0.0034)
(0.0035)

Constant
Obs.

16

16

16

16

16

16

Table 6 Panel B. Interest Rates, Exchange Rates, and Cost of Capital Post-Capital Control Announcements
Notes: Implied cost of capital following Hail and Leuz (2009) and Easton (2004). Data obtained from IBES are calculated for different-length
windows both before and after the event. Max and Min refer to root values over the relevant 14-day or 21-day window. Log Total Assets corresponds
to lagged values (to the closest year) taken from Worldscope. Export data are matched from Secex. Clustered standard errors in parenthesis. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel B: Cost of Capital
Max (14 days)
Constant
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
Exporter

-0.299
(0.730)
0.0701
(0.051)
-0.398
(0.281)

Export < $1 mil

0.0687
(0.050)

0.0625
(0.577)
-0.455+
(0.299)
-0.503*
(0.305)
0.0674
(0.049)

913
0.017

913
0.023

Export $1 mil -$100 mil
Export > $100 mil
Post-Event Dummy

Observations
R-squared

-0.477
(0.865)
0.081
(0.059)

Min (14 days)
-0.252
(0.739)
0.0682
(0.051)
-0.401
(0.291)

-0.439
(0.872)
0.0796
(0.059)

0.0740*
(0.044)

0.0633
(0.591)
-0.448
(0.313)
-0.517*
(0.314)
0.0724*
(0.042)

878
0.017

878
0.023

50

Max (21 days)
-0.203
(0.664)
0.0605
(0.045)
-0.346+
(0.237)

-0.371
(0.786)
0.0706
(0.052)

Min (21 days)
-0.113
(0.664)
0.0559
(0.044)
-0.347
(0.245)

-0.276
(0.781)
0.0657
(0.051)

0.0590*
(0.034)

0.119
(0.564)
-0.398+
(0.259)
-0.448*
(0.256)
0.0626*
(0.034)

0.0612*
(0.033)

0.135
(0.580)
-0.397+
(0.269)
-0.452*
(0.263)
0.0649*
(0.033)

1,050
0.017

1,050
0.023

1,010
0.016

1,010
0.022

Table 7. Robustness: Capital Controls, Alternative Indices, and Event Windows
Notes: Cumulative Abnormal returns using Scholes-Williams betas, CAPM, and raw returns. Results for
BOVESPA and IBRA indices. Bootstrapped standard errors. ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1, ‡p<0.15. Source:
Datastream.
returns.BOVESPA
CAR
ScholesCAPM
Williams
2 day
2 day (prior)
3 day
Observations
2 day
2 day (prior)
3 day
Observations
2 day
2 day (prior)
3 day
Observations

-0.00277**
(0.0011)
0.000867
(0.0012)
-0.000706
(0.0013)
1078

-0.00294***
(0.0010)
-0.00121
(0.0010)
-0.00225*
(0.0013)
1078

-0.00195+
(0.0012)
0.00108
(0.0015)
0.000466
(0.0014)
737

-0.00205*
(0.0011)
-0.00111
(0.0016)
-0.00111
(0.0014)
737

-0.00565***
(0.0017)
0.000133
(0.0019)
-0.00415**
(0.0018)
406

-0.00576***
(0.0012)
-0.00152
(0.0016)
-0.00516***
(0.0020)
406

IBRA
CAR
ScholesWilliams
Panel A: All Events
-0.00350***
-0.00269***
(0.0012)
(0.0008)
0.0106***
0.00197***
(0.0012)
(0.0006)
0.00621***
-0.000279
(0.0014)
(0.0008)
1078
2029
Panel B: Debt Events
-0.00294*
-0.00215***
(0.0016)
(0.0008)
0.0114***
0.00249***
(0.0013)
(0.0009)
0.00763***
0.000641
(0.0015)
(0.0011)
737
1382
Panel C: Equity Events
-0.00714***
-0.00511***
(0.0017)
(0.0012)
0.00853***
0.0011
(0.0018)
(0.0012)
-0.000944
-0.00364**
(0.0024)
(0.0014)
406
766
RAW

51

CAPM

RAW

-0.00297***
(0.0007)
-0.000804
(0.0006)
-0.00240***
(0.0009)
2029

-0.00168**
(0.0007)
0.0106***
(0.0007)
0.00667***
(0.0009)
2029

-0.00245**
(0.0010)
-0.0003
(0.0009)
-0.0015
(0.0013)
1382

-0.00113+
(0.0007)
0.0112***
(0.0009)
0.00772***
(0.0012)
1382

-0.00503***
(0.0011)
-0.00143
(0.0011)
-0.00497***
(0.0014)
766

-0.00496***
(0.0014)
0.00939***
(0.0016)
0.00096
(0.0017)
766

Table 8. Robustness: Additional Checks
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are measured over a two-day window using ScholesWilliams betas. Log Total Assets and Operating Revenue corresponds to lagged one year values from Worldscope; Bank Debt/Total Debt correspond to one quarter
lagged values and are from Worldscope. Export data (dummy variables) are matched from Secex. External Finance Dependence is measured as (CE-CF)/CE which is
the difference between capital expenditures and cash flows divided by cash flows as in Rajan and Zingales (1998). Loosening events corresponds to a dummy for
events associated with reductions in the IOF. MNCs correspond to firms that belong to a multinational firm (either Brazilian or foreign). ADRs corresponds to firms
that issue ADRs on the NYSE. Foreign Bond Issuance data are from Bloomberg. VO is turnover by volume, NOSH is number of shares outstanding, MCAP is market
capitalization. Bootstrapped standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
Bank Debt
Constant
Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
Exporter
ExtFinDep
(lag 1y)
Bank Debt / Total
Debt
Operating Revenue
(lag 1y)
VO/NOSH
(lag 1y)
(VO*P)/MV
(lag 1y)
(VO*P)/MCAP
(lag 1y)
Loosening Dummy
Observations
R-squared
Bootstrapped Errors

-0.0302***
(0.0113)
0.00155**
(0.0006)
0.00324
(0.0026)
-0.0022***
(0.0000)
-0.0000343
(0.0000)

Operating
Revenue
-0.00466***
(0.0012)

0.00346+
(0.0023)
-0.00006***
(0.0000)

MNCs

ADRs

Foreign Bond
Issuance

VO/NOSH

(VO*P)/MV

(VO*P)/
MCAP

Loosening
Dummy

-0.0212*
(0.0108)
0.00106*
(0.0006)
0.00372+
(0.0025)
-0.00006***
0.0000

-0.0305*
(0.0174)
0.00141
(0.0010)
0.00610**
(0.0029)
-0.0337+
(0.0002)

-0.0609***
(0.0156)
0.00306***
(0.0008)
0.00584+
(0.0039)
-0.00842
(0.0002)

-0.0267***
(0.0086)
0.00134***
(0.0005)
0.00369+
(0.0026)
-0.00006***
(0.0000)

-0.0268**
(0.0113)
0.00134**
(0.0007)
0.00371*
(0.0022)
-0.00006***
(0.0000)

-0.0267***
(0.0093)
0.00134***
(0.0005)
0.00370*
(0.0022)
-0.00006***
(0.0000)

-0.0266***
(0.0101)
0.00134**
(0.0006)
0.00365+
(0.0024)
-0.00006***
0.0000

4.47E-8+
(0.0000)
-0.00030
(0.0018)
2.02E-06
(0.0000)
-0.00227
(0.0036)
-3.21E-07
(0.0030)
824
0.008
Yes

1011
0.005
Yes

714
0.005
Yes

452
0.021
Yes

309
0.035
Yes

52

989
0.008
Yes

989
0.008
Yes

989
0.008
Yes

999
0.008
Yes

Table 9: Robustness: Tightening and Loosening Events.
Notes: Results for tightening capital control announcements in Panel A and loosening capital control announcements in
Panel B. The sample includes all the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are measured over a
two-day window using Scholes-Williams betas. Log Total Assets, Debt to Assets, and Short Term Debt to Total Debt all
correspond to one year lagged values and are from Worldscope. Export data are matched from Secex. Bootstrapped standard
errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
Panel A: Tightening Events
Constant
-0.00286***
-0.0227***
-0.0216***
-0.0201**
-0.0236***
-0.0258***
(0.0008)
(0.0074)
(0.0080)
(0.0088)
(0.0083)
(0.0085)
Log Total Assets
0.00118***
0.00114**
0.000986*
0.00115**
0.00128***
(lag 1y)
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
Debt/Assets
-9.98E-06
(lag 1y)
(0.0001)
Short-term Debt/Debt
0.00128
(lag 1y)
(0.0037)
Exporter
0.00382*
(0.0022)
Export < $1 mil
-0.00238
(0.0039)
Export $1 mil -$100 mil
0.00685*
(0.0040)
Export > $100 mil
0.00311
(0.0023)
Observations
R-squared

Constant

733
0.000

702
0.006

-0.0026
(0.0023)

-0.0361
(0.0312)
0.002
(0.0018)

Log Total Assets
(lag 1y)
Debt/Assets
(lag 1y)
Short-term Debt/Debt
(lag 1y)
Exporter

697
0.005

622
0.004

Panel B: Loosening Events
-0.0377
-0.029
(0.0317)
(0.0329)
0.00174
0.00172
(0.0018)
(0.0018)
0.000191
(0.0002)
-0.00821
(0.0068)

702
0.011

702
0.016

-0.0363
(0.0301)
0.00192
(0.0018)

-0.0424+
(0.0287)
0.00228
(0.0018)

0.00353
(0.0059)

Export < $1 mil

-0.00458
(0.0066)
0.0093
(0.0138)
0.00143
(0.0048)

Export $1 mil -$100 mil
Export > $100 mil

Observations
R-squared

345
0.000

314
0.004

309
0.007

53

306
0.005

314
0.006

314
0.01

Appendix Table 1. Robustness: CARs using MSCI World Index
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are
measured over a two-day window using Scholes-Williams betas and the MSCI World Index. Log Total Assets, Debt to
Assets, and Short Term Debt to Total Debt all correspond to one year lagged values and are from Worldscope. Export
data are matched from Secex. Bootstrapped standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡ p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
All Events
Constant
-0.0329***
-0.0889***
-0.0759***
-0.0779***
-0.0918***
-0.0935***
(0.0028)
(0.0231)
(0.0216)
(0.0239)
(0.0221)
(0.0239)
Log Total Assets
0.00336**
0.00343***
0.00332**
0.00317**
0.00328**
(lag 1y)
(0.0013)
(0.0012)
(0.0014)
(0.0012)
(0.0013)
Debt/Assets
-0.000452***
(lag 1y)
(0.0002)
Short-term Debt/Debt
-0.0312***
(lag 1y)
(0.0113)
Exporter
0.0144***
(0.0049)
Export < $1 mil
0.0264**
(0.0126)
Export $1 mil -$100 mil
0.0126*
(0.0070)
Export > $100 mil
0.0130**
(0.0060)
Observations
R-squared

1,078
0.000

1,016
0.004

1,006
0.01

54

928
0.011

1,016
0.01

1,016
0.011

Appendix Table 2. Robustness: CARs-Invariant Window
Notes: The sample includes all events and the firms on the Bovespa exchange. Cumulative Abnormal Returns are measured
over a two-day window using Scholes-Williams betas and the estimation window of event 10/19/2009. Log Total Assets,
Debt to Assets, and Short Term Debt to Total Debt all correspond to one year lagged values and are from Worldscope.
Export data are matched from Secex. Bootstrappedd standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1, ‡
p<0.15.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel A: Cumulative Abnormal Returns (Scholes-Williams)
All Events
Constant
-0.00322***
-0.0325***
-0.0319***
-0.0257**
-0.0334***
-0.0373***
(0.0012)
(0.0099)
(0.0109)
(0.0109)
(0.0091)
(0.0101)
Log Total Assets
0.00175***
0.00164***
0.00141**
0.00170***
0.00194***
(lag 1y)
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
Debt/Assets
0.000045
(lag 1y)
(0.0001)
Short-term Debt/Debt
-0.00372
(lag 1y)
(0.0040)
Exporter
0.00417*
(0.0025)
Export < $1 mil
-0.000859
(0.0055)
Export $1 mil -$100 mil
0.00771*
(0.0047)
Export > $100 mil
0.00277
(0.0023)
Observations
R-squared

1037
0.000

980
0.007

972
0.007

55

896
0.005

980
0.011

980
0.014

