                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ALL OR NOTHING? THE IMPACT OF SCHOOL AND CLASSROOM GENDER
           COMPOSITION ON EFFORT AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT

                                            Soohyung Lee
                                           Lesley J. Turner
                                            Seokjin Woo
                                           Kyunghee Kim

                                        Working Paper 20722
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20722


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank Katharine Abraham, Chris Avery, Sandy Black, David Blau, Thomas Dee, John Ham, Muriel
Niederle, Alex Ponce-Rodriguez, and Jeff Smith for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Soohyung Lee, Lesley J. Turner, Seokjin Woo, and Kyunghee Kim. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
All or Nothing? The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Effort and
Academic Achievement
Soohyung Lee, Lesley J. Turner, Seokjin Woo, and Kyunghee Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 20722
December 2014
JEL No. I20,I21,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the causal impact of school and classroom gender composition on achievement. We take
advantage of the random assignment of Korean middle school students to single-sex schools, co-educational
(coed) schools with single-sex classes, and coed schools with mixed-gender classes. Male students
attending single-sex classes within coed schools score 0.10 of a standard deviation below male students
in mixed-gender classes, and this achievement gap is entirely accounted for by classroom gender composition.
Conversely, male students attending single-sex schools outperform their counterparts in mixed-gender
classes by 0.15 of a standard deviation. The significant impact of single-sex schools on male students'
achievement are not driven by classroom gender composition, but largely accounted for by increases
in student effort and study-time. We find little evidence that classroom or school gender composition
affect the outcomes of female students.


Soohyung Lee                                         Seokjin Woo
Department of Economics                              Myongji University
University of Maryland                               34 Geobukgol-ro Seodaemun-gu
3147B Tydings Hall                                   Seoul, 120-728, S. Korea
College Park, MD 20742                               sjwoo@mju.ac.kr
lees@econ.umd.edu
                                                     Kyunghee Kim
Lesley J. Turner                                     Korea institute for Curriculum and Evaluation
Department of Economics                              Jeongdong Bldg.
University of Maryland                               21-15 Jeongdong-gil Jung-gu
3115E Tydings Hall                                   Seoul, 100-784, S. Korea
College Park, MD 20742                               khee@kice.re.kr
and NBER
turner@econ.umd.edu
1     Introduction

The impact of interactions with peers on individual outcomes has been extensively studied in economics, in

the context of social- and family-networks, neighborhood effects, and within educational settings. Research

on peer effects in education provides evidence that peers matter, but underscores the difficulty in identifying

the causal impact of potentially endogenously formed groups (e.g., Evans et al. 1992; Manski 1993; Moffitt

2001; Angrist 2014). In this paper, we focus on a particular type of peer effect: the role of student gender

and the gender composition of peers in the education production function. Many countries provide some

public schooling in gender-segregated classes or schools. The United States joined this group in 2006 when

the Department of Education relaxed restrictions on single-sex schooling in public schools, resulting in

large increases in the number of schools offering single-sex education and sparking a lively debate between

proponents and critics of such policies.1

    Nonrandom selection of students into schools and classes within schools makes it difficult to fully assess

the impact of a student’s peers on outcomes. Researchers have designed clever identification strategies that

exploit variation in the share of female students within coeducational (coed) schools (e.g., Hoxby 2000) and

variation in the probability of assignment to a coed versus single-sex schools (e.g., Jackson 2012). However,

there is less evidence of whether estimates based on local variation around an evenly split class can be

extrapolated to measure the impact of single-sex classrooms within coed schools. Furthermore, estimated

impacts of single-sex schools may not represent the impact of attending a single-sex class within a coed

schools, if teachers and schools adjust their curriculum, discipline methods, and other inputs in response

to student gender composition. The distinction between single-sex schools and single-sex classrooms within

coed schools is policy relevant: while most of the expansion in single-sex schooling in the U.S. since 2006 has

taken the form of single-sex classes within coed schools, almost all studies on single-sex education involve

comparisons between single-sex and coed schools.

    We address these challenges by examining middle school students in the Seoul, South Korea metropolitan

area, a setting that offers close to ideal circumstances for addressing concerns of endogenous sorting and

differences in inputs that might be correlated with student gender composition. Within a given district,

students are randomly assigned to single-sex schools, coed schools with single-sex classes, and coed schools

with mixed-gender classes. Most inputs that would be considered endogenous in other settings, such as

curriculum and school funding, are orthogonal to peer gender composition in our context.
   1 See, for instance, Weil’s March 2008 New York Times article (“Teaching Boys and Girls Separately”), Hollingsworth

and Bonner’s July 2012 article in the Christian Science Monitor (“Why single-sex education is spreading across the US”),
Morello’s Indiana Public Radio May 2014 report (“The Great Gender Debate: Should Boys and Girls Learn Separately?”), and
the American Civil Liberties Union’s complaint filed against the U.S. Department of Education in May 2014 that single-sex
schooling in Florida violates Title IX prohibitions on sex discrimination in federally funded education programs.




                                                           2
    We find significant impacts of peer gender composition on male students’ achievement but no effect

on female students’ performance. Male students in coed schools with single-sex classes perform the worst,

scoring over 0.10 of a standard deviation below male students in balanced-gender classrooms. Conversely,

assignment to a single-sex school maximizes male students’ achievement, with students scoring 0.15 of a

standard deviation above their counterparts in coed classrooms.

    To our knowledge, ours is the first paper to identify the causal impact of assignment to a single-sex class

relative to a single-sex school.2 We show that class- and school-based gender segregation yield significantly

different outcomes for male students. In our setting, using variation in the gender composition of coed classes

provides an accurate prediction of the negative impact of assignment to a single-sex classroom within a coed

school, suggesting that it may be appropriate to use results from existing studies, such as Hoxby (2000),

to approximate the impact of the recent expansion of single-sex classes in the United States. However, our

results suggest that estimates from research examining the impacts of single-sex schools will not accurately

predict the effect of single-sex classrooms within a mixed-gender school.

    We show that increases in study time and effort account for approximately 60 percent of the positive

impact of attending a single-sex school on male students’ achievement. Male students in single-sex schools

are significantly more likely to report being focused on lectures, participating in classroom activities, and

preparing in advance for class relative to male students attending coed schools. Male students in single-sex

schools report spending more than an additional hour per week on homework and extra curricular tutoring

relative to their peers in coeducational settings.

    One explanation for why single-sex instruction benefits male students in single-sex schools while harming

them in coed schools is that teachers and schools are able to specialize when they teach only male students. In

Korean middle schools, while students remain with their assigned classroom, they are instructed by multiple

teachers. Thus, teachers in coed schools with single-sex classes instruct both all-male and all-female classes,

limiting their ability to adopt techniques, such as teaching style and disciplinary methods, that may best

serve students of a given gender. Our findings suggest that, if such specialization exists, it is able to increase

achievement by inducing male students to exert more effort towards academic tasks. Although we cannot

provide direct evidence of these channels, our findings do suggest that the gains from altering classroom

gender composition are not zero-sum if single-sex schooling is an option.

    Our paper contributes to an extensive literature on within-school gender peer effects.3 In the first study to
    2 Strain (2013) examines impact of single-sex classrooms in the context of a coed school using variation in the availability of

single-sex math and reading classes in North Carolina elementary and middle schools in a differences in differences framework.
Although the author estimates significant negative impacts of single-sex classes on achievement for students of both genders,
placebo tests indicate a correlation between period t test scores and period t + 1 treatment, suggesting that the implementation
of single-sex classrooms is correlated with unobservable factors that are not fully captured by school, year, and grade fixed
effects.
    3 Sacerdote (2011), Epple and Romano (2011), and Sacerdote (2014) summarize research on peer effects in education.




                                                                3
take advantage of quasi-experimental variation in classroom gender composition, Hoxby (2000) uses within-

school, across-cohort idiosyncratic variation in the share of female elementary and middle school students and

estimates that students of both genders have lower performance when they have fewer female classmates.4

Lavy and Schlosser (2011) use both cross-cohort and within-student variation in cohort gender composition

and find similar negative impacts of an increase in the share of classmates that are male. Furthermore,

by examining impacts of classroom gender composition on students’ own behavior and the behavior of

classmates, the authors provide evidence that the positive impact of female-heavy classes stems from a

reduction in the probability of disruptive behavior in classes with fewer male students, rather than changes

in students’ own behavior due to peer gender.5 Using the random assignment of elementary students to

classrooms in the Project STAR experiment, Whitmore (2005) finds that an increase in the share of female

students raises achievement of male and female students, but only in lower grades. Lu and Anderson

(forthcoming) examine within-class peer effects in China and find that female middle school students who

are randomly assigned to sit near more female students earn higher test scores.

    We also contribute to the literature examining the impacts of single-sex schooling.6 Jackson (2012) uses

variation in assignment to single-sex secondary schools in Trinidad and Tobago (conditional on demand for

single-sex schooling) in a instrumental variables framework. His results suggest that that, while the marginal

male student does not benefit from attending an all-male school, the marginal female student with strong

preferences for single-sex schooling earns higher test scores but takes fewer science courses. Most similar to

our paper’s setting, Park et al. (2013) and Choi et al. (2014) estimate the impact of random assignment to

coed and single-sex high schools in Seoul on college entrance exam performance. Park et al. (2013) estimate

a random effects model while Choi et al. (2014) include district fixed effects and allow for heterogeneous

impacts of single-sex schooling across districts; both studies find a positive impact of single-sex schooling on

male students’ achievement. Different from these two studies, we examine student effort and time use, as

well as teacher and peer effort, which provide information on the mechanisms through which peer gender

affects academic achievement. Furthermore, our empirical setting allows for a cleaner identification than the

high school setting these two papers exploit, because at the end of their initial year, high school students

must choose a track, which could be affected by gender peer effects, and the scoring of college entrance exams

is not comparable across tracks.
   4 Hoxby (2000) also illustrates that the positive impact of female classmates likely operates through channels beyond the

increase in average peer achievement that results from the fact that in her setting, female students earn higher scores than male
students, on average.
   5 Garcia-Fontes and Ciccone (2014) argue that using variation in school by grade gender composition for identification will

yield biased estimates in the presence of grade retention. As an alternative, they use variation in the gender composition of
birth cohorts and estimate positive impacts of female peers on male students’ achievement in Spain.
   6 In a review of descriptive studies that compare outcomes of students enrolled in single-sex and coed schools, U.S. Department

of Education (2005) reports that 15 out of 43 studies found single-sex school students earned higher test scores coed school
students, while only one study found that coed school students outperformed single-sex school students.



                                                                4
     Our findings have implications for public policy outside of Korea. Many countries have publicly funded

single-sex schools. Since the U.S. Department of Education relaxed restrictions on single-sex education in

2006, public schools have been allowed to separate male and female students into single-sex classrooms and

schools. According to the National Association for Single Sex Public Education, an advocacy program for

single-sex schooling, as of 2012, over 500 U.S. public schools contained single-sex programs, and close to 400

of these involved single-sex classrooms within coed schools.7 In reference to the 2006 policy change, Halpern

et al. (2011) assert that “there is no well-designed research showing that single-sex (SS) education improves

students’ academic performance...” We believe our study fills this gap by providing a nuanced view of the

potential benefits of single-sex schooling.

     The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows: in Section 2, we describe middle schools and students in

Korea. Section 3 discusses our data and sample and in Section 4, we describe our empirical approach. We

present estimates of the impact of school and classroom gender composition on the achievement of male and

female students in Section 5, while in Section 6, we discuss how evidence from survey data on student time

use and student, peer, and teacher effort can inform our understanding of the mechanisms through which

school and classroom gender composition affects achievement. Section 7 concludes.



2      Setting

We focus on middle school students in the Seoul, South Korea metropolitan area, which provides an ideal

setting for identifying the causal effect of peer gender on student outcomes for several reasons. First, due

to South Korea’s “Equalization Policy”, elementary and middle school students are randomly assigned to a

school in their district, and students are not allowed to submit preferences over schools during the assignment

process.8 Compliance with random assignment is high, because the only way for to avoid assignment to a

specific school is through a student’s entire family moving to a different district. Even if a student’s family

moves to another school district, he or she is still subject to random assignment. The central government’s

education policies, including the random assignment rule, apply to almost all schools except for a small

number of specialized schools (mostly for arts and athletics) supervised by the government with separate

regulations.9 Therefore, we observe the vast majority of middle school students and their outcomes. Fur-

thermore, almost all school districts in Seoul contain single-sex schools, coed schools with single-sex classes,

and coed schools with mixed-gender classes. Seoul has 11 school districts, which contain approximately 370
    7 Available at: http://www.singlesexschools.org/schools-schools.htm.
    8 Thispolicy, implemented in the 1970s, was designed to provide a homogeneous educational environment to all South Korean
students, and prohibits schools from selecting students, segregating students based on their performance, and deviating from
the national curriculum (Kim et al. 2008).
   9 In Seoul, such specialized schools make up less than 2 percent of the middle schools and less than 1 percent of middle school

students.


                                                                5
middle schools. Roughly 30 percent of these schools are single-sex and around 7 percent are coed schools

that separate male and female students into single-sex classes.

    Second, within schools, students have no choice over the peer group with whom they are required to spend

the majority of their time at school. Students are assigned to classes, called “Bahns”, of approximately 34

students. Following Korea’s “Equalization Policy,” the assignment process equalizes prior achievement across

Bahns (Kang 2007). Therefore, our setting provides us exogenous variation in peer gender composition in

mixed-gender classes, while holding the average quality of peers constant.10 Each Bahn has a homeroom

teacher, who is in charge of keeping track of students’ performance, while subject teachers visit the classroom

throughout the day.11 Within coed schools that place students in mixed-gender classes, this process through

which students are allocated to classrooms and idiosyncratic variation in cohort gender composition provides

additional variation in the share of students that are female in a given classroom.

    Finally, many factors that would be considered endogenous in other settings, such as curriculum and

school funding, are held constant across districts, schools, and classrooms. All Seoul area elementary schools

are coed with coed classrooms; middle school is the first opportunity for students to be exposed to single-sex

instruction. All Korean middle schools use the national curriculum and the length of academic year does

not vary. Schools are centrally financed, resulting in equal funding across schools. Nationwide, teachers are

subject to the same qualification requirements and salary schedule.

    The one dimension along which schools may differ is whether a school was historically established by a

public or private entity. However, “private” schools do not charge tuition, participate in the random assign-

ment process, are publicly funded, and use the national curriculum. Private schools have more discretion

over teacher hiring and firing, conditional on the national qualification requirements, but no discretion over

teacher pay or benefits. Public school teachers are randomly assigned to schools for approximately five year

periods. Due to the fact that schools that were established by a private entity are more likely to be single-sex,

we will control for this characteristic, as well as the characteristics of teachers, to show that our estimated

impacts of single-sex education are not driven by differences between public and private schools.

    The Korean Ministry of Education administers the National Assessment of Educational Achievement

(NAEA) each June to measure students’ academic performance. All South Korean students at grades 6,
   10 For instance, if school has 3 classes in a given grade, students are ranked by their prior year test scores, and the student

with the highest score is assigned to the first classroom, the student with the second highest score is assigned to the second
classroom, the student with the third highest score is assigned to the third classroom, the student with the fourth highest score
is assigned to the first classroom, etc.
   11 During our sample period, schools were allowed to track students based on their baseline math and English test scores. In

general, students from two separate classrooms were divided into two groups - a high performing group and low performing
group. Students were only divided this way for math and/or English instruction and returned to their original classroom for the
remainder of the day. Given the class time allocated to math and English based on the national curriculum for middle schools,
students in a school using tracking systems for both math and English, are exposed to other classroom students for about 20
percent of their school day. About 51 percent of middle schools in our data tracked students in both math and English in 2009,
and 67 percent did in 2010.



                                                                6
9, and 11, take NAEA tests in five subjects: reading, math, English, social studies, and science. The

NAEA tests we will focus on - those given to ninth graders - are not as high stakes as the national college

entrance exam. However, these tests still represent a useful proxy for students’ educational attainment as the

tests’ content is well aligned with the middle school curriculum and a student’s middle school performance

determines whether he or she is admitted to a magnet high school.12

    Our focus on middle school students provides several advantages over previous research examining the

impact of single-sex schooling at the high school level in Korea (e.g., Park et al. 2013; Choi et al. 2014).

First, assignment to high school is not completely random. Nationwide, approximately half of all Korean

high schools select their students based on academic performance (Kim et al. 2008). In Seoul, dozens of

magnet high schools are exempt from the random assignment rule, and about half of school districts in our

sample period allow for students to submit preference rankings over their high school assignment. Therefore,

the students subject to random assignment are not representative sample of the population in Korea or

Seoul, making the estimated impact of single-sex schooling more difficult to interpret, especially given the

limited available information on students’ background characteristics. Furthermore, high school students

endogenously select into one of two tracks (math/science or humanities/social science) at the end of their

freshman year, and scores from the available performance measure (the College Scholarly Aptitude Test or

CSAT) are not comparable across tracks, but can only be used to measure relative performance of students

conditional on track choice. As the fraction of students who choose the math/science track varies across

single-sex and coed high schools, selection bias complicates identification of gender peer effects at the high

school level.

    Finally, developmental psychology research suggests middle school may be an especially relevant period for

examining the impacts of single-sex schooling, since differences in learning and brain development by gender

are particularly pronounced. This research suggests that girls complete more of their brain development at

earlier ages, and that boys and girls experience differences in the development of areas related to language

versus spatial reasoning during this period (Lenroot et al. 2007; Hanlon et al. 1999). However, differences

in brain development do not necessarily imply differences in learning (Halpern et al. 2011; Eliot 2013). The

onset of puberty leads to differences in hormone levels and behavior. Even in the absence of meaningful

physiological differences, adolescence is a period when differences in socialization and norms experienced

by boys and girls may reinforce pressure to conform to gender-specific stereotypes, resulting in differences

in performance (e.g., Steele et al. 2002). For example, Lee et al. (2014) and Booth and Nolen (2012)
  12 In Seoul, about 10 percent of high schools fall into this category. These school are widely regarded as providing their

students with an advantage on the national college admissions exam. For example, over 46 percent of the new enrollees in Seoul
National University, considered the best college in Korea, graduated from special high schools in Korea (Ministry of Education,
Press Release, June 26th, 2014).




                                                              7
examine students in middle schools and report gender differences in competitiveness in South Korea and

U.K, respectively, which have been shown to have long-run implications for gender gaps in labor market

outcomes (e.g., Gneezy et al. 2003; Niederle and Vesterlund 2007; Flory et al. forthcoming).



3     Data and Sample

Our primary data set contains student-level administrative records from 2009 and 2010. We observe 9th

grade students’ NAEA performance in each of the five tested subjects (math, reading, English, science, and

social studies). We standardize test scores to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one across

all students in a given year. We also construct a measure of overall achievement by standardizing the sum

of a student’s performance in all subjects. In addition to the test scores, we observe each student’s gender,

school district, class and school gender composition, and responses to survey questions measuring family

background, effort, time-use, and evaluations of teachers and peers. However, the survey data offer only

limited information on family background. Specifically, we only observe a student’s living arrangements,

which provides a rough proxy for socioeconomic status (SES) in that students living with both biological

parents are more likely to come from an advantaged family (Park 2014). Finally, we supplement our data with

a separate school-level dataset called the Korea Education & Research Information Service (KERIS) provided

by the Korean Ministry of Education. For each year, the KERIS includes school-level characteristics, such as

student-teacher ratios, whether a school was established by a private entity, teacher characteristics, number

of bullying incidents and transfers.


3.1     Characteristics of schools and students

We limit our sample to students enrolled in a Seoul metropolitan area school. Students in Seoul are not

allowed to express their preference rankings over schools within their school districts, while in some other

regions, students’ preference rankings are used in middle school assignment. We further restrict our sample

to students in districts that contain all four types of middle schools (e.g., single-sex male and female schools,

coed schools with mixed-gender classes, and coed schools with single-sex classes). Eight of the 11 Seoul-area

school districts contain coed, single-sex male, and single-sex female schools.13 We limit our analysis to these

eight districts, which contain 280 schools representing 76 percent of all schools and 77 percent of students

in Seoul.14

    Table 1 displays the characteristics of students and schools in our sample. As shown in Panel A, the
  13 Two districts do not contain either single-sex male or single-sex female schools and one district that does not contain coed

schools with single-sex classes.
  14 Our estimates are robust to using the full set of Seoul schools and students (available upon request).




                                                               8
average class size, share of teachers with experience, and student to teacher ratios are quite similar across the

four types of schools. However, single-sex schools have fewer classes and schools with mixed-gender classes are

less likely to be classified as private schools and have a smaller share of teachers that belong to a professional

teachers’ organization.15 A higher share of all-male schools received support from a government program

targeting low-performing schools in 2010.16 Finally, single-sex male schools have fewer female teachers - on

average, 41 percent of teachers in such schools are female, compared to 65 percent of teachers in single-sex

female schools, 61 percent in coed schools with single-sex classrooms, and 73 percent in coed schools.

    Female students earn higher test scores than males in every subject and in each type of school. Across

student gender, students attending single-sex classrooms within coed schools have the lowest average perfor-

mance. Male students in single-sex schools outperform male students in all other settings, whereas female

students in single-sex schools and those in coed classrooms have similar performance. An F-test rejects the

hypothesis that test scores are equal across school types with p < 0.001 for both genders. As shown in

Figure 1, while the distribution of test scores are similar for female students in single-sex schools and coed

classrooms, the performance of male students in single-sex schools dominates that of male students in coed

classrooms at almost every part of the distribution.



4     Modeling Gender Composition and Student Achievement

School and class gender composition may affect a given student’s achievement through several channels.

First, peer gender composition may indirectly affect student achievement by inducing students and their

parents to alter their inputs (e.g., Epple and Romano 2011). For example, students may increase their effort

or time devoted to studying in response to peer gender composition. Furthermore, parents may alter their

investment for their children (e.g., by hiring private tutors).

    Second, peer gender may directly affect a student’s achievement by altering interactions among students

within or outside the classroom. For example, if boys are more disruptive than girls, as in Lavy and Schlosser

(2011), an increased share of male classmates may increase the time teachers spend handling disruptions

and decrease time available for instruction (e.g., Lazear 2001). Even in the absence of disruptive behavior,

if students are distracted by opposite-gender peers, they may learn less within coed settings. Conversely,

if female students have higher performance than their male counterparts (as is the case in Korea and the
  15 These organizations were primarily established for political purposes, such as lobbying for changes in the national curriculum.

Such organizations do not have collective bargaining rights.
  16 Schools with more than 20 percent of their students receiving NAEA scores below the threshold for “basic understanding”

in 2009 were eligible for this program, which provided support (e.g., monetary transfers, additional teachers’ aides) in 2010.
When we limit our sample to only contain 2009 observations, our results remain qualitatively the same, suggesting our estimated
impacts of school and classroom gender composition are not driven by differences in receipt of the government subsidy in 2010
(available upon request).




                                                                 9
US), and higher ability peers generate positive externalities, an increase in the share of classmates that

are female may make it easier for a given student to master his or her coursework. In our setting, we can

rule out this channel in mixed-gender classes, as classrooms are balanced in prior achievement of students.

Conditional on classroom gender composition, school gender composition may still matter if students interact

with other students in different classrooms through school-level extracurricular activities. However, within-

school interactions between students in different classrooms are quite limited in Korea. For example, Lim

et al. (2009) show that less than 15 percent of middle school students participate in an extracurricular club,

with participants interacting approximately once per week. Only 13 percent of middle school students join

a student board, which meets, on average, only once per quarter.

    Finally, beyond the channels discussed above, school and class gender composition may affect student

achievement if teachers adjust their behavior in response to their students’ gender composition. Korean

teachers report that male and female students often react differently to the same teaching style (Chung

et al. 2009). As an example, Jung and Chung (2005) report that male elementary and middle school

students have more in-class interactions with their teachers and are more likely to ask questions and respond

to questions posed by teachers. In addition, teachers may use different discipline methods depending on

gender composition. Male and female students report differences in both their experiences of within-school

disciplinary methods and their support for certain discipline methods. Male students in Korea are more

likely to report experiencing corporal and verbal punishment and undergoing inspection of their personal

belongings and appearance compared to female students, but male students are also more likely to report

supporting stricter discipline methods (Mo and Kim 2009).17 Schools may also adjust inputs in response to

student gender composition, such as adopting different curricula or hiring different teachers. In our setting,

schools have limited ability to adjust such inputs.

    The remainder of this section presents our empirical framework for identifying the impact of peer gender

composition on student’s achievement and other outcomes, including many of the student, parent, and

teacher responses we describe above. We then discuss our method for decomposing the impact of peer

gender composition on achievement into direct peer effects and indirect effects that occur through changes

in student and teacher inputs. Finally, we present evidence supporting the validity of our identification

strategy.
  17 For instance, 27 percent of male students reported experiencing corporal punishment at least once a week, compared to only

12 percent of female students. However, male students were also more likely to express support for these disciplinary methods.
To give an example, 43 percent of male students expressed support for corporal punishment compared to 36 percent of female
students.




                                                              10
4.1     Empirical framework

Under the identifying assumption that within a given district, students are randomly assigned to schools

and classes, ordinary least squares regressions of test scores on school and classroom gender composition

and district fixed effects should generate causal estimates of the average impact of single-sex schooling on

student achievement. Our estimates of gender peer effects will include both direct peer effects and indirect

effects that are driven by changes in teacher and student effort. To examine the impact of extensive margin

variation in peer gender on student achievement, we estimate:



            Aicst = αf SSsf + αm SSsm + β f SCsf + β m SCsm + X0it λg + Z0st η g + ξ d×g + ξ t×g + icst                       (1)


Where Aicst represents the achievement of student i assigned to class c in school s and year t, SSsf =

1 [single-sex school] × 1 [female] and SSsm = 1 [single-sex school] × 1 [male]. Similarly, SCsg represents the

interaction between an indicator for whether a student belongs to a single-sex class within a coed school

and an indicator for whether the student has gender g. Therefore, the omitted category for school and

classroom gender composition is mixed-gender classes within coed schools. Xit is a vector of indicators for

student living arrangements (e.g., both biological parents, single mother, other relative), which proxy for

socioeconomic status, and Zst is a vector of school-specific characteristics.18 Even though we expect most of

these characteristics to be orthogonal to peer gender composition, we include them in our main specifications

to reduce residual variation. All student and school control variables are fully interacted with student gender.

Finally, we include a set of district by student gender and year by student gender fixed effects. Standard

errors are clustered within school by year cells to account for correlation of error terms within a given school

and year.

    Our second model examines the role of gender composition of mixed-gender classes in coed schools:



            Aicst = δ f F racF emalefcst + δ m F racF emalem      0   g   0   g
                                                           cst + Xit λ + Zst η + ξ d×g + ξ t×g + icst                         (2)


Where F racF emalegcst represents the share of classmates that are female interacted with an indicator for

whether a student is gender g, standardized to represent deviations from a class with an equal share of

male and female students. We use variation in classroom gender composition, rather than cohort gender

composition (as in Hoxby (2000) and Lavy and Schlosser (2011)), for two reasons. First, in our setting,

students do not have any choice over their classroom assignment, and students spend most of their time with
  18 School-specific characteristics include the total number of teachers in the school, the fraction teachers that are classified

as experienced, the fraction of teachers belonging to a professional organization, pupils per teacher, school size, the fraction of
teachers that are female, whether a school was established by a private entity, and whether a school received government aid
in 2010.



                                                                11
their 35 classmates throughout an academic year. Second, since class size is capped at 35, there is a greater

degree of variation in the share of female students in a classroom than the share within a school. However,

our estimates are quite similar when we use cohort gender variation instead (available upon request).

   To jointly estimate the impacts of within- and across-school and class variation in gender composition,

we combine equations (1) and (2):


         Aicst = αf SSsf + αm SSsm + β f SCsf + β m SCsm + δ f F racF emalefcst + δ m F racF emalem
                                                                                                  cst
                                                                                                            (3)
                                         X0it λg + Z0st η g + ξ d×g + ξ t×g + icst .


In this case, α̂g will represent the estimated impact of moving a student of gender g from a coed classroom

with an equal share of male and female students to a single-sex school, β̂ g will represent moving the student

to a single-sex classroom within a coed school, and δ̂ g will represent the estimated impact of a marginal

increase in the share of students in a coed class that are female, relative to a class with an equal share of

male and female students.

   The above estimates encompass the overall effects of peer gender on student achievement that may occur

through the multiple channels described at the beginning of this section. To understand the mechanisms

behind these effects, we use the three models to examine the extent to which students and teachers adjust

their inputs in response to peer gender composition. Furthermore, we conduct decomposition exercises by

examining the extent to which the achievement gap between single-sex and coed schools decreases once we

control for student and teacher inputs. For example, if differential effort by students within coed and single-

sex schools drives the achievement gap between male students in these schools, then we should estimate a

smaller achievement gap once we control for student effort in (3).


4.2    Evaluating the assumption of within-district random assignment

Before presenting estimates of the impact of school and classroom gender composition on student outcomes,

we provide two pieces of evidence in support of our identifying assumption of within-district random assign-

ment. First, we find no systematic differences in students’ family background across school types. Using

student survey data, Lee et al. (2014) show that within a given district, assignment to single-sex schools

is uncorrelated with household income, family composition, and parental education. Unfortunately, our

dataset only contains a subset of these predetermined student characteristics. We test whether a student’s

living arrangement is correlated with assignment to a particular type of middle school. Living arrangements

serve as a proxy for student SES in that high SES children are more likely to live with both of their biological

parents whereas lower SES children are more likely to live with a single parent (Park 2014). As shown in



                                                        12
Table 2, the probability of living with a single parent or with both biological parents is uncorrelated with

classroom and school gender composition. Only one of the 18 point estimates is statistically significant, and

suggests that male students in single-sex schools are slightly more likely (1 percent) to be living with both

biological parents. However, we cannot reject that the correlation between school and classroom gender

composition and the probability of living with both biological parents is jointly equal to zero (p = 0.44).

Nonetheless, we control for student living arrangements in our main specification.

    Second, we provide evidence that, for the vast majority of students, initial random assignment to a

particular school type is binding. We use school-level KERIS data, and examine the number of students

(in grades 7 through 9) who leave a school (quit) or migrate to another school district (transfer). KERIS

does not contain separate measures of these outcomes by grade or by student gender. Therefore, we only

compare aggregate outcomes in single-sex and coed, single-sex classroom schools relative to coed schools with

mixed-gender classrooms. To do so, we estimate a model with school-type indicators, school characteristics,

and year and district fixed effects:


                          Yst = αf SSsf + am SSsm + βSCs + Z0st η + ξ d + ξ t + sdt .                    (4)


We do find evidence of significantly lower, albeit quite small in magnitude, quit and transfer rates within

single-sex schools. Column (1) of Table 3 shows that on average, 17 of every 1000 students quit in a given

year, leaving their assigned school, but not enrolling in a different school. Single-sex schools have 5 fewer

quits per 1000 students. The average single-sex middle school has approximately 780 students, with 260

students in 9th grade. Even if all of the quits came from 9th grade, this would only imply a 4 student

(2 percent) reduction in quits relative to other school types. As shown in column (2), estimated impacts

on transfer rates out of single-sex male schools are of a similar magnitude. Given this small magnitude of

transfers and quits, it is unlikely that endogenous quits and transfers would mitigate the initial random

assignment within school districts.



5     Impacts of Peer Gender on Achievement

We first compare the outcomes of students in coed schools to those of their counterparts in single-sex

classrooms and single-sex schools in order to examine the impact of extensive margin variation in school

and classroom gender composition on student achievement. Table 4 displays estimates from (1). Our first

specification includes only year and school district fixed effects (fully interacted with gender). Estimates

from this model suggest that assignment to a single-sex school increases male students’ achievement by a



                                                      13
statistically significant 0.14 of a standard deviation, relative to coed school assignment, and by one-fifth of

a standard deviation, relative to assignment to a single-sex classroom within a coed school. Our second

specification, which controls for students’ living arrangements, produces similar results.

   In our third and preferred specification, we add controls for school characteristics. The estimated impact

of assignment to a single-sex school relative to assignment to a coed classroom on male students’ achievement

increases to 0.17 of a standard deviation. Furthermore, male students in single-sex schools score more than

one-quarter of a standard of a deviation higher than their counterparts in single-sex classrooms within coed

schools. Finally, male students assigned to single-sex classes in coed schools score an approximately one-

tenth of a standard deviation lower than male students in mixed-gender classes. None of our specifications

yield significant estimates of the impact of peer gender on female students’ achievement. For the remainder

of the paper, we report results from models similar to our third specification that include district and year

fixed effects and controls for school and student characteristics, all fully interacted with gender.

   Next, we investigate whether the impact of gender-segregated education is driven by impacts on achieve-

ment in specific subject areas. We examine students’ performance on reading, English, math, science, and

social studies tests. As shown in Table 5, we find no evidence that female students’ performance depends on

school or class gender composition in any subject except for English, where female students in coed schools

with single-sex classes score approximately one-tenth of a standard deviation lower than female students in

fully coed classes. Conversely, in every subject, male students in single-sex schools outperform their coun-

terparts in coed schools, scoring between 0.13 and 0.17 of a standard deviation higher than boys in coed

classes and 0.21 to 0.28 of a standard deviation higher than male students in single-sex classes. Finally, male

students in single-sex classes within coed schools perform worse than their counterparts in coed classrooms

in every subject, although our estimates are only statistically significant in the case of reading, English, and

science.

   In Table 6, we turn to examine whether variation in the share of classmates that are female affects the

performance of students in mixed-gender classes, limiting our sample to students enrolled in coed schools

with mixed-gender classrooms. We estimate that male students’ achievement is increasing in the share of

their classmates that are female in every subject. A 10 percentage point increase in a male student’s share of

classmates that are female results in an approximately 0.04 standard deviation increase in overall achievement

and a 0.03 to 0.04 standard deviation increase in achievement across subjects, on average. Conversely, we do

not find a statistically significant relationship between female students’ achievement and the share of their

classmates that are also female expect in the case of science, although for every subject, our point estimates

are positive.19
 19 We   also estimate models that include school fixed-effects and obtain similar results (available upon request).



                                                               14
    Finally, we jointly estimate the impact of intensive and extensive margin variation in school and classroom

gender composition via equation (3). Our results are consistent with those displayed in Tables 4 and 5,

although the impact of an increase in the share of classmates that are female on male students’ achievement

is no longer statistically significant. Although the estimated impact of an increase in female classmates on

achievement is largely insignificant (except in the case of male students’ social studies performance) our 95

percent confidence intervals include impacts estimated by Hoxby (2000).20

    Our estimates suggest that the impact of single-sex education on male students’ achievement varies by

school gender composition, with single-sex schools increasing achievement and single-sex classrooms within

mixed-gender schools decreasing achievement. This suggests that the benefits of single-sex schooling for male

students is not driven solely by within-class gender peer effects. Male students assigned to single-sex classes

in coed schools have few opportunities interact with students outside of their own class. If boy students are

more likely to be disruptive, as Lavy and Schlosser (2011) hypothesize, then single-sex male classes should

lead to negative impacts on achievement in both single-sex and coed schools.

    We formally test the hypothesis that that students’ achievement gains are linear in the share of classmates

that are female; p-values from these tests are displayed in Table (7). We cannot reject the hypothesis that

the impact of assignment to a single-sex class is equal to the predicted impact of assignment to a coed class

with no female students (p = 0.152 for female students and p = 0.855 for males). In other words, the out-

of-sample prediction of the average impact of moving a male student from a classroom with an equal share

of male and female students to an all male classroom within a coed school is consistent with our estimate of

the impact of assignment to an all male classroom in a coed school. Conversely, we can reject the hypothesis

that male students’ assignment to a single-sex school is equivalent to this out-of-sample prediction with

p = 0.002, suggesting that school gender composition affects male students’ achievement above and beyond

impacts driven by in-class peer effects.21


5.1     Alternative outcome measures

Although test scores are generally the preferred measure of student achievement, other studies have found

that standardized test scores are subject to gaming behavior. Additionally, test scores cannot measure a

student’s own assessment of whether he or she has a deep understanding of course material. Thus, we use
  20 The estimates from Hoxby (2000) imply that a 10 percentage point increase in the share of classmates that are female

increases sixth grade female students’ achievement by approximately 0.012 of a standard deviation in reading and 0.017 of a
standard deviation in math. A similar increase in female classmates increases sixth grade male students’ achievement by 0.012
of a standard deviation in reading and 0.02 of a standard deviation in math.
  21 Hoxby (2000) finds evidence of nonlinear gender peer effects, where the impact of a marginal increase in the share of students

that are female is larger for cohorts with a high share of female students. Several other papers provide evidence against peer
effects that are linear in average peer achievement, including Hoxby and Weingarth (2005), Ding and Lehrer (2007), Lavy et
al. (2012), Burke and Sass (2013), and Carrell et al. (2013).




                                                                15
students’ reports of how well they understand lectures as an alternative outcome variable. We create a

dummy variable that is equal 1 if a student reports that he or she can understand lectures very well and 0

otherwise. As shown in column (1) of Table 8, consistent with our estimated impacts on test scores, male

students in single-sex schools are significantly more likely to report understanding lectures than those in

single-sex or coed classrooms in coed schools (between 2 and 3 percentage points or 12 and 16 percent,

respectively). Female students’ assessments of lecture comprehension do not significantly depend on peer

gender composition.

   Second, test scores may not fully encompass all aspects of student welfare. Our data contains a survey

question measuring whether students are happy to go to school. We use this measure to examine the

relationship between reported happiness and peer gender composition. As shown in column (2) of Table

8, male students in single-sex schools are 3 percentage points (14 percent) less likely to report that they

are happy to go to school compared to male students in coed classrooms. However, boys in coeds with

gender-segregated classes also report unhappiness comparable to boys in single-sex schools. These findings

suggest that the negative impact of an all male classroom on happiness is likely not driven by factors that

lead to test score increases.


5.2    The impact of peer gender on the distribution of student achievement

Before further exploring the channels through which peer gender affects achievement, we investigate whether

single-sex schooling differentially affects the achievement of students at different points in the ability distri-

bution. We estimate separate models by student gender and take the residuals from a regression of student

achievement on our full set of student- and school-level controls, and year and district fixed effects. Fig-

ure 2 displays the cumulative distribution of residualized achievement by school type (single-sex, coed with

single-sex classes, and fully coed).

   In contrast to our results thus far, we do find evidence that peer gender composition matters for female

students with low to medium achievement (Panel A). Above the 80th percentile of achievement, female

students in all three school types have similar performance, but below this point, female students assigned to

mixed-gender schools with single-sex classes have slightly lower achievement than female students in other

schools. The cumulative distribution of female students’ achievement within single-sex schools and fully

coed schools are statistically indistinguishable, with a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) test of equality yielding

a p-value of 0.891. We can reject the hypothesis that the distribution of female students’ achievement is

equal between coed schools with single-sex classes and other school types (p < 0.001). However, differences

in achievement between these school types are small. For instance, at the 40th percentile of achievement,



                                                       16
female students in coed classrooms score approximately 0.01 of a standard deviation higher than female

students enrolled in single-sex classes within coed schools.

    As shown in Panel B, assignment to a single-sex school appears to have larger impacts on performance

for male students at the middle and bottom of the achievement distribution. Although we find little evidence

of differences in the achievement of male students in single-sex schools compared to those in coed classes

above the 70th percentile, male students in single-sex classes within mixed-gender schools perform worse

than other male students at every point in the achievement distribution. A K-S test rejects the equality of

male students’ achievement distributions across school types with p < 0.001. To give an example, at the

30th percentile of achievement, male students in single-sex schools score approximately 0.3 of a standard

deviation higher than male students in single-sex classrooms within coed schools and approximately 0.1 of a

standard deviation higher than those in coed classrooms.



6     Evidence on Mechanisms

Although our setting allows us to rule out many school- and class-level policies that vary with student

gender composition, our estimated impact of peer gender composition on achievement will still encompass

both direct peer effects and indirect effects that operate through impacts on student and teacher effort. To

test for the importance of indirect peer effects, we use survey data containing measures of reported effort,

time use, and perceptions of teacher and peer effort.22


6.1     Impacts on students’ own effort and time-use

To test whether students’ own effort responds to the gender composition of their peers, we create a sum-

mary measure of effort using students’ responses to several survey questions. Specifically, we sum students’

responses to six individual survey questions that ask students to assess how often they come to class pre-

pared, are focused on in-class lectures, study class material in advance, review class material after school,

ask questions in class, and actively participate in class. We standardize this composite effort index to have

a mean equal to zero and a standard deviation of one. Single-sex schooling leads to substantial increases in

male students’ effort (Table 9). Male students in single-sex schools report effort that exceeds that of male

students in coed classes by half of a standard deviation. Furthermore, their effort is almost one-third of a

standard deviation higher than the effort reported by their counterparts enrolled in single-sex classes in coed

schools. We find little evidence that single-sex schooling systematically alters female students’ effort.23
  22 Appendix A provides a detailed description of the student survey and construction of the outcomes we examine.
  23 Appendix Table B.2 presents estimated impacts on the components of our composite effort measure. For male students,
assignment to a single-sex school increases probability of coming to class prepared by 6.3 percentage points (23 percent) relative



                                                               17
    The second two columns of Table 9 show the increases in reported effort for male students assigned to

single-sex schools are matched with changes in how these students devote their time to academic and leisure

activities. Students are surveyed on the time they devote in a given day specific activities, which we group

into two broad categories. Specifically, we classify homework and extracurricular tutoring (“cram school”) as

“academic” activities and watching TV, playing computer games, and hanging out with friends as “leisure”

activities. We estimate that male students in single-sex schools spend an additional 12 minutes per day (hour

and fifteen minutes per week) on academic activities compared to their peers in coed classes with an equal

share of male and female students. Compared to male students in single-sex classes within coed schools,

students in single sex schools spend an additional 18 minutes day (close to 2 hours per week) on academic

activities.24 Within coed classrooms, the time that male students devote to these academic activities is not

significantly related to the share of their classmates that are female and female students’ time use is not

significantly related to the gender composition of their peers.

    Turning to leisure activities, we estimate that the increase in time that male students in single-sex

schools spend on academic activities is more than offset by a reduction in time spent playing computer

games, watching TV, and hanging out with friends. These students spend approximately 0.3 fewer hours

per day (2 fewer hours per week) on leisure activities compared to male students in coed classes. Compared

to male students in single-sex classes within mixed-gender schools, these students spend close to 0.4 fewer

hours per day (2.5 fewer hours per week) on leisure.25 Once again, we find little systematic evidence that

female students’ time use varies by classroom or school gender composition.
to assignment to a coed class and by 4 percentage points (15 percent) relative to assignment to a single-sex classroom within
a coed school. Male students in single-sex schools are 2.7 percentage points (19 percent) more likely to report being focused
on lectures relative to male students in coed classes and schools and 2.8 percentage points (7 percent) more likely to report
reviewing class material after school compared to their counterparts in coed classrooms. Male students in single-sex schools
are significantly more likely to report asking questions in class compared to those in coed classes (5.4 percentage points or 17
percent) and single-sex classrooms (1.9 percentage points or 6 percent). Finally, single-sex schooling leads to a 2.5 percentage
point (17 percent) increase in the probability that male students report actively participating in class relative to assignment
to a coed school. Female students in single-sex classes are significantly less likely to come to class prepared relative to those
in coed classes, and within coed classes, female students are less likely to report being prepared when they have more female
classmates. Female students also report being more comfortable asking questions within single-sex schools and single-sex classes
within mixed-gender schools.
  24 In Appendix Table B.3, we report estimates of the impact of peer gender composition on time spent in each activity.

Male students in single-sex schools spend an additional 0.06 hours per day (25 minutes per week) on homework, relative to
those in coed classes with an even split of male and female students. Compared to their counterparts in such students spend
0.12 additional hours per day (50 minutes per week) in “cram school” compared to their counterparts in coed classes and an
additional 0.21 hours per day (1.5 hours per week) in extra-curricular tutoring than male students in single-sex classrooms in
coed schools.
  25 Male students in single-sex schools spend 0.1 fewer hours per day (42 fewer minutes per week) than those in coed classrooms

playing computer games and 0.07 fewer hours per day (30 fewer minutes per week) relative to those in single-sex classrooms
in coed schools (Appendix Table B.3). Male students in single-sex schools spend 0.1 fewer hours (45 fewer minutes per week)
playing computer games compared to their counterparts in single-sex classes. The difference in time spent with friends for
male students in single-sex schools versus those in coed classes is 0.12 hours per day (52 minutes per week). Male students in
single-sex schools spend 0.11 fewer hours per day with friends compared to those in single-sex classrooms within coed schools.
Among female students, none of the time-use categories we examine are significantly related to peer gender composition.




                                                               18
6.2     Impacts on student interactions and teacher inputs

Our dataset includes a small set of variables that provide information on interactions between students.

The first measures students’ views of whether their classmates study hard. We create an indicator variable

that is 1 if a student considers his/her classmates study hard and 0 otherwise (see Appendix A for details)

and examine the impact of peer gender on the indicator by estimating equation (3). As shown in column

(1) of Table 10, female students in single-sex schools are 13 percentage points (20 percent) more likely to

report having hard working classmates than their counterparts in single-sex classes within coed schools. Male

students in coed schools with single-sex classrooms are approximately 10 percentage points (15 percent) less

likely to report having peers that study hard than male students in mixed-gender classes and male students

in single-sex schools. In coed schools with mixed-gender classes, both male and female students with more

female peers are significantly more likely to report having hardworking peers. This finding is consistent

with the hypothesis that male students are more disruptive than female students (e.g., Lavy and Schlosser

2011).26

    Our data does not provide the information directly measuring teachers behavior. However, one survey

question asks students to assess whether their teachers “teach well”.27 We test whether students’ assessments

of teaching quality systematically varies by school and classroom gender composition. As shown in column

(2) of Table 10, perceived teaching quality is not significantly related to class or school gender composition,

which suggests that teachers provide instruction that is comparable in quality across schools.28


6.3     Decomposition exercise

This subsection examines relative importance of student, teacher, and peer inputs in explaining the impact

of school and classroom gender composition on achievement. We estimate equation (3) and include an

additional set of controls corresponding to each mechanism. Consider the 0.154 of a standard deviation

achievement gap between male students in single-sex schools and those in coed schools with mixed-gender

classrooms. As shown in column (1) of Table 11, when we control for students’ time-use, the gap falls to

0.085 of a standard deviation, a 44 percent reduction compared to our baseline result. When we control
  26 We also examine impacts on bullying incidents using school-level KERIS data. The number of incidents is rare - across

all schools, fewer than 4 out of 1000 students report being bullied. This rarity is because the KERIS only collects bullying
incidents, serious enough to be reported to schools. As shown in Table B.3, we estimate that single-sex schooling reduces the
number of male students bullied by approximately 1.1 per 1000 (an approximately 30 percent reduction at the mean) and
female students by 1.4 per 1000 (an approximately 40 percent reduction). Single-sex classrooms within coed schools lead to a
reduction in bullying of 0.5 per 1000. However, none of these estimates are statistically significant.
  27 The specific expression this question uses can be interpreted as both “teach skillfully” and “teach with enthusiasm.”
  28 Even though teachers are equivalent in terms of their lecture quality, they may still influence on students’ achievement by

encouraging students to complete their homework, bring textbooks to school, and focus their attention during class. As shown
in Appendix Table B.1, male students in single-sex schools are more likely to report coming to class prepared and being focused
on lectures. Although we categorized these behaviors as measuring student effort, they may also represent, in part, differences
in teacher inputs across different school types.



                                                              19
for student effort (column (2)), the achievement gap falls to 0.110 of a standard deviation, a 28 percent

reduction compared our the baseline result. Conversely, as shown in columns (3) and (4), controlling for

students’ perception of peer and teacher effort does not explain any of the the achievement gap between

male students in single-sex schools and coed classes. When we include all measures of student effort (column

(5)), the achievement gap between male students in single-sex schools and those in coed classes becomes

insignificant at conventional levels.

   In contrast, the achievement gap between male students in single-sex classes within coed schools and male

students assigned to a coed class with an even share of male and female students barely changes from our

baseline estimate even when we control for student, teacher, and peer inputs. Similarly, we find no systematic

changes in the estimated impact of peer gender on females students’ achievements as we control for these

inputs. Taken together, the results from our decomposition exercise suggests that single-sex schools primarily

improve male students achievement by inducing higher effort and time devoted to academic activities, rather

than through differences in teacher quality or positive spillovers due to harder-working peers.


6.4     Evaluating alternative explanations for the impact of single-sex schooling
        on male students’ achievement

Thus far, we have shown male students who enroll in single-sex schools consistently outperform male students

in other schools. Furthermore, we show that one channel through which single-sex schooling increases male

students’ achievement may be by increasing these students’ effort and the amount of time they spend on

academic-related activities. However, we still need to rule out alternative explanations for these findings. As

shown in Table 1, single-sex schools are more likely to be private. Furthermore, single-sex schools serving

male students have more male teachers. The latter is likely due to the fact that schools that were privately

founded have more discretion over which teachers they hire, even though they cannot deviate from the

national qualification requirements and pay guidelines. These observed efforts to employ more male teachers

is consistent with research suggesting that students may learn more when matched to a teacher of the same

gender.29

   We first test whether the impact of school and classroom gender composition varies by whether a school

was established by a private entity. To do so, we estimate equation (1), and interact school type with an

indicator for whether the school was privately founded. We examine impacts of peer gender composition and

interactions with enrollment in a private school on student achievement, effort, time-use, satisfaction, and
  29 In the context of developing countries, Muralidharan and Sheth (2013) show that female students benefit from having

female teachers. Hoffmann and Oreopoulos (2009) find that U.S. college students experience statistically significant, albeit
small, benefits from having an instructor of the same sex. However, using data from 15 OECD countries, Cho (2012) finds no
correlation between teacher-student gender matches and student achievement.



                                                            20
teacher effort (Table 12).30 For male students, enrollment in a private school status does not significantly

interact with peer gender composition. The one exception is that male students in single-sex private schools

are less likely to report understanding class lectures compared to their counterparts in single-sex public

schools. Thus, the increased likelihood that single-sex schools were privately founded cannot explain the

increases in male students’ achievement that these schools produce. However, among female students enrolled

in single-sex classes within a coed school, we find significant interactions between private school status in

the case of their effort, time spent on leisure activities, perceptions of teaching quality, and satisfaction with

school.

   Next, we test whether the larger proportion of male teachers employed by all-male schools contributes to

the positive impact of single-sex schooling on male students’ effort and achievement. We estimate equation

(1), and fully interact school type with the share of teachers that are female (standardized such that zero

represents a school with an equal share of male and female teachers). As shown in Table 13, we find a

positive relationship between the concentration of male teachers and male students’ achievement in single-

sex schools.31 However, the share of teachers within a school that are female has an overall positive impact

on student achievement, and taking into account these offsetting effects, the fact that male-only schools have

fewer female teachers can explain very little of the difference in male students’ achievement between coed and

single-sex schools. For instance, a linear prediction of male students’ achievement gains from assignment to a

single-sex school (relative to assignment to a coed class within a coed school), assuming that only 20 percent

of the teaching force is female, is 0.22 of a standard deviation. When the share of teachers that are female is

increased to 80 percent, we predict that male students in single-sex schools still experience a 0.20 standard

deviation increase in achievement. In fact, even if male students in single-sex schools had a 100 percent

female teaching force, these students would still score 0.19 standard deviations higher than their peers in

coed classrooms. The remainder of Table 13 examines impacts on our index of student effort, hours spent

on academics and leisure, teacher effort, and student satisfaction. We find little evidence that the impact

of single-sex schooling on male students varies by teacher gender for any of these outcomes, suggesting that

the impact of single-sex male schools on achievement is not solely through these schools’ ability to hire more

male teachers.
 30 Appendix   Table B.4 repeats this exercise, looking at performance on specific subject tests.
 31 Appendix   Table B.5 presents results from models examining the impact of teacher gender interacted with peer gender on
students’ achievement in specific subjects.




                                                            21
7      Conclusions

Past research identifies one of the main channels through which gender composition affects learning as

increased disruptions in male-concentrated classrooms (Lavy and Schlosser 2011). Our estimates of the

impact of additional female students within coed schools in Korea on achievement are consistent with these

findings. However, the large achievement gap between male students in single-sex schools and those in

single-sex classrooms within coed schools suggests that within-class peer effects are unlikely to completely

drive our results. We find that male students’ achievement is maximized by assignment to a single-sex

school, and minimized by assignment to a single-sex class within a mixed-gender school. We also provide

suggestive evidence that one channel through which single-sex schools affect male students’ achievement is

through increasing students’ effort and time devoted to academic tasks. We can rule out differential teacher

gender composition and school organization as explanations for differences in outcomes by school gender

composition. The channels that remain are the use of different instruction technology by teachers and

administrators and different expectations placed on students by parents and teachers in single-sex settings.

We can only indirectly examine expectations and instruction technology using information from student

surveys. However, our results are consistent with a model where teachers in all-male schools may develop

specialized teaching techniques to deal with disruptions, while teachers that instruct both male and female

students, even in a setting with single-sex classes, have a harder time specializing.



References

Angrist, Joshua D., “The Perils of Peer Effects,” Labour Economics, 2014, 30, 98–108.

Booth, Alison and Patrick Nolen, “Choosing to Compete: How Different are Girls and Boys?,” Journal

    of Economic Behavior and Organization, 2012, 81 (2), 542–555.

Burke, Mary A. and Tim R. Sass, “Classroom Peer Effects and Student Achievement,” Journal of Labor

    Economics, 2013, 31 (1), 51–82.

Carrell, Scott E., Bruce I. Sacerdote, and James E. West, “From Natural Variation to Optimal

    Policy? The Importance of Endogenous Peer Group Formation,” Econometrica, 2013, 81 (3), 855–882.

Cho, Insook, “The Effect of Teacher-Student Gender Matching: Evidence from OECD Countries,” Eco-

    nomics of Education Review, 2012, 31 (3), 54–67.




                                                       22
Choi, Eleanor Jawon, Hyungsik Roger Moon, and Geert Ridder, “Estimation of an Education

  Production Function under Random Assignment with Selection,” American Economic Review: Papers

  and Proceedings, 2014, 104 (5), 206–211.

Chung, Haesook, Jineun Yoo, and Meeyoon Kim, “Gender Equality in Education at Coeducational

  Secondary Schools,” 2009. Korean Women’s Development Institute.

Ding, Weili and Steven F. Lehrer, “Do Peers Affect Student Achievement in China’s Secondary

  Schools?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (2), 300–312.

Eliot, Lise, “Single-Sex Education and the Brain,” Sex Roles, 2013, 69 (7-8), 363–381.

Epple, Dennis and Richard E. Romano, “Peer Effects in Education: A Survey of the Theory and

  Evidence,” in Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Matthew O. Jackson, eds., Handbook of Social Economics,

  Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2011, chapter 20, pp. 1053–1163.

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab, “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A

  Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100 (5), 966–991.

Flory, Jeffrey A., Andreas Leibbrandt, and John A. List, “Do Competitive Work Places Deter Female

  Workers? A Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment on Gender Differences in Job-Entry Decisions,” Review

  of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Garcia-Fontes, Walter and Antonio Ciccone, “Gender Peer Effects in School, a Birth Cohort Ap-

  proach,” 2014. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP10042.

Gneezy, Uri, Muriel Niederle, and Aldo Rustichini, “Performance in Competitive Environments:

  Gender Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (3), 1049–1074.

Halpern, Diane F., Lise Eliot, Rebecca S. Bigler, Richard A. Fabes, Laura D. Hanish, Janet

  Hyde, Lynn S. Liben, and Carol Lynn Martin, “The Pseudoscience of Single-Sex Schooling,” Science,

  2011, 333 (6050), 1706–1707.

Hanlon, Harriet W., Robert W. Thatcher, and Marvin J. Cline, “Gender Differences in the Devel-

  opment of EEG Coherence in Normal Children,” Developmental Neuropsychology, 1999, 16 (3), 479–506.

Hoffmann, Florian and Philip Oreopoulos, “A Professor Like Me: The Influence of Instructor Gender

  on College Achievement,” Journal of Human Resources, 2009, 44 (2), 479–494.

Hoxby, Caroline, “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,” 2000. NBER

  working paper 7867.

                                                       23
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Gretchen Weingarth, “School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Ef-

  fects,” 2005. working paper.

Jackson, C. Kirabo, “Single-Sex Schools, Student Achievement, and Course Selection: Evidence from

  Rule-Based Student Assignments in Trinidad and Tobago,” Journal of Public Economics, 2012, 96 (1-2),

  173–187.

Jung, Kyungah and Haesook Chung, “Gender Equality in Classroom Instruction: Introducing Gender

  Training for Teachers in the Republic of Korea,” 2005. UNESCO Asia and Pacific Regional Bureau for

  Education.

Kang, Changhui, “Classroom Peer Effects and Academic Achievement: Quasi-Randomization Evidence

  from South Korea,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2007, 61 (3), 458–495.

Kim, Taejong, Ju-Ho Lee, and Young Lee, “Mixing versus Sorting in Schooling: Evidence from the

  Equalization Policy in South Korea,” Economics of Education Review, 2008, 27 (6), 697–711.

Lavy, Victor and Analı́a Schlosser, “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School,” Amer-

  ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (2), 1–33.

  , Olmo Silva, and Felix Weinhardt, “The Good, The Bad and The Average: Evidence on Ability Peer

  Effects in Schools,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (2), 367–414.

Lazear, Edward P., “Educational Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (3), 777–803.

Lee, Soohyung, Muriel Niederle, and Namwook Kang, “Do Single-Sex Schools Make Boys and Girls

  More Competitive?,” Economics Letters, 2014, 124 (3), 474–477).

Lenroot, Rhoshel K., Nitin Gogtay, Deanna K. Greenstein, Elizabeth Molloy Wells, Gregory L.

  Wallace, Liv S. Clasen, Jonathan D. Blumenthal, Jason Lerch, Alex P. Zijdenbos, Alan C.

  Evans, Paul M. Thompson, and Jay N. Giedd, “Sexual Dimorphism of Brain Developmental Tra-

  jectories During Childhood and Adolescence,” NeuroImage, 2007, 36 (4), 1065–1073.

Lim, Jiyeon, Jungju Kim, Shinyoung Kim, and Min Kim, “Activities of Children and Adolescents

  in Korea,” 2009. National Youth Policy Institute Policy Brief.

Lu, Fangwen and Michael L. Anderson, “Peer Effects in Microenvironments: The Benefits of Homoge-

  neous Classroom Groups,” Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

Manski, Charles F., “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,” Review of

  Economic Studies, 1993, 60 (3), 531–542.

                                                    24
Mo, Sanghyun and Heejin Kim, “Human Rights of Korean Children and Adolescents Compared to

  International Standard,” 2009. National Youth Policy Institute Policy Brief.

Moffitt, Robert, “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria, and Social Interactions,” in Steven N. Durlauf

  and H. Peyton Young, eds., Social Dynamics, Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Pres, 2001.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Ketki Sheth, “Bridging Education Gender Gaps in Developing Countries:

  The Role of Female Teachers,” 2013. NBER working paper 19341.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, “Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men Compete

  Too Much?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1067–1101.

Park, Hyunjoon, “Single Parenthood and Children’s Education in South Korea: An Update,” in Hyunjoon

  Park and Kyung keun Kim, eds., Korean Education in Changing Economic and Demographic Contexts,

  Springer, 2014, pp. 153–171.

  , Jere R. Behrman, and Jaesung Choi, “Causal Effects of Single-Sex Schools on College Entrance

  Exams and College Attendance: Random Assignment in Seoul High Schools,” Demography, 2013, 50 (2),

  447–469.

Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are They and How Much

  Do We Know Thus Far?,” in Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Handbook

  of the Economics of Education, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2011, chapter 4, pp. 249–277.

  , “Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Analysis of Peer Effects: Two Steps Forward?,” Annual Review

  of Economics, 2014, 6, 253–272.

Steele, Claude M., Steven J. Spencer, and Joshua Aronson, “Contending with Group Image: The

  Psychology of Stereotype and Social Identity Threat,” Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 2002,

  34, 379–440.

Strain, Michael R., “Single-Sex Classes and Student Outcomes: Evidence from North Carolina,” Eco-

  nomics of Education Review, 2013, 36, 73–87.

U.S. Department of Education, “Single-Sex Versus Secondary Schooling: A Systematic Review,” 2005.

  Washington DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development.

Whitmore, Diane, “Resource and Peer Impacts on Girls’ Academic Achievement: Evidence from a Ran-

  domized Experiment,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 2005, 95 (2), 199–203.



                                                    25
Tables and Figures

      Table 1: Characteristics of Students and Schools by School and Classroom Gender Composition
                                                         A. Coed School                            B. Single-sex school
                                                  (1) Coed         (2) Single-sex
                                                                                           (3) Boys only          (4) Girls only
                                                 classrooms          classrooms
A. School-level characteristics
  Number of classes                                  9.7                    9.9                  7.7                   7.7
  Class size                                        34.8                   34.4                 33.6                  33.9
  Fraction female in class                          0.47                  0 or 1                  0                     1
  Fraction female teachers                          0.73                   0.61                 0.41                  0.65
  Fraction experienced teachers                     0.74                   0.72                 0.71                  0.70
  School founded by private entity                  0.06                   0.61                 0.87                  0.89
  Fraction teachers in professional org.            0.36                   0.45                 0.42                  0.48
  Pupils per teacher                                20.8                   20.4                 20.2                  20.1
  Government support in 2010                        0.11                     0                  0.16                  0.03
 Observations (school by year)                       377                   23                    90                    76
B. Student-level characteristics

 Achievement: male students                         -0.08                 -0.25                 -0.02                   --
  Reading                                           -0.19                 -0.32                 -0.11                   --
  English                                           -0.12                 -0.34                 -0.08                   --
  Math                                              -0.01                 -0.17                 0.04                    --
  Science                                           -0.04                 -0.17                 0.03                    --
  Social studies                                   -0.001                 -0.12                 0.04                    --

 Achievement: female students                       0.09                  -0.07                   --                   0.09
  Reading                                           0.20                  0.09                    --                   0.22
  English                                           0.15                  -0.08                   --                   0.14
  Math                                              0.01                  -0.12                   --                  0.001
  Science                                           0.04                  -0.06                   --                   0.06
  Social studies                                   -0.003                 -0.13                   --                   0.01
 Observations (students)                          128,096                 7,726                23,132                19,875
Notes: Ninth grade middle school students enrolled in a Seoul-area public school in 2009 and 2010. Excludes students in three
districts that do not contain at least one of each type of middle school (coed classes, coed school with single-sex classes, single-
sex male, and single-sex female). Experienced teachers are those with at least two years of experience. Teacher professional
organizations are called unions, but do not practice collective bargaining on behalf of teachers. Number of observations used
to measure whether a school received government support in 2010 is 283. Subject test scores are standardized to have a mean
equal to zero and standard deviation equal to one (within the Seoul metropolitan area). Overall achievement is the sum of a
student’s raw achievement on all five subject tests, standardized to have mean zero, standard deviation equal one (within the
Seoul metropolitan area).




                                                                26
      Table 2: Correlations between Family Structure and School and Classroom Gender Composition
                                                      (1) Both biological
                                                                                (2) Single mom        (3) Other relative(s)
                                                            parents

      Female ˣ
        1[Single-sex school]                                  0.010                  -0.005                 -0.003
                                                             [0.006]                 [0.004]                [0.003]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                     -0.008                   0.009                  0.001
                                                             [0.012]                 [0.009]                [0.005]
        1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class              0.001                  -0.010                  0.014
                                                             [0.038]                 [0.023]                [0.016]
      Male ˣ
        1[Single-sex school]                                 0.012*                  -0.003                 -0.004
                                                             [0.007]                 [0.004]                [0.003]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                     -0.007                   0.002                  0.011
                                                             [0.011]                 [0.005]                [0.008]
        1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class             -0.008                  -0.012                  0.019
                                                             [0.041]                 [0.023]                [0.018]
      F-test (p- value):
        All six coefficients = 0                              0.436                   0.616                  0.437
        Female coefficients = 0                               0.306                   0.281                  0.618
        Male coefficients = 0                                 0.249                   0.679                  0.199

      Dependent variable mean                                 0.86                    0.08                    0.05

      Observations                                           178,829                178,829                 178,829
Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
gender composition relative to a coed classroom with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a
separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions
include gender, year, and school fixed effects, all fully interacted with gender. “Other relatives” category includes grandparents,
siblings, single father, and all other relatives.




                                                                27
         Table 3: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Quits and Transfers
                                                                          (1) Quits per 100 (2) Transfers per
                                                                               students       100 students

               1[Female single-sex school]                                     -0.505*             -0.151
                                                                               [0.252]            [0.111]
               1[Male single-sex school]                                       -0.504*            -0.603**
                                                                               [0.225]             [0.230]
               1[Coed school, single-sex classes]                               -0.009            0.483**
                                                                               [0.159]            [0.199]
               Test of equality (p -value):
                Male SS school = Coed school, single-sex classes                0.082              0.005
                Female SS school = Coed school, single-sex classes              0.061              0.058

               Dependent variable mean                                          1.74                3.15

               Observations                                                      566                566
Notes: Sample includes schools that report information to KERIS. Dependent variables represent outcomes for all students
in grades 7 through 9. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school district, in
brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Both regressions include district fixed effects and controls for: number of classes,
average students per class, number of teachers, fraction of experienced teachers, fraction of teachers belonging to a union,
fraction of teachers that are female, pupils per teacher, and whether the school was founded by a private entity




                                                              28
                   Table 4: The Impact of Single-Sex Schools and Classrooms on Achievement
                                                                 (1)                    (2)                    (3)
      Female ˣ
        1[Single-sex school]                                    0.015                 0.010                 -0.002
                                                               [0.034]               [0.032]                [0.047]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                       -0.087                -0.083                 -0.063
                                                               [0.055]               [0.052]                [0.055]
      Male ˣ
        1[Single-sex school]                                  0.140***              0.132***               0.166***
                                                               [0.035]               [0.033]                [0.050]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                       -0.063                -0.059                -0.093**
                                                               [0.042]               [0.037]                [0.044]
      Test of equality (p- value):
       Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                      <0.001                 <0.001                <0.001
       Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                   0.090                  0.098                 0.356

      Observations                                            178,829                178,829                178,829

      Student controls                                                                  X                      X
      School controls                                                                                          X
Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
gender composition relative to a coed classroom. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors,
clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. All regressions include district by gender fixed effects
and year by gender fixed effects and gender main effects. Individual controls include indicators for living arrangement (both
biological parents, single mother, single father, grandparents, other relatives, or other adults), interacted with student gender.
School controls include: number of classes, average students per class, number of teachers, fraction of experienced teachers,
fraction of teachers belonging to a union, fraction of teachers that are female, pupils per teacher, and whether the school was
founded by a private entity, all interacted with student gender. Dependent variable represents the sum of reading, English,
math, science, and social studies test scores, standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one.




                                                               29
               Table 5: The Impact of Single-Sex Schools and Classrooms on Achievement by Subject

                                              (1) Reading        (2) English         (3) Math         (4) Science      (5) Soc. Studies
Female ˣ
 1[Single-sex school]                            -0.005            -0.007             -0.002             -0.007             0.011
                                                 [0.040]           [0.057]            [0.046]            [0.042]           [0.039]
 1[Coed school, single-sex class]                -0.048            -0.109*            -0.029             -0.037            -0.063
                                                 [0.051]           [0.065]            [0.053]            [0.043]           [0.047]
Male ˣ
 1[Single-sex school]                          0.148***           0.165***           0.164***          0.129***           0.138***
                                                [0.041]            [0.060]            [0.049]           [0.046]            [0.039]
 1[Coed school, single-sex class]               -0.074*           -0.117**            -0.067            -0.089**           -0.069
                                                [0.041]            [0.052]            [0.043]            [0.038]           [0.043]

Test of equality (p- value):
 Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class              <0.001            <0.001             <0.001             <0.001             <0.001
 Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class          0.477             0.159              0.659              0.597              0.215

Observations                                    178,829            178,829           178,829            178,829            178,829

   Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
   gender composition relative to a coed classroom. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors,
   clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table
   4 notes. All test scores standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one.




                        Table 6: The Impact of Classroom Gender Composition on Achievement
                               (1) Combined      (2) Reading       (3) English       (4) Math        (5) Science    (6) Soc. Studies
   Female ˣ
    Fraction female in class         0.189          0.103               0.203          0.189           0.169*            0.185
                                    [0.146]        [0.132]             [0.180]        [0.140]          [0.099]          [0.127]
   Male ˣ
    Fraction female in class        0.366**        0.286*           0.368**           0.281*          0.337**          0.376***
                                    [0.152]        [0.146]          [0.147]           [0.144]         [0.147]           [0.126]

   Observations                     128,096        128,096          128,096          128,096          128,096          128,096

   Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Sample limited to students attending coed schools with coed classrooms. Estimates
   represent the impact of increasing the share classmates that are female, relative to an even split between female and male
   students. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school by year level, in brackets; *
   p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. All test scores standardized
   to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one.




                                                                  30
                                          Table 7: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Achievement

                                                                         (1) Combined                                                                          (5) Social
                                                                                            (1) Reading     (2) English       (3) Math        (4) Science
                                                                          achievement                                                                            Studies

            Female ˣ
             1[Single-sex school]                                            -0.003           -0.005           -0.008          -0.003           -0.008           0.010
                                                                             [0.047]          [0.040]         [0.057]          [0.046]          [0.042]         [0.040]
              1[Coed school, single-sex class]                               -0.065           -0.048          -0.110*          -0.030           -0.038          -0.064
                                                                             [0.055]          [0.051]         [0.065]          [0.053]          [0.043]         [0.048]
              1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                        0.142            0.065           0.165            0.134            0.129           0.142
                                                                             [0.147]          [0.131]         [0.179]          [0.142]          [0.099]         [0.129]
            Test of equality (p- value):
             Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                           0.356            0.477           0.160            0.658           0.596            0.216
             Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female            0.413            0.638           0.409            0.423           0.269            0.437
             Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female             0.152            0.346           0.091            0.284           0.130            0.102

            Male ˣ
             1[Single-sex school]                                           0.154***         0.138***         0.154**         0.156***         0.117**         0.125***
31




                                                                             [0.051]          [0.042]          [0.061]         [0.050]          [0.047]         [0.040]
              1[Coed school, single-sex class]                              -0.103**         -0.083**         -0.127**         -0.074*         -0.099**         -0.081*
                                                                             [0.045]          [0.042]          [0.053]         [0.044]          [0.039]         [0.043]
              1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                        0.237            0.185            0.230           0.158            0.235          0.258**
                                                                             [0.157]          [0.149]          [0.155]         [0.149]          [0.150]         [0.129]
            Test of equality (p- value):
             Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                              <0.001           <0.001           <0.001          <0.001           <0.001          <0.001
             Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                  0.002           0.003            0.003           0.005            0.005           <0.001
             Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                   0.855           0.900            0.886           0.948            0.818           0.515
            Observations                                                    178,829          178,829          178,829          178,829         178,829          178,829

     Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom gender composition relative to a coed classroom
     with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school by year level, in brackets; * p<0.10,
     ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. Combined achievement is the sum of test scores in all subjects, standardized to
     have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one. All subject scores standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one.
     Table 8: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on other Academic Outcomes
                                                                              (1) Understand     (2) Happy to go
                                                                                  lectures           to school

          Female ˣ
           1[Single-sex school]                                                    0.009             -0.008
                                                                                  [0.009]            [0.008]
            1[Co-ed school, single sex class]                                      0.005             -0.004
                                                                                  [0.009]            [0.012]
            1[Co-ed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                              0.011              0.005
                                                                                  [0.016]            [0.022]
          Test of equality (p- value):
           Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                                  0.622              0.723
           Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                   0.749              0.449
           Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                    0.956              0.694

          Male ˣ
           1[Single-sex school]                                                  0.020**            -0.025***
                                                                                 [0.008]              [0.010]
            1[Co-ed school, single sex class]                                     -0.006            -0.026***
                                                                                 [0.008]              [0.010]
            1[Co-ed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                             0.034                0.031
                                                                                 [0.026]              [0.029]
          Test of equality (p- value):
           Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                                      0.004              0.955
           Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                         0.010              0.530
           Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                          0.469              0.518
          Dependent variable mean                                                  0.15                0.19
          Observations                                                           177,771             177,779
Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
gender composition relative to a coed classroom with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a
separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school by year level, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes.




                                                               32
   Table 9: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Student Effort and Time Use
                                                                        (1) Effort        (2) Hours:        (3) Hours:
                                                                            index          academic           leisure

      Female ˣ
       1[Single-sex school]                                                 0.075           -0.028             0.001
                                                                           [0.111]          [0.056]           [0.094]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                    0.178           -0.059             0.158
                                                                           [0.145]          [0.076]           [0.101]
        1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                           -0.010            0.176            -0.187
                                                                           [0.235]          [0.155]           [0.266]
      Test of equality (p- value):
       Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                               0.472            0.712             0.130
       Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                0.622            0.216             0.579
       Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                 0.333            0.175             0.145

      Male ˣ
       1[Single-sex school]                                               0.497***         0.193***         -0.287***
                                                                           [0.109]          [0.052]           [0.094]
        1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                    0.170           -0.081*            0.076
                                                                           [0.105]          [0.045]           [0.076]
        1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                            0.166            -0.125            0.134
                                                                           [0.311]          [0.161]           [0.234]
      Test of equality (p- value):
       Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                                   0.006            <0.001           <0.001
       Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                      0.002            0.138            0.099
       Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                       0.158            0.096            0.252
      Dependent variable mean                                                 0                2.6              4.5
      Observations                                                        177,682           177,310           177,094
Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
gender composition relative to a coed classroom with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a
separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school by year level, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For
description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. The effort index represents the sum of the students responses
to whether they (1) come prepared to school, (2) are focused on lectures, (3) study class materials in advance, (4) review class
material after school, (5) ask questions in class, and (6) actively participate in class, standardized to have a mean of zero and
standard deviation of one. Time use measures represent hours per day spent on the specified activity. Academic activities
include homework and cram school. Leisure activities include watching TV, playing computer games, and spending time with
friends. See Appendix Tables B.2 and B.3 for estimated impacts of gender composition on effort index components and time
spent on specific activities.




                                                               33
  Table 10: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Teacher and Classmate Effort
                                                                               (1) Classmates
                                                                                                 (2) Teaching quality
                                                                                 study hard

      Female ˣ
       1[Single-sex school]                                                       0.133***               0.019
                                                                                   [0.030]              [0.013]
        1[Co-ed school, single sex class]                                           0.053               -0.005
                                                                                   [0.037]              [0.011]
        1[Co-ed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                                 0.229***              -0.033
                                                                                   [0.073]              [0.020]
      Test of equality (p- value):
       Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                                      0.058                 0.063
       Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                       0.695                 0.045
       Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                        0.245                 0.477

      Male ˣ
       1[Single-sex school]                                                        -0.004               -0.001
                                                                                   [0.029]              [0.012]
        1[Co-ed school, single sex class]                                        -0.098***               0.004
                                                                                   [0.027]              [0.013]
        1[Co-ed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                                 0.151**                0.027
                                                                                   [0.074]              [0.031]
      Test of equality (p- value):
       Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                                          0.002                 0.687
       Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                             0.099                 0.529
       Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                              0.589                 0.366
      Dependent variable mean                                                       0.67                 0.14
      Observations                                                                178,829               177,872

Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom
gender composition relative to a coed classroom with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a
separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school by year level, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes.




                                                             34
Table 11: The Relative Importance of Student, Teacher, and Peer Inputs in Explaining the Impact of Peer
Gender on Achievement
                                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)

Female ˣ
 1[Single-sex school]                                          0.005       -0.014        -0.009       -0.004       -0.007
                                                              [0.034]      [0.043]       [0.046]      [0.046]      [0.032]
 1[Coed school, single-sex class]                             -0.035       -0.086*       -0.067       -0.064       -0.056
                                                              [0.039]      [0.050]       [0.053]      [0.054]      [0.038]
 1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                      0.079        0.126         0.113        0.136        0.081
                                                              [0.100]      [0.140]       [0.143]      [0.146]      [0.101]
Test of equality (p- value):
 Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                        0.395        0.247         0.373        0.359        0.299
 Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female         0.579        0.363         0.459        0.421        0.440
 Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female          0.250        0.093         0.181        0.157        0.137

Male ˣ
 1[Single-sex school]                                         0.085**      0.110**      0.155***     0.155***       0.061
                                                              [0.038]      [0.047]       [0.051]      [0.051]      [0.038]
 1[Coed school, single-sex class]                             -0.080**    -0.123***     -0.103**     -0.104**     -0.096***
                                                               [0.036]      [0.042]      [0.045]      [0.045]       [0.035]
 1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                     0.247**       0.216         0.220        0.216       0.240*
                                                              [0.124]      [0.146]       [0.155]      [0.155]      [0.123]
Test of equality (p- value):
 Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                            <0.001       <0.001       <0.001       <0.001        <0.001
 Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                0.002        0.007        0.002        0.002         0.007
 Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                  0.52        0.847        0.935        0.961         0.723

Observations                                                  176,197      177,682      178,829       177,872      176,197
Additional controls:
 Student Inputs ˣ Gender
  - Time use                                                    YES          NO           NO           NO            YES
  - Effort                                                      NO           YES          NO           NO            YES
 Peer inputs ˣ Gender                                           NO           NO           YES          NO            NO
 Teacher inputs ˣ Gender                                        NO           NO           NO           YES           NO
Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Dependent variable is combined achievement across subjects. Estimates represent the
impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom gender composition relative to a coed classroom with equal
number of female and male students. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered at school
by year level, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4
notes. Additional controls include student time spent on academic activities, student effort, peer inputs, and teacher inputs.
See Table 9 and Appendix A for a description of the student time-use and effort measures. See Table 10 and Appendix A for a
description of the teacher and peer input measures.




                                                             35
                           Table 12: Heterogeneity in the Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition: Public versus Private Schools
                                                          (1) Overall     (2) Student      (3) Hours:       (4) Hours:     (5) Teacher    (6) Understand (7) Happy to go
                                                         Achievement      effort index      academic          leisure         effort          lectures       to school
             Private                                         0.103           -0.099           0.105           -0.043          -0.008           0.005          -0.023**
                                                            [0.065]         [0.132]          [0.065]         [0.101]         [0.017]          [0.011]          [0.011]
             Female ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                   -0.076          -0.012         -0.163**          0.228           0.032            0.001           -0.015
                                                            [0.089]         [0.234]          [0.078]         [0.170]         [0.031]          [0.017]         [0.014]
               ˣ Private                                     0.093           0.008           0.180*           -0.278          -0.028           0.005           0.001
                                                            [0.100]         [0.267]          [0.103]         [0.198]         [0.034]          [0.020]         [0.018]
             Female ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]        -0.003        0.483**            0.037           -0.052           0.011         0.026**            0.023
                                                            [0.057]         [0.192]          [0.096]         [0.121]          [0.012]         [0.012]          [0.017]
               ˣ Private                                     -0.092        -0.598**           -0.132         0.328*          -0.040**        -0.041**         -0.052**
                                                            [0.106]         [0.251]          [0.147]         [0.185]          [0.020]         [0.016]          [0.021]
             Male ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                    0.138*         0.560***         0.196**           -0.237          -0.002         0.035***         -0.027*
                                                            [0.084]         [0.179]         [0.080]          [0.158]         [0.018]          [0.012]         [0.016]
               ˣ Private                                     0.043           -0.129          -0.013           -0.066          0.006           -0.029*          0.008
                                                            [0.100]         [0.213]         [0.099]          [0.181]         [0.025]          [0.016]         [0.018]
             Male ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]
36




                                                             -0.047         0.247**         -0.114*           0.006           -0.004           0.003          -0.028*
                                                            [0.044]         [0.119]         [0.064]          [0.096]         [0.015]          [0.011]         [0.015]
               ˣ Private                                     -0.073          -0.181          0.048            0.124           0.021            -0.025          0.010
                                                            [0.089]         [0.211]         [0.095]          [0.154]         [0.027]          [0.017]         [0.020]

             Observations                                  178,829          177,682         177,310          177,094         177,872          177,771         177,779

     Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
     For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. Regressions also include controls for whether a school is private, fully interacted with gender, and an
     interaction between private school status and an indicator for single-sex school.
                               Table 13: Heterogeneity in the Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition by Teacher Gender
                                                           (1) Overall       (2) Student      (3) Hours:       (4) Hours:      (5) Teacher    (6) Understand (7) Happy to go
                                                           Achievement       effort index      academic          leisure           effort         lectures       to school

            Fraction teachers female in school (μ = 0.5)      0.453**          0.723*            0.260            -0.194           -0.015          0.027            0.027
                                                              [0.187]          [0.398]          [0.189]          [0.304]          [0.037]         [0.031]          [0.035]

            Female ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                      0.032            0.148            0.028            -0.135           0.011           0.010            -0.004
                                                              [0.062]          [0.117]          [0.088]          [0.112]          [0.015]         [0.009]          [0.011]
              ˣ Fraction teachers female in school             -0.218           -0.736           -0.397         1.046**            0.054           -0.022           -0.039
                                                              [0.276]          [0.550]          [0.373]         [0.488]           [0.060]         [0.040]          [0.046]

            Female ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]           -0.038           0.014            -0.057          0.206*            -0.012          -0.007           -0.015
                                                              [0.073]          [0.161]          [0.095]          [0.118]          [0.015]         [0.010]          [0.011]
              ˣ Fraction teachers female in school             -0.153           1.304            0.060            -0.521           0.037          0.089*            0.088
                                                              [0.303]          [0.912]          [0.470]          [0.523]          [0.065]         [0.052]          [0.067]

            Male ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                      0.210***         0.523***         0.211***        -0.316***           0.005         0.023***          -0.016*
                                                              [0.049]          [0.111]          [0.053]         [0.087]           [0.012]         [0.008]          [0.009]
              ˣ Fraction teachers female in school
37




                                                              -0.502**          -0.326           -0.165           0.453            -0.055          -0.017         -0.088**
                                                               [0.209]         [0.450]          [0.224]          [0.386]          [0.042]         [0.034]          [0.041]

            Male ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]             -0.050           0.126            0.001            0.074            0.015           -0.003           -0.018
                                                              [0.069]          [0.165]          [0.062]          [0.106]          [0.022]         [0.013]          [0.013]
              ˣ Fraction teachers female in school             -0.137           0.501          -0.587**           -0.099           -0.054          -0.005           -0.013
                                                              [0.267]          [0.739]          [0.298]          [0.482]          [0.103]         [0.062]          [0.074]
            Observations                                      178,829          177,682          177,310         177,094          177,872          177,771          177,779

     Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
     Share teachers female denotes the fraction of teachers in a given school and year that are female, standardized such that zero indicates an equal share of male and female
     teachers. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. Regressions also include controls for the share of teachers that are female, fully interacted with
     gender, and an interaction between the share of teachers that are female and an indicator for single-sex school.
    Figure 1: The Distribution of Student Achievement by School and Classroom Gender Composition

                                                            A. Female Students



                              .4
                              .3
                    Density
                              .2
                              .1
                              0




                                   -3        -2             -1              0              1         2              3
                                                                 Standardized Score

                                        Single-sex school          Coed school, single-sex classes       Coed classes




                                                             B. Male Students
                              .4
                              .3
                    Density
                              .2
                              .1
                              0




                                   -3        -2             -1              0              1         2              3
                                                                 Standardized Score

                                        Single-sex school          Coed school, single-sex classes       Coed classes



Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Achievement is standardized to have a mean of zero, standard deviation of one.




                                                                       38
             Figure 2: The Cumulative Distribution of Achievement by Peer Gender Composition

                                                                 A. Female Students


                     1
                     .9
                     .8
                     .7
                     .6
                     .5
                     .4
                     .3
                     .2
                     .1
                     0




                               -3      -2.5        -2     -1.5    -1     -.5     0     .5      1     1.5     2       2.5     3
                                                                       Standardized Score
                                           Single-sex school               Coed school, single-sex classes            Coed classes




                                                                      B. Male Students
                     1
                     .9
                     .8
                     .7
                     .6
                     .5
                     .4
                     .3
                     .2
                     .1
                     0




                          -3        -2.5      -2        -1.5     -1      -.5    0       .5      1      1.5       2     2.5       3
                                                                       Standardized Score
                                           Single-sex school               Coed school, single-sex classes            Coed classes



Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Cumulative distribution of residual achievement (from regressions of achievement on
student controls, school controls, and year and district fixed effects, separately estimated by gender). Kolmogorov-Smirnov test
of equality of distributions for female students (p-value): single-sex school = coed school with coed classes: p = 0.891; coed
school with single-sex classes = coed school with coed classes: p < 0.001; single-sex school = coed school with single-sex classes
: p < 0.001. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of equality of distributions for male students (p-value): single-sex school = coed school
with coed classes: p < 0.001; coed school with single-sex classes = coed school with coed classes: p < 0.001; single-sex school
= coed school with single-sex classes : p < 0.001.




                                                                               39
A     Data Appendix

Our primary data source comes from the Korean Ministry of Education and contains National Assessment

of Educational Achievement (NAEA) test scores for all ninth grade students. Students are tested in reading

(Korean), math, English, science, and social studies. This data set also contains information from a survey

that students complete regarding their time use and experiences in school. We also use school-level ad-

ministrative data from the Korean Education and Research Information Service (KERIS). KERIS contains

information on bullying, student exits, and a limited set of school and teacher characteristics.


A.1     NAEA Tests

All South Korean students at grades 6, 9, and 11, participate in the NAEA in June of each year. The

NAEA was introduced in 1998 and was initially administrated to a subset of schools based on sampling and

then expanded to all schools from 2008. By law, summary statistics of a school’s performance at the NAEA

is publicly available at the school’s website and that of the Ministry of Education. For each subject, we

standardize students’ score to have a mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one. We construct a

measure of overall achievement by summing raw scores across all five subjects and standardizing to have a

mean of zero and standard deviation equal to one.


A.2     Student Survey

Our measures of student effort are derived from survey questions which ask students to choose one of

four options (strongly disagree, disagree, agree, or strongly agree) in response to a statement. Students

were classified as coming to class prepared if they strongly agreed with the statement “I bring textbooks,

homework, and materials related to classes to school.” Students were classified as being focused on lectures if

they strongly agreed with the statement “I concentrate on what teachers say during classes.” Students who

studied material in advance were those who strongly agreed or agreed with the statement “I study textbook

materials in advance to get ready for school lectures.” Students who reviewed after school strongly agreed

or agreed with the statement “I study the lecture materials I learned during the day.” Those who asked

questions during class indicated that they strongly agreed or agreed with the statement “I ask questions to

teachers during the class or right after the class.” Active participants were students who strongly agreed with

the statement “I actively participate in classroom activities – e.g., science experiment, discussions, group

activities.” Our composite student effort index is constructed by summing students responses to each of the

above six measures, standardized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one. Table A.1 displays

the distribution of responses to each survey item by school type.


                                                      40
   Measures of student time use are derived from survey questions which ask students to chose one of five

categories of time use for the specified activity. We convert these categories into a continuous measure of

time use: “0 hours” is coded as 0, “between 0 and 1 hour” is coded as 0.5 hours, “between 1 and 2 hours”

is coded as 1.5 hours, “between 2 and 3 hours” is coded as 2.5 hours, and “3 or higher” is coded as 3.5

hours. Tables A.2 and A.3 display the distribution of student responses to these questions by school and

class gender composition.

   Our measures of classmate and teacher inputs come from survey questions where students choose one of

four options (strongly disagree, disagree, agree, or strongly agree) in response to a statement. We classify

a student as indicating that his/her classmates study hard if he or she strongly agrees or agrees with the

statement “the students in my school study hard in general.” A student is classified as indicating his/her high

teaching quality if he/she strongly agrees with the statement “my teachers [homeroom and subject teachers]

teach skillfully/with enthusiasm.” Likewise, our alternative measures of student outcomes come from survey

questions where students choose one of the same four options. A student is classified as understanding lectures

if he/she strongly agrees with the statement “I can understand the textbook materials with classroom lectures

(without additional help from cram school).” Finally, a student is considered to be happy to go to school if

he/she strongly agrees with the statement “I am happy to go to school.” Table A.4 displays the distribution

of student responses by survey question and school type.




                                                      41
           Table A.1: Student Effort Index Components by School and Class Gender Composition
                                                A. Coed School                   B. Single-sex school
                                         (1) Coed         (2) Single-sex
                                                                           (3) Boys only      (4) Girls only
                                        classrooms          classrooms
       A. Coming to class prepared
         strongly disagree                 0.01                  0.01          0.02               0.01
         disagree                          0.12                  0.12          0.13               0.09
         agree                             0.59                  0.60          0.55               0.66
         strongly agree                    0.27                 0.27           0.31               0.25
       Observations                      127,361                7,702         23,045             19,822
       B. Focused on lectures
         strongly disagree                 0.02                  0.02          0.03               0.02
         disagree                          0.25                  0.27          0.26               0.21
         agree                             0.59                  0.58          0.55               0.64
         strongly agree                    0.14                  0.13          0.16               0.13
       Observations                      127,308                7,701         23,049             19,817

       C. Study material in advance
        strongly disagree                  0.21                  0.20          0.22               0.19
        disagree                           0.56                  0.57          0.54               0.59
        agree                              0.20                  0.19          0.19               0.20
        strongly agree                     0.04                  0.04          0.05               0.02
       Observations                      127,275                7,700         23,031             19,811

       D. Review after school
        strongly disagree                  0.15                  0.14          0.17               0.12
        disagree                           0.47                  0.48          0.47               0.48
        agree                              0.33                  0.32          0.30               0.36
        strongly agree                     0.05                  0.05          0.06               0.04
       Observations                      127,316                7,699         23,037             19,816

       E. Ask questions in class
         strongly disagree                 0.18                  0.15          0.16               0.16
         disagree                          0.51                  0.52          0.49               0.52
         agree                             0.26                  0.28          0.29               0.28
         strongly agree                    0.05                  0.05          0.07               0.04
       Observations                      127,266                7,700         23,029             19,806

       F. Actively participate
         strongly disagree                 0.06                 0.05           0.07               0.04
         disagree                          0.27                 0.27           0.27               0.25
         agree                             0.53                 0.54           0.50               0.58
         strongly agree                    0.14                 0.14           0.17               0.12
       Observations                      127,292                7,698         23,036             19,812

Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes.




                                                           42
        Table A.2: Student Time Use by School and Class Gender Composition: Academic Activities
                                              A. Coed School                  B. Single-sex school
                                                        (2) Single-sex
                                    (1) Coed classes                     (3) All male      (4) All female
                                                            classes
        A. Homework
          0 hours                        0.15                0.14           0.13               0.10
          less than 1 hour               0.59                0.57           0.56               0.58
          1-2 hours                      0.22                0.25           0.25               0.27
          2-3 hours                      0.03                0.03           0.03               0.03
          3 or more hours                0.02                0.02           0.03               0.01
          Mean                           0.74                0.78           0.83               0.82
        Observations                    127,168             7,688          23,025             19,807


        B. Cram school
          0 hours                        0.30                0.37           0.30               0.32
          less than 1 hour               0.04                0.04           0.04               0.03
          1-2 hours                      0.13                0.12           0.12               0.13
          2-3 hours                      0.21                0.18           0.19               0.21
          3 or more hours                0.33                0.30           0.36               0.30
          Mean                           1.89                1.69           1.92               1.80
        Observations                    127,120             7,692          23,009             19,786

Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes.




                                                           43
         Table A.3: Student Time Use by School and Class Gender Composition: Leisure Activities
                                                A. Coed School                   B. Single-sex school
                                         (1) Coed         (2) Single-sex
                                                                           (3) Boys only      (4) Girls only
                                        classrooms          classrooms
        A. Watching TV
          0 hours                          0.09                0.07            0.09               0.09
          less than 1 hour                 0.23                0.21            0.25               0.22
          1-2 hours                        0.37                0.38            0.38               0.36
          2-3 hours                        0.18                0.20            0.17               0.19
          3 or more hours                  0.13                0.15            0.11               0.15
          Mean                             1.57                1.69            1.50               1.64
        Observations                     127,060              7,681           23,002             19,794
        B. Computer games
          0 hours                          0.23                0.22            0.11               0.37
          less than 1 hour                 0.23                0.21            0.22               0.23
          1-2 hours                        0.29                0.30            0.35               0.23
          2-3 hours                        0.15                0.16            0.19               0.10
          3 or more hours                  0.10                0.11            0.13               0.07
          Mean                             1.28                1.34            1.55               0.94
        Observations                     127,021              7,678           22,991             19,786

        C. With friends
         0 hours                           0.08                0.08            0.08               0.09
         less than 1 hour                  0.28                0.27            0.28               0.32
         1-2 hours                         0.29                0.28            0.30               0.26
         2-3 hours                         0.16                0.16            0.15               0.14
         3 or more hours                   0.19                0.21            0.18               0.19
         Mean                              1.65                1.69            1.62               1.57
        Observations                     126,985              7,674           22,980             19,776

Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes.




                                                            44
 Table A.4: Alternative Outcomes and Teacher and Peer Inputs by School and Class Gender Composition
                                                A. Coed School                   B. Single-sex school
                                         (1) Coed         (2) Single-sex
                                                                           (3) Boys only      (4) Girls only
                                        classrooms          classrooms
     A. Understand lectures
       strongly disagree                   0.04                  0.04          0.04               0.03
       disagree                            0.21                  0.24          0.19               0.22
       agree                               0.60                  0.59          0.58               0.63
       strongly agree                      0.15                  0.14          0.19               0.12
     Observations                        127,235                7,700         23,025             19,811
     B. Happy to go to school
       strongly disagree                   0.05                  0.05          0.06               0.04
       disagree                            0.17                  0.18          0.19               0.17
       agree                               0.58                  0.60          0.56               0.64
       strongly agree                      0.20                  0.17          0.18               0.16
     Observations                        127,249                7,702         23,035             19,793

     C. Classmates study hard
      strongly disagree                    0.05                  0.04          0.07               0.01
      disagree                             0.30                  0.33          0.33               0.15
      agree                                0.55                  0.55          0.51               0.70
      strongly agree                       0.10                  0.08          0.10               0.14
     Observations                        127,299                7,698         23,038             19,811

     D. Teaching quality
      strongly disagree                    0.02                 0.02           0.03                0.01
      disagree                             0.12                 0.12           0.11                0.10
      agree                                0.72                 0.72           0.66                0.76
      strongly agree                       0.13                 0.14           0.19                0.13
     Observations                        127,305                7,705         23,050             19,812

Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes.




                                                           45
B      Additional Figures and Tables

         Table B.1: The Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Bullying Incidents
                                                                                    (1) Bullying per
                                                                                      100 students

                        1[Female single-sex school]                                      -0.140
                                                                                        [0.077]
                        1[Male single-sex school]                                        -0.115
                                                                                        [0.065]
                        1[Coed school, single-sex classes]                               -0.051
                                                                                        [0.068]
                        Test of equality (p -value):
                         Male SS school = Coed school, single-sex classes                0.439
                         Female single-sex = coed school, single-sex classes             0.233

                        Dependent variable mean                                           0.36

                        Observations                                                      508
Notes: Sample includes schools that report information to KERIS. Dependent variable is the number of bullying incidents
reported by all students in grades 7 through 9. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered
by school district, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Both regressions include district fixed effects and controls
for: number of classes, average students per class, number of teachers, fraction of experienced teachers, fraction of teachers
belonging to a union, fraction of teachers that are female, pupils per teacher, and whether the school was founded by a private
entity




                                                              46
                                          Table B.2: Impacts of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Student Effort

                                                                                                           (3) Study                          (5) Ask
                                                                         (1) Come to (2) Focused on                         (4) Review                       (6) Actively
                                                                                                           material in                      questions in
                                                                        class prepared   lectures                           after school                      participate
                                                                                                            advance                             class
         Female ˣ
          1[Single-sex school]                                            -0.028***          0.007            0.005            0.008           0.033**          0.008
                                                                            [0.011]         [0.008]          [0.010]          [0.013]          [0.014]         [0.008]
           1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                 -0.008           0.000            0.013            0.014          0.041***         0.017**
                                                                            [0.015]         [0.010]          [0.013]          [0.014]          [0.014]         [0.009]
           1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                        -0.054*          -0.006            0.004            0.005            0.026           0.015
                                                                            [0.029]         [0.017]          [0.024]          [0.028]          [0.032]         [0.016]
         Test of equality (p- value):
          Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                            0.174            0.511            0.484            0.675            0.586            0.284
          Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female             0.944            0.406            0.854            0.797            0.358            0.977
          Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female              0.363            0.807            0.521            0.572            0.204            0.413

         Male ˣ
47




          1[Single-sex school]                                            0.063***         0.027***           0.014          0.028**          0.054***         0.025***
                                                                           [0.010]          [0.008]          [0.009]         [0.011]           [0.013]          [0.007]
           1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                0.023**           0.003           -0.001           0.010            0.035**           0.004
                                                                           [0.011]          [0.007]          [0.008]         [0.011]           [0.014]          [0.008]
           1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                         -0.043           0.021            0.037           0.039             -0.008           0.011
                                                                           [0.027]          [0.021]          [0.029]         [0.035]           [0.040]          [0.023]
         Test of equality (p- value):
          Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                                0.001            0.004            0.115            0.162            0.222            0.017
          Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                   0.007            0.003            0.047            0.016            0.029            0.019
          Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                    0.932            0.262            0.277            0.136            0.194            0.493
         Dependent variable mean                                             0.27             0.14            0.24             0.38             0.32             0.14
         Observations                                                      177,930          177,875          178,829         178,829          178,829          177,838

     Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom gender composition relative to a coed classroom
     with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
     *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes.
                                        Table B.3: Impacts of School and Classroom Gender Composition on Student Time Use
                                                                        (1) Hours spent on (2) Hours spent in       (3) Hours spent      (4) Hours spent      (5) Hours spent
                                                                            homework           cram school            watching TV        computer games         with friends
        Female ˣ
         1[Single-sex school]                                                  0.004                -0.033                0.009                0.039                 -0.047
                                                                              [0.023]               [0.045]             [0.037]               [0.033]                [0.035]
         1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                     -0.003                -0.057              0.082**                0.057                  0.019
                                                                              [0.029]               [0.065]             [0.037]               [0.039]                [0.038]
         1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                              0.010                 0.167               -0.044                0.006                 -0.144
                                                                              [0.056]               [0.133]             [0.098]               [0.086]                [0.101]
        Test of equality (p- value):
         Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ SS class                                0.836                0.726                0.062                0.632                   0.116
         Female ͯ SS school = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                 0.971                0.136                0.630                0.533                   0.691
         Female ͯ SS class = Female ͯ Coed class, 100% female                  0.847                0.129                0.102                0.365                   0.159

        Male ˣ
         1[Single-sex school]                                                0.063***             0.130***              -0.054*             -0.104***               -0.128***
                                                                              [0.024]              [0.039]              [0.032]               [0.040]                 [0.029]
48




         1[Coed school, single-sex class]                                      0.016              -0.096**               0.057*                0.030                  -0.012
                                                                              [0.028]              [0.042]              [0.031]               [0.037]                 [0.024]
         1[Coed class] ˣ Fraction female in class                             -0.101               -0.025                 0.007                0.001                   0.124
                                                                              [0.076]              [0.118]              [0.082]               [0.098]                 [0.086]
        Test of equality (p- value):
         Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ SS class                                    0.146                <0.001               0.002                0.001                  <0.001
         Male ͯ SS school = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                       0.776                 0.067               0.279                0.073                   0.150
         Male ͯ SS class = Male ͯ Coed class, 100% male                        0.437                 0.105               0.197                0.584                   0.258
        Dependent variable mean                                                 0.77                 1.88                 1.58                 1.28                   1.64
        Observations                                                          177,688              177,607              177,537              177,476                177,415

     Notes: For sample, see Table 1 notes. Estimates represent the impact of assignment to the specified school and and classroom gender composition relative to a coed classroom
     with equal number of female and male students. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
     *** p<0.01. For description of individual and school controls, see Table 4 notes. Time use measures represent hours per day spent on the specified activity.
        Table B.4: Heterogeneity in the Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition: Public versus Private Schools, Achievement by Subject
                                                                  (1) Reading          (2) English          (3) Math           (4) Science       (5) Social Studies

                  Private                                           0.101*                0.076               0.057              0.127**              0.106*
                                                                    [0.060]              [0.063]             [0.063]             [0.062]              [0.056]
                  Female ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                      -0.051               -0.119              -0.104               -0.020              -0.044
                                                                    [0.073]              [0.110]             [0.082]              [0.075]             [0.074]
                    ˣ Private                                        0.068                0.136               0.143                0.006               0.062
                                                                    [0.087]              [0.123]             [0.095]              [0.084]             [0.085]
                  Female ˣ 1[Coed school, single-sex class]          -0.031               -0.003              0.023               -0.002               -0.002
                                                                    [0.054]              [0.081]             [0.063]             [0.037]              [0.044]
                    ˣ Private                                        -0.014               -0.169              -0.061              -0.065               -0.101
                                                                    [0.101]              [0.124]             [0.104]             [0.085]              [0.092]
                  Male ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                       0.135**               0.128              0.136*               0.091               0.131**
                                                                    [0.066]              [0.104]             [0.081]             [0.075]              [0.061]
                   ˣ Private                                         0.025                0.049               0.050               0.066                0.003
49




                                                                    [0.082]              [0.116]             [0.096]             [0.092]              [0.079]
                  Male ˣ 1[Coed school, single-sex class]            -0.073              -0.021               -0.043              -0.043               -0.030
                                                                    [0.045]             [0.062]              [0.048]             [0.037]              [0.036]
                   ˣ Private                                         0.006              -0.167*               -0.028              -0.065               -0.075
                                                                    [0.085]             [0.097]              [0.087]             [0.080]              [0.086]

                  Observations                                      178,829             178,829              178,829             178,829              178,829

     Notes: See Table 12 notes. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
              Table B.5: Heterogeneity in the Impact of School and Classroom Gender Composition by Teacher Gender: Achievement by Subject

                                                                     (1) Reading          (2) English           (3) Math            (4) Science        (5) Soc. Studies


                Fraction teachers female in school (μ = 0.5)           0.397**              0.365*               0.378**             0.493***              0.400**
                                                                       [0.163]              [0.203]              [0.175]              [0.163]              [0.168]

                Female ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                           0.030                0.053                0.043                0.000                0.018
                                                                       [0.051]              [0.075]              [0.066]              [0.055]              [0.049]
                  ˣ Fraction teachers female in school                  -0.199               -0.418               -0.311               -0.013               -0.034
                                                                       [0.227]              [0.336]              [0.284]              [0.237]              [0.219]

                Female ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]                -0.003               -0.094               -0.017               -0.009               -0.046
                                                                       [0.071]              [0.079]              [0.068]              [0.062]              [0.066]
                  ˣ Fraction teachers female in school                  -0.294               -0.039               -0.044               -0.195               -0.116
                                                                       [0.301]              [0.370]              [0.312]              [0.235]              [0.256]

                Male ˣ 1[Single-sex school]                           0.190***             0.205***             0.209***             0.172***             0.167***
                                                                       [0.042]              [0.054]              [0.045]              [0.045]              [0.043]
50




                  ˣ Fraction teachers female in school                -0.445**             -0.489**             -0.518***            -0.479***             -0.319*
                                                                       [0.178]              [0.246]              [0.200]              [0.183]              [0.176]

                Male ˣ 1[Co-ed school, same sex class]                  -0.017               -0.099               -0.023               -0.046               -0.037
                                                                       [0.090]              [0.093]              [0.087]              [0.076]              [0.098]
                  ˣ Fraction teachers female in school                  -0.262               0.049                -0.134               -0.141               -0.126
                                                                       [0.278]              [0.287]              [0.261]              [0.224]              [0.272]
                Observations                                           178,829              178,829              178,829              178,829             178,829

     Notes: See Table 13 notes. Each column represents a separate regression. Robust standard errors, clustered by school, in brackets; * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Share
     teachers female denotes the fraction of teachers in a given school and year that are female, standardized such that zero indicates an equal share of male and female teachers.
