NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES BETTER INFORMATION LEAD TO BETTER CHOICES? EVIDENCE FROM
ENERGY-EFFICIENCY LABELS
Lucas W. Davis
Gilbert E. Metcalf
Working Paper 20720
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20720

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2014

We are grateful to Hunt Allcott, Sébastien Houde, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments.
We also thank Poom Nukulkij at GfK for his work on the experiment. Data collected by Time-sharing
Experiments for the Social Sciences, NSF Grant 0818839, Jeremy Freese and James Druckman, Principal
Investigators. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for randomized
control trials under Trial number 560. The authors have not received any financial compensation for
this project nor do they have any financial relationships that relate to this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Lucas W. Davis and Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Does Better Information Lead to Better Choices? Evidence from Energy-Efficiency Labels
Lucas W. Davis and Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 20720
November 2014
JEL No. D12,H49,Q41,Q48
ABSTRACT
Information provision is a key element of government energy-efficiency policy, but the information
that is provided is often too coarse to allow consumers to make efficient decisions. An important example
is the ubiquitous yellow “EnergyGuide” label, which is required by law to be displayed on all major
appliances sold in the United States. These labels report energy cost information based on average
national usage and energy prices. We conduct an online randomized controlled trial to measure the
potential benefits from providing more accurate information. We find that state-specific labels lead
to significantly better choices. Consumers invest about the same amount overall in energy-efficiency,
but the allocation is much better with more investment in high-usage high-price states and less investment
in low-usage low-price states. The implied aggregate cost savings are larger than any reasonable estimate
of the cost of implementing state-specific labels.

Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

1.

Introduction
Information provision is a key element of government energy-efficiency policy.

An important example is the ubiquitous yellow “EnergyGuide” label, which is required
by law to be displayed on all major appliances sold in the United States. Similarly, new
cars and trucks sold in the United States must display information about vehicle fuel
efficiency and an estimate of annual gasoline expenditures. Over 40 countries worldwide
have some sort of energy-efficiency labelling requirements, (CLASP, 2014) .
This information is intended to help consumers make better decisions. However,
in many cases government-mandated labels do not provide accurate information
necessary for consumers to make efficient decisions. In particular, most labels report only
very coarse information based on national average energy prices and typical national
usage. In practice, energy prices and typical usage vary substantially, so the labels
provide information that is highly inaccurate for many consumers.
The objective of our project is to evaluate the potential welfare benefits from
providing more accurate information. We designed and implemented an online
randomized controlled trial to measure how consumer decisions would change with
information tailored to each household’s state of residence. We find that better labels
indeed lead to better choices. When presented with more accurate information, the
average energy-efficiency of selected appliances stays about the same, but the allocation
is much better. That is, households facing low energy prices and low expected usage tend
to invest less in energy-efficiency, while those facing high energy prices and high
expected usage tend to invest more.
The implied aggregate savings are substantial. With energy-efficiency
investments the relevant measure is “lifetime cost,” calculated as purchase price plus the
present discounted value of energy costs over the life of the appliance. We find that statespecific labels decrease lifetime cost by an average of $10 per appliance, with much
larger savings in high-cost states. The implied aggregate cost savings are larger than any
reasonable estimate of the cost of implementing state-specific labels.
We then provide additional analysis and evidence aimed at better understanding
1

the mechanisms underlying our results. We find that immediately after the experiment
most participants are unable to correctly answer basic questions about the information
they have just seen. Most do not know whether the labels they just saw were based on
national or state energy prices, nor do they know how energy prices or appliance usage in
their state compares to the national average.
Overall, the evidence points to people taking the information in these labels as
given without analyzing it carefully. Daniel Kahneman (2011) has referred to this kind of
decision making as WYSIATI, “What you see is all there is.” The content of the labels
changes participants’ decisions, so it is not that they are ignoring this information
completely. But they appear not to be exerting the additional effort that would be
required to understand what this information means nor are they spontaneously
transforming this information to take local conditions into account.
This behavior may well be perfectly rationale. Understanding this information and
“translating” it to make it relevant for a consumer's own state of residence requires time
and cognitive effort. These are real economic costs, and the benefits of becoming
informed are relatively modest, so “rational inattention” may be optimal for many
consumers (see Sallee, forthcoming, and references therein).
Our paper differs from most previous studies of energy-efficiency. While there is
an extensive theoretical and empirical literature on the economic determinants of
investments in energy-efficient capital, there is little that has taken an explicit
experimental approach. None of the work to date has focused on the efficiency cost of
inaccurate information provided to consumers as this study does.1,2
It is worth emphasizing, however, that our evidence comes from a stated-choice
experiment. The highly-stylized setting allows us to eliminate many of the factors that
1

Studies focusing on consumer choice of energy efficient capital include Hausman (1979), Dubin and
McFadden (1984), Metcalf (1994), Revelt and Train (1998), Metcalf and Hassett (1999), and Davis (2008)
among others. See Gillingham, Newell and Palmer (2009) and Gillingham and Palmer (2014) for recent
surveys.
2
Two related studies perform online experiments using the same nationally-representative panel that we
employ. Newell and Siikamaki (2013) analyze optimal EnergyGuide label design while Allcott and
Taubinsky (2013) conduct experiments on the importance of attentional biases in leading to sub-optimal
energy efficiency investments. Neither of these studies considers the role of inaccurate information as does
our study.

2

complicate these decisions in real-world settings. This facilitates analysis and
interpretation, but it also may lead participants to focus more on labels than they
otherwise would. One approach to validating our results is to look for complementary
evidence from actual choices. Examining data from appliance purchases, we find a zero
(or even negative) correlation between operating costs and investments in energyefficiency. Although this doesn’t tell us how much choices would change with better
information, it corroborates other results in the paper about the lack of effectiveness of
current labels.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background information, and
makes the case for why better information might matter. Section 3 describes our online
experiment. Sections 4 and 5 provide the main results and additional analysis. Section 6
offers concluding comments.

2.

Background

A.

Previous Research
Early research on energy labeling focused on the role of labels in improving

consumer information and in providing incentives to manufacturers to improve energy
efficiency in product choices.3 More recently, interest in information provision has
surged over the last couple of years with much of the focus aimed at trying to understand
potential behavioral biases like MPG illusion, inattention, and myopia. This work is
motivated by the idea of the “energy-efficiency gap.” Going back to Hausman (1979)
and Dubin and McFadden (1984), and then with intensified focus since McKinsey &
Company and The Conference Board (2007), there is a widespread perception that
consumers make systematic mistakes when making energy-related decisions that lead
them to underinvest in energy-efficiency. Papers include Allcott (2013) focusing on
consumer misunderstanding of the non-linear relation between miles per gallon ratings

3

Wiel and McMahon (2001) discuss the early motivation for energy labels and provide a summary of the
early findings on the effectiveness of labeling programs at reducing energy consumption. Thorne and Egan
(2002) conduct qualitative interviews with focus groups about alternative graphical elements and other
aspects of EnergyGuide label design.

3

and motor vehicle fuel consumption, Allcott and Taubinsky (2013) who look at the role
of product bans as a policy response to address informational or attentional bias, Sallee
(forthcoming) who considers rational inattention to small costs and implications for
information provision, and Heutel (2011) who focuses on time inconsistent preferences.
There are also studies that examine the effect of environmental messaging like
Energy Star Certification (e.g. Newell and Siikamaki (2013), Houde (2014b)) and
“normative” letter grades for the energy-efficiency characteristics of products (e.g.
Brounen and Kok (2011)).4 The evidence shows that people respond to these “nudges,”
though it is not always clear if this is because they trigger “warm glow” responses or
because they are indirectly providing information about private costs.
Finally, there is a group of studies that have received a great deal of attention on
peer comparisons in energy use. Mostly focusing on Opower, these studies have found
that learning about how your electricity consumption compares to your neighbors tends to
reduce consumption, both in the short-run and long-run. See, for example, Ayres,
Raseman and Shih (2009), Allcott (2011b), and Allcott and Rogers (forthcoming).
We see what we are doing as quite different. We are not viewing this through a
behavioral lens but rather as a classic example of decision-making under imperfect
information. The stakes are substantial but not enormous, so consumers are “rationally
inattentive.” In this setting, there can be substantial welfare gains from improved
information provision. But they need not move people toward more energy-efficient
choices.
Our paper focuses sharply on the quality of the information that is provided and
asks whether better tailoring information to consumers’ characteristics can lead to more
efficient choices. An important feature of the experiment is that the amount of
information is exactly the same for the treatment and control groups. In related work,
Allcott and Taubinsky (2013) and Allcott and Sweeney (2014) conduct field experiments
4

Newell and Siikami (2013) is similar to our study in that it uses an online stated-choice experiment to
evaluate components of EnergyGuide labels. In addition to comparing choices with and without Energy
Star certification, they randomly include or exclude information about carbon dioxide emissions, normative
letter grades, and other elements of label design. They do not, however, vary the operating cost information
itself or explore information that is tailored to the participant’s local usage or prices.

4

in which the treatment group receives information about the potential benefits from
energy-efficiency, while the control group receives nothing or an equivalent-length
intervention with irrelevant information. These studies are extremely interesting but it can
be difficult to know whether the observed changes in behavior are driven by the
information provision per se, or by the fact that the intervention focuses consumers’
attention on the issue.

B.

U.S. Energy Labeling Requirements
EnergyGuide labels must be displayed on all major appliances sold in the United

States. As of 2014, this includes clothes washers, dishwashers, refrigerators, freezers,
televisions, water heaters, window air conditioners, central air conditioners, furnaces,
boilers, heat pumps, and pool heaters. Collectively, these appliances account for over
60% of residential energy consumption, and 13% of total U.S. energy consumption.5
Energy efficiency labels have existed since the first energy crisis in the mid1970s. France mandated labels for a variety of appliances in 1976 and Japan, Canada,
and the United States followed soon after (Wiel and McMahon, 2001). The Energy
Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 mandated labels for certain appliances beginning in
1980. Changes to the labeling program were made in the Energy Policy Act of 1992
which gave rise to the EnergyGuide labels in their current form.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is charged with enforcing these labeling
requirements. Appliance manufacturers must submit data to the FTC disclosing appliance
annual energy costs. While FTC approval of manufacturer labels is not required, the
labels must accord with strict guidelines outlining exactly what the labels must look like.
The FTC provides templates on its website for manufacturers to use and the Energy
Labeling Rule in the Code of Federal Regulations provides samples of acceptable labels
(Federal Trade Commission, 2014).

5

According to U.S. DOE (2014a), Table A4, space heating, space cooling, water heating, refrigeration,
clothes dryers, freezers, clothes washers, and dishwashers accounted for 62% of total residential energy
consumption in 2012. These end-uses represented in 2012 a total of 12.5 quadrillion Btu compared to 95.0
quadrillion Btu from all sectors and sources in 2012.

5

Information provision requirements for vehicles are similar. Since 1977, all new
cars and trucks sold in the United States must display information about vehicle fuel
efficiency. Until recently, labels reported estimated city, highway, and combined fuel
efficiency in miles-per-gallon (MPG). Starting with model year 2013, new labels provide
additional information including estimated gallons per 100 miles, annual fuel cost, and
five year fuel cost savings compared the average new vehicle. The inclusion of gallons
per 100 miles brings the United States in line with the European Union (which reports
liters per 100 kilometers) and addresses a potential cognitive bias in MPG ratings. Fuel
savings are not linear in MPG. A five mile-per-gallon fuel economy improvement
reduces fuel consumption by a factor of over six times when moving from ten to fifteen
miles per gallon versus thirty to thirty-five miles per gallon.6 Despite this non-linearity,
consumers appear to make decisions on the basis of a linear relationship between MPG
ratings and fuel consumption, a mistake termed the "MPG Illusion." Allcott (2011b,
(2013) provides evidence on the extent of the MPG Illusion but argues that the welfare
losses arising from this illusion are modest.7
Setting MPG Illusion aside, fuel economy labels on vehicles suffer from the same
problem as do appliance labels in using national energy prices to compute fuel savings
and ignoring variation in vehicle miles traveled across the states. Paradoxically, the
improvement in fuel economy labels on motor vehicles may exacerbate losses from
inaccurate information on the labels. When labels only reported miles per gallon,
consumers had to undertake significant mental computations to balance the cost savings
from a more fuel efficient vehicle against the higher purchase price (holding other
attributes constant). The current labels now report estimated five year cost savings for
each vehicle relative to the fleet average. Now it is more straightforward to balance cost
savings from more efficient vehicles against higher purchase price. But cost savings can
differ significantly given differences in average gasoline prices and driving patterns

6

Moving from ten to fifteen miles per gallon reduces fuel consumption by about 33 gallons per 1000 miles
while moving from thirty to thirty-five MPG reduces consumption by about 5 gallons per 1000 miles.
7
In related work, Camilleri and Larrick (2014) use an online experiment to test whether vehicle
preferences are affected by the scale on which fuel economy information is expressed (e.g. the cost of
gasoline per 100 miles, per 15,000 miles or per 100,000 miles), finding that participants select more fuelefficient options when cost is expressed per 100,000 miles.

6

across states. Whether consumers will make those mental adjustments is not clear.

C.

Focus on Air Conditioning
More accurate labels could be important for many different appliance types. We

focus in our experiment specifically on room air conditioners. More than 25 million
American households own one or more room air conditioners so this is a source of energy
consumption that is of large intrinsic interest.8 It is also a particularly lucid example of an
energy-efficiency investment for which consumers face a clear tradeoff between purchase
price and energy costs, and for which operating costs vary substantially across states.
Moreover, most consumers install room air conditioners themselves, thereby avoiding
any principal-agent problem that arises when contractors are involved in selecting and
installing equipment.
More broadly, residential air conditioning is of large and growing policy interest
nationwide because of the high level of energy consumption associated with it. In the
United States, there is air-conditioning in nearly 100 million homes (87% of homes), and
households spend an estimated $22 billion dollars annually on electricity for airconditioning.9 Table 1 shows that air conditioner usage is pervasive in all parts of the
country. The lowest share is in the West where one-third of households have no form of
air conditioning. The table also illustrates considerable variation in the shares of central
versus room air conditioning among those households with air conditioning with central
air conditioning dominating in all regions except the Northeast.
Figure 1 shows annual cooling hours by state from U.S. Department of Energy
(2014).10 This is the number of hours per year for which a household should expect to
use an air conditioner. On average, Americans face 1,265 cooling hours per year, but
there is enormous geographic variation. Within the continental United States average
8

U.S. Department of Energy, Residential Energy Consumption Survey 2009. See Table HC7.1 “Air
Conditioning in U.S. Homes”.
9
Data from U.S. Department of Energy (2009). See Table HC7.1 “Air Conditioning in U.S. Homes” and
Table CE3.6 “Household Site End-Use Consumption in the U.S.”.
10
Data in the calculator are taken from an uncited 2002 EPA study and are reported at the city level. We
aggregated to the state level taking a weighted average of cities within a state weighting by population.

7

annual cooling hours range from 310 in Maine to 2,771 in Florida, almost a 9:1 ratio.
Figure 2 shows average residential electricity prices by state for 2012 from U.S.
Department of Energy (2013a), Table 2.10. The average price is 12.4 cents per kilowatt
hour, but again there is substantial geographic variation. The lowest electricity prices in
2012 were found in Louisiana (8.4 cents), while New York had the most expensive prices
(17.6 cents), so more than a 2:1 ratio.
The cost of operating an air conditioner depends on both cooling hours and
electricity prices. Figure 3 shows annual average energy costs for a medium-sized
(10,000 Btu), medium-efficiency (10.0 EER) room air conditioner. The geographic
pattern reflects variation in both cooling hours and electricity prices. Operating costs
range from $28 per year in Washington to $316 per year in Florida, more than an 11:1
ratio.

3.

Experimental Design

A.

Overview
Our experiment was implemented through Time-Sharing Experiments for the

Social Sciences (TESS), an NSF-funded program aimed at making it easier for academics
to run online experiments. TESS contracts with GfK (formerly “Knowledge Networks”)
a company that administers surveys and experiments using a nationally-representative
panel which they call the KnowledgePanel. This platform has been widely used by
economists, see, e.g., Allcott (2013), Allcott and Taubinsky (2013), and Newell and
Siikamaki (2013).
The KnowledgePanel is a nationally representative panel of some 55,000 adults
selected using random-digit dialing and address-based sampling (GfK, 2013).
Participants are provided with a computer and free internet service if they do not already
have it. From this panel, GfK constructs samples to respond to surveys and participate in
experiments on a wide variety of topics. Samples are constructed to represent the
underlying population of interest and upon completion of the survey or experiment,
study-specific sample weights are provided to ensure that the observable characteristics
8

of the final sample match the characteristics of the population of interest (GfK, nd). The
TESS-funded surveys put limits on sample size and the number of questions. For our
experiment, GfK asked 3,744 participants to take the survey, of whom 2,440 completed
the experiment (completion rate of 62.5 percent).
Participants in our experiment were asked to make three hypothetical purchase
decisions. Each decision involved selecting one of three room air conditioners that varied
by purchase price and expected annual energy cost. Participants were told that the three
air conditioners were otherwise identical except for these features. And, as we explain in
the appendix, we designed the choice sets carefully to maximize the precision of our
estimates.
We designed the experiment as a simple randomized controlled trial with
participants randomly assigned to either the control group or the treatment group. During
the experiment, the only difference between these two groups was the labels which they
were shown. The control group was shown the current EnergyGuide labels which report
operating costs based on national average electricity prices and typical national usage.
The treatment group, in contrast, was shown labels which report operating cost based on
average electricity prices and usage for the state in which each participant resides.
Finally, at the end we asked a short set of questions to elicit how well the participants
understood the labels they had just seen and to assess their knowledge about state and
national electricity prices and air conditioner usage. GfK also provided us with a rich
array of socio-economic information about the participants collected from previous
surveys. See the appendix for the complete survey instrument and list of variables.

B.

The Treatment
Figure 4 shows examples of the labels we showed participants in the experiment.

Participants in the control group saw labels like the one on the left. This is the current
EnergyGuide label, and it shows estimated yearly energy cost based on national average
electricity costs and usage.11 Participants in the treatment group saw labels like the one
11

The actual EnergyGuide labels for room air conditioners report estimated annual energy cost based on

9

on the right. This particular label is for a participant in Iowa. The estimated yearly
energy cost is calculated based on the average residential price of electricity in Iowa
($0.1082 per kWh) and the average usage in Iowa (828 hours per year). These statespecific labels were tailored to the state of residence of each participant.12 That is,
participants in the treatment group from Iowa saw the Iowa label, and participants in the
treatment group from Nevada saw the Nevada label. Moreover, for all state-specific
labels, we adjusted the cost range to reflect the relevant range for that particular state.
Because energy costs scale linearly, this meant that the slider bar and “triangle” were
positioned in the same place in control and treatment labels.
In all cases, our labels are for a medium-sized (10,000 Btu) window unit. In
addition to reporting the estimated yearly energy cost in dollars, the label also reports the
unit’s “Energy Efficiency Ratio” (EER). Although not explained in the label, the EER is
the ratio of cooling capacity (in Btu’s) to electricity consumption (in watts), and is a
direct measure of energy-efficiency. Below the EER, the label includes the language
“Your cost will depend on your utility rates and use.”
Then the bottom of the label provides additional details. The first bullet explains
that the cost range is based only on models with similar capacity and characteristics. The
second bullet explains how the energy cost was calculated. This is important for our
experiment, and we varied the text here depending on treatment status. For the control
group, the text reads, “Estimated energy cost based on a national average electricity cost
of 12.4 cents per kWh and national average usage.” For the treatment group, the text
reads, "Estimated energy cost based on average electricity costs and usage for [State
Name]." Finally, the last bullet points consumers to the FTC website for more
information.

750 hours of usage. This has long been used as a rule-of-thumb, for example by the Association of Home
Appliance Manufacturers, but average usage in the United States is actually significantly higher. We use
1265 hours of usage per year based on the data that we use to calculate state-specific energy costs from
U.S. Department of Energy (2014). In all other ways, our labels are identical to the current EnergyGuide
labels.
12
The KnowledgePanel programmers programmed the experiment so that the appropriate state-specific
label was automatically shown to each participant in the treatment group in a seamless fashion so that the
survey experience was identical across the control and treatment groups.

10

C.

Balance in Sample
Before moving on to results, we test for balance between the control and

treatment groups. Since treatment status was randomly assigned, we expect very similar
characteristics in the two groups. Table 2 reports mean characteristics for the control and
treatment groups as well as p-values from tests that the means are equal. We report
weighted means using the sampling weights that were constructed specifically for our
experiment. This socio-economic information including political party affiliation was
collected from the individuals in the KnowledgePanel by GfK during previous surveys.13
Not surprisingly, given the design of the experiment, we fail to reject equality of
means between the two groups for any of the socioeconomic characteristics. The pvalues of 1.0 for educational status, sex, and race reflect the fact that the experimentspecific sampling weights are balancing on these attributes.14 The mean characteristics
also match national data quite well. For example, the proportion of households with
central air conditioners (65.5 and 67.5 percent) is similar to the national average from the
2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey reported in Table 1 (63 percent). The
fraction of participants with high school and college degrees is also similar to data from
the U.S. Census Bureau.
Despite households being randomly assigned to control and treatment groups, the
average residential electricity price is slightly higher in the control group and statistically
significant at the 10 percent level. Consequently, average yearly energy costs are also
slightly higher in the control group, though this difference is not statistically significant.
We attribute these modest differences to sampling variation and in our preferred
estimates will control for state fixed effects.

13

Political party affiliation is measured by GfK as "strong", "not strong", or "leans." We constructed
indicator variables for Democratic and Republican affiliation based on whether each participant indicated
"strong" or "not strong" support for a particular party.
14
The unweighted means are also very similar between the control and treatment groups. We also
computed p-values for equality of means between the two groups with the unweighted data and we
continue to find p-values in excess of 10 percent for the demographic and economic characteristics. In
addition we ran a weighted regression of a treatment indicator variable on all the variables in Table 2. The
F-statistic for the joint test that all the estimated coefficients are zero has a p-value of 0.75.

11

4.

Results
We present results in this section as follows. First we provide a simple graphical

depiction of our main results. We then turn to a regression framework to quantify the
magnitude of the effect controlling for state-fixed effects and other observable
characteristics, and we compare treatment effects across subsets of participants. Finally,
we use our preferred estimates to calculate aggregate national impacts.

A.

Graphical Evidence
As a first cut at the data, we compare the average characteristics of the air

conditioners selected by the treatment and control groups. We hypothesize, for example,
that participants living in states with high electricity prices will respond to more accurate
labels by choosing more energy-efficient air conditioners (i.e. with a higher EER). The
same prediction can be made for participants living in states with a large number of
annual cooling hours.
Figure 5 provides an initial attempt to answer our central research question. We
divided states into those with low, medium, and high operating costs. Specifically, we
ranked states by estimated annual energy cost (average state electricity price multiplied
by average state usage) and assigned states to these three categories based on whether the
state was in the lower, middle, or upper third of all states. For each group of states, we
plot the mean energy-efficiency of air conditioners selected by the treatment and control
groups. In addition to plotting these means, the figure also includes 95 percent confidence
intervals for each group constructed using standard errors clustered by participant.
The results are striking. The participants who see the current EnergyGuide labels
choose similar levels of energy-efficiency in all three groups of states. This is interesting
and perhaps surprising given the enormous variation in cooling hours and electricity
prices across states that we documented earlier. The participants who see state-specific
labels choose less energy-efficient air conditioners in low-cost states and more energyefficient air conditioners in high-cost states. This suggests a more efficient allocation of
energy-efficiency. The returns to energy-efficiency are higher in states with high
12

operating costs because electricity expenditures are a larger share of the total cost of
cooling.
While illustrative, this figure does not control for electricity prices and other
factors that are imperfectly balanced between the treatment and control groups. Nor does
it allow us to quantify the cost of any misallocation of energy efficiency across
households. We turn to that analysis next.

B.

Measuring the Lifetime Cost of Appliance Ownership
With energy-efficiency investments the relevant measure is the lifetime cost of

the appliance. Lifetime cost (LTC) is the sum of an appliance’s purchase price (PP) and
the present discounted value of its annual energy costs (EC) over the appliance's lifetime.
Specifically
(1)

1

where ρ is the consumer's discount rate,

1

≡

is the discount rate adjusted for appliance life,

and T is the expected operating life of the appliance.15
Our conjecture is that the group shown state-specific labels will make better
choices leading to lower average lifetime cost. When we make these calculations we use
a twelve-year appliance lifetime and use a discount rate which we estimate from our
data.16 Given the considerable discussion in the energy literature on the relevant discount
rate for thinking about energy-efficient capital, we also report results based on other
discount rates. But as a starting point, we believe it is reasonable to estimate a discount
rate using our data following long standing practice in the literature. Specifically, we first
analyze the data using a standard conditional logit model as has been done in previous

15

We assume that the best estimate of future electricity prices is the electricity price at time of purchase.
This is consistent with estimates from U.S. Energy Information Administration (2014a) which shows a flat
ten year real price trend for predicted retail electricity prices.
16
The U.S. Energy Information Administration (2014b) assumes room air conditioners have a minimum
life of 8 years and a maximum life of 16 years. EIA assumes an approximately linear retirement schedule
so the average expected lifetime is 12 years.

13

studies of consumer take-up of energy efficient appliances.17 This allows us to estimate
an average discount rate for the sample, a necessary input for calculating expected
lifetime appliance cost using equation (1) above.
Participants are assumed to choose the appliance that yields the highest level of
utility,
,

(2)

where i indexes the participant and j indexes the different air conditioner alternatives.
Purchase prices

are the same for all participants regardless of where they live, but

annual energy costs

depend on both the energy-efficiency of the appliance and on

the usage and electricity prices in the state where the participant lives. The idiosyncratic
term

is assumed to be independent across participants and alternatives and have an

extreme value distribution so the choice probabilities take the well-known conditional
logit form.
Our estimate of

is given by the ratio of estimated coefficients on purchase price

and energy costs:18
.

(3)

Table 3 shows results from the regression. Our estimate of

from this regression is 17.4

percent. This corresponds to an underlying discount rate (ρ) of 13.7 percent assuming a
12-year lifetime.19 In the results which follow we report lifetime costs using this discount
rate as well as a value of

both five percentage points lower and higher.20 As will

become clear, our qualitative results are not affected by the discount rate we choose, but
the magnitude of the measured cost savings from state-specific labels is sensitive to the
discount rate.
17

Hausman (1979) and Dubin and McFadden (1984) are seminal papers in this literature.
We assume participants make decisions based on the annual energy cost information provided on the
label. Note that for the control group, this is an energy cost based on national usage and electricity prices.
Our estimate of the discount rate is similar if we instead restrict the sample to include the treatment group
only.
19
This is similar to recent estimates in the literature from vehicle purchases including Busse, Knittel and
Zettelmeyer (2013) and Allcott and Wozny (forthcoming).
20
These correspond to underlying discount rates, ρ, of 6.7 percent and 19.8 percent respectively.
18

14

C.

Regression Estimates
We estimate regressions of the following form,
∙

(4)
where the dependent variable

′
is one of our three different measures of cost (purchase

price, annual energy cost, or lifetime cost) based on the purchase decisions made by the
participants. The subscript indexes participant i, purchase decision j (j = 1, 2, 3), and state
s. Energy costs were calculated for all participants using state-specific measures of
cooling hours and electricity prices, and thus reflect our best estimate of actual operating
costs regardless of which labels the participant was shown.21 Regressions are estimated
using all 7,275 choices made by the 2,440 participants in our online experiment. We
estimate these models in levels, but we have also estimated specifications in which costs
are measured in logs and the results are similar.
The covariate of interest is

, an indicator variable equal to 0 if the

individual is in the control group and 1 if in the treatment group. Thus, the treatment
effect

is the estimated difference in cost between the treatment and control groups, after

controlling for covariates. The vector X includes household income and indicator
variables for college graduate, non-white, married, age 65 and older, and political
affiliation. We also control for state fixed effects ( ). These controls increase the
precision of our estimates and correct for the modest imbalance in observed
characteristics between the treatment and control groups observed in Table 2.
Identification of

comes from within-state comparisons between participants in the

treatment and control groups.
Table 4 reports the regression estimates. The treatment group paid on average
$3.44 more in purchase price than the control group, indicating slightly more investment
21

These calculations implicitly assume that the price elasticity of demand for cooling is zero (i.e. that there
is no “rebound” effect). A richer framework would describe air conditioning as a household production
problem in which thermal comfort is traded off against electricity expenditure. Allowing for a non-zero
elasticity would increase the lifetime pecuniary cost of an energy-efficient unit, but also provide utility in
the form of improved thermal comfort. Because households are choosing usage levels optimally, these two
components will be similar in magnitude for small differences in energy-efficiency.

15

in energy-efficiency. We hypothesized that the state-specific labels would improve the
allocation of energy-efficiency investments across households, but there was no clear
prediction for purchase prices so this is not particularly surprising. Annual energy cost is
$2.36 lower on average in the treatment group and is statistically significant at the 10
percent level.
We are most interested in the impact on lifetime cost. The reduction in annual
energy cost accumulates over the lifetime of the air conditioner, resulting in significantly
lower lifetime costs from state-specific labels. On average, lifetime costs are $10.12
lower in the treatment group than the control group. This estimate is statistically
significant at the 1% level. This reduction in lifetime costs is consistent with Figure 5 and
indicates a better allocation of energy-efficient air conditioners across states.
Some of the other coefficient estimates are also interesting. Lifetime cost is
decreasing in household income, consistent with energy-efficiency being a normal good.
Also, non-white participants pay considerably more in lifetime cost and older participants
pay considerably less. Finally, Democrats spend about the same amount in lifetime cost,
but there is suggestive evidence that Republicans spend somewhat more.
It is worth noting that the fit of the model differs substantially across dependent
variables. In the first column the R2 is only 0.045, indicating that these decisions are
driven mostly by idiosyncratic factors. The R2 in the second column is much higher
(0.781) because the state fixed effects capture the variation in energy costs driven by
electricity prices and usage. And the R2 in the third column is the highest of all (0.916).
Lifetime costs are easier to predict because differences in purchase price offset
differences in the present discounted value of energy costs, so that the variation in
lifetime cost has more to do with cooling hours and electricity prices than with the
energy-efficiency of the selected appliances.

D.

The Allocation of Energy Efficiency across Regions
Table 5 reports additional regression estimates. Focusing on cost savings across

the entire sample masks important heterogeneity. As suggested by Figure 5, it may well
16

be that participants in low-cost states respond differently to state-specific labels than
participants in high-cost states. The top row corresponds exactly to the regression
estimates in Table 4, but also includes estimates of lifetime cost corresponding to
alternative values of the adjusted discount rate ( ). Estimated savings increase to $15.60
with a 12.4 percent adjusted discount rate and fall to $7.09 with a 22.4 percent adjusted
discount rate. In all cases, the savings are statistically significant at the 5 percent level or
lower.
For the regressions reported in the second through fourth rows, the sample is split
into three parts corresponding to low-, middle-, and high-energy cost states. As we saw
initially with Figure 5, the impact of state-specific labels varies considerably across
groups. Participants in low-cost states spend less upfront on air conditioners, and incur
less overall lifetime cost. With a 17.4% adjusted discount rate, lifetime savings are $6.78,
a difference that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Participants in mediumcost states incur about the same amount in overall lifetime cost. For these states, statespecific labels provide information that is very similar to the current EnergyGuide labels,
so it makes sense that there would not be large differences in behavior. Finally,
participants in high-cost states spend considerably more upfront on air conditioners, and
then incur considerably lower lifetime costs, ranging from $12.81 to $41.61 for the
discount rates we consider. In all cases the lifetime savings for this group are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level.

E.

Aggregate Savings Nationwide from State-Specific Labels
Households can make two kinds of mistakes when buying air conditioners with

inaccurate information about operating costs. Households in low-cost states (e.g.
Massachusetts) may purchase overly energy-efficient air conditioners despite the fact
they will operate these air conditioners only a few days a year. In our experiment,
participants from low-cost states save nearly $7 on average in lifetime costs with better
information. Conversely, households in high-cost states (e.g. Florida) may purchase less
energy-efficient air conditioners than is optimal given the expected heavy usage in that

17

state. In our experiment, participants from high-cost states save $23 on average in
lifetime costs with better information. Overall, better information leads to private gains of
over $10 per air conditioner purchase.
Table 6 reports the aggregate national savings implied by our estimates. That is,
the table reports how much consumers would save nationwide from a shift to statespecific EnergyGuide labels. At a per-unit savings of $10.12 and nationwide annual sales
of 4.4 million units, the cost savings for room air conditioners sold in a given year is
$44.5 million.22 Discounting future year savings at 13.7 percent (and assuming no
increase in sales or annual energy costs), we get a present discounted value of savings of
$370 million.
These benefits exceed any reasonable estimate of the cost of implementing statespecific labels. There are a couple of different options for deployment. The most
expensive would be to require manufacturers to ship appliances with state-specific labels.
Although this would not require any additional appliance testing, there would be nonnegligible administrative costs from such a change. The FTC currently maintains label
templates that manufacturers can download. Instead of one template per appliance, the
FTC would need to maintain 50 different templates, one for each state, perhaps accessible
through a drop-down menu. At the same time it might also make sense to automate the
simple calculation required to fill in estimated yearly energy cost.
None of this would cost very much or add much administrative burden. However,
the challenge for manufacturers is that labels are often attached to appliances even before
it is known where they are going to be shipped. Moreover, appliances are frequently
rerouted across states. For example, an appliance originally intended for California can
end up Nevada. It might make sense to use region-specific labels, rather than statespecific, to reduce the amount of relabeling that is required and/or to ship appliances with

22

These calculations ignore potential responses by appliance manufacturers and retailers. In the short-run,
firms might adjust pricing in response to the change in demand for different models. The U.S. appliance
market has become more competitive with the recent entry of LG, Samsung, and other international
manufacturers, but firms are still able to charge significant markups particularly for high-end models
(Houde (2014a); Spurlock (2014)). Moreover, in the long-run manufacturers might respond to better
information by changing the set of appliances offered for sale.

18

labels prepared for several different states.23 We recognize that moving to state-specific
labels would impose some real costs on manufacturers but think it is important that these
costs be compared to the estimated benefits.
An alternative deployment option would be add a QR scan code to existing labels
which consumers could scan with their smart phones.24 The phone would know the
user’s location and automatically display a label with state-specific or even countyspecific annual energy costs. This approach would require the FTC to maintain a website
with data on average annual energy costs that would be queried by the phone's QR scan
app. The cost of including a QR scan code on labels would be near zero, and the cost to
the FTC of developing the software and maintaining such a system would almost
certainly be small compared the benefits from improved information.
Note also that we have only focused on room air conditioners. State-specific
labels would improve purchase decisions for all different types of appliances. Central air
conditioners, furnaces, and heat pumps are obvious examples because cooling and
heating demand varies across states. But appliances like refrigerators, freezers, clothes
washers, and dishwashers could also benefit from state-specific labels. As we showed
earlier, residential electricity prices vary by more than 2:1 across states, so there are
significant potential efficiency gains from improved information even for products with
little predictable cross-state variation in usage.25

5.

Underlying Mechanisms
Having documented substantial treatment effects from the introduction of state-

23

The U.S. Department of Energy has taken a region-based approach with new minimum efficiency
standards for air conditioners and heat pumps. The United States has been divided into three regions
(North, Southwest, and Southeast) and, beginning January 1, 2015, air conditioners and heat pumps
manufactured for the two Southern regions must meet a higher minimum efficiency standard. See U.S.
Court of Appeals Case # 11-1485, April 24, 2014 for details.
24
The new EPA vehicle mileage labels that went into effect beginning with model year 2013 include a QR
scan code providing smart phone access to online information about fuel economy and environmental
factors.
25
While we have not addressed the issue of externalities associated with appliance use and the interaction
with better labels, we note that carbon pricing, for example, would change – and perhaps increase – the
regional variation in electricity prices. See, for example, Graff Ziven, Kotchen and Mansur (2014).

19

specific EnergyGuide labels, we next turn to an analysis of the underlying mechanisms
driving our results. Specifically, we ask three questions: (1) Do people understand the
EnergyGuide labels? (2) Do they know whether their state's annual energy cost from
operating an air conditioner is higher or lower than the national average? (3) Do people
take local factors into account when selecting a level of efficiency?

A.

Do People Understand the Labels?
Table 7 shows the responses to two multiple choice questions we asked

participants immediately after they made their hypothetical appliance choices. The exact
wording of the questions is provided in the table. These questions were aimed at
investigating how well participants understood the labels they had just seen. Participants
were not able to go back and look again at the labels before answering the questions.
Overall, participants demonstrate a remarkably poor level of label comprehension.
Over half the participants were not sure whether the national or state electricity price was
used to compute yearly costs. And among those who had an opinion, many incorrectly
answered the question.26 There is no statistical difference between the percentage of each
group that thought it was the national average price (33.6 versus 30.8 percent). However,
the treatment group was more likely to answer correctly that it was the state price (17.0
versus 10.1 percent). This difference is highly statistically significant, but indicates that
only a relatively small fraction of participants in the treatment group actually realized
they were seeing operating costs calculated using state-specific information. The
responses are similar for the question about what usage level was used. Again, over half
of the participants were not sure whether national or state information was used. And
again, among those who expressed an opinion there is a large fraction of incorrect
responses.

B.

Do People Know How Their State Compares?

26

Allcott (2011a) provides related evidence from vehicle purchase decisions. When purchasing a vehicle,
40% of respondents report not thinking “at all” about fuel costs, and an additional 35% report thinking
“some” about fuel costs but not making any calculations.

20

Part of the rationale for the current EnergyGuide labels is that individuals should
be able to “translate” the operating cost information to incorporate information about
local electricity prices and usage. The labels include the phrase, “Your cost will depend
on your utility rates and use.” And, at least in theory, an individual could transform the
estimated yearly energy cost to a more meaningful measure reflecting local information.
This hinges, however, on individuals having some sense of how their local energy prices
and usage compare to the national average.
Table 8 shows the responses to two multiple choice questions aimed at evaluating
this knowledge. We first asked participants how electricity prices in their state compare
to the national average. More than two-thirds of the participants answered that they were
not sure and, overall, only 20% of participants were able to correctly answer the question.
Participants have a somewhat better understanding of how their air conditioning usage
compares to the national average. A larger fraction of participants felt confident in taking
a position (60 percent versus 30 percent) and, overall, 40% of participants were able to
correctly answer the question.27

C.

Do People Take Local Factors Into Account?
The evidence from the previous subsections suggests that consumers are not

going to be able to mentally adjust the information in the current EnergyGuide labels to
account for local factors. Participants overall do not fully understand the information they
are being shown, nor do they consistently know how electricity prices and usage in their
state compare to the national average. In this section we formalize this conjecture by
testing whether state-level electricity prices and usage have any predictive power for
purchase decisions.
Table 9 shows regression estimates from two separate regressions. The dependent
variable in both regressions is the energy-efficiency of the selected air conditioner
(measured in EER). For the control group, neither the electricity price nor usage has a

27

We also examined responses separately for the treatment and control groups and the distribution of
responses is very similar and not statistically different (p-values 0.41 and 0.70).

21

statistically-significant effect on energy-efficiency. The p-value for the joint null
hypothesis of no influence is 0.24. Moreover, the sign of the estimated coefficient on
price is negative, counter to what theory would suggest. This is pretty surprising and
provides no evidence that participants in the control group are able to mentally adjust the
information provided in the labels to account for local operating costs.
In contrast, for the treatment group, both price and usage are positive and jointly
strongly statistically significant. While we cannot reject the null that the coefficient on
price is zero at the 5 percent level, it is statistically significant at the 10 percent level and
the coefficient on usage is significant at the 1 percent level. This is what we would
expect given the savings documented in Tables 4 and 5. Importantly this evidence does
not support the hypothesis that participants are making any mental adjustments. It seems
more likely, given the lack of label comprehension in Table 7 that participants are simply
responding to the operating cost presented in the state-specific labels.

D.

Complementary Revealed Preference Evidence
An important question is how any of these results would generalize to actual

choices. With good reason, economists have long been skeptical about interpreting results
from stated-choice experiments (Hausman, 2012). Without any real “skin in the game,”
it is not at all clear that participants in an online experiment are going to make the same
choices that they would when faced with real financial consequences. We have attempted
to reduce these concerns by focusing on a concrete purchase decision that is designed to
look similar to actual decisions that individuals face, but we recognize the limitations
inherent with stated choice.
In our context, it is not even possible to make strong statements about the
direction of bias. On the one hand, better labels might tend to be less effective than in the
real-world because there is no actual money at stake, so participants are going to tend to
answer these questions quickly and perhaps not read the fine print. On the other hand, our
stated-choice setting removes some additional factors like appliance manufacturer and
differences in sizes, color, and other design considerations potentially leading participants
22

to focus more on these labels than they would in the real-world. It is impossible to know
which of these potential biases is more important.
Federal law requires that EnergyGuide labels be displayed on all major appliances
sold in the United States. Thus, it is not at all straightforward how to replicate this online
experiment in the field. Strictly speaking, it would be illegal to go into an appliance
retailer and replace the current labels with labels providing state-specific information.
One possibility would be to supplement the existing labels with additional information of
some form. Although this would indeed be interesting, the results of such an experiment
would be somewhat difficult to interpret. Such a treatment would inevitably increase
attention on operating costs, and it would be difficult to disentangle the impact of that
attention from the pure information content.
Another approach to validating our stated-choice experiment is to look for
complementary evidence from actual choices. Figure 6 shows the fraction of new central
air conditioners sold in each state in 2009 that has an Energy Star rating.28 What is
striking about this figure is the lack of correlation between these choices and the pattern
of operating costs we showed in Figure 3. Operating costs are highest throughout the
South, from Texas through Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina
and Florida. So if choices are being made efficiently, we would expect to see large
investments in energy-efficiency in these states. Instead, the states with the highest
Energy Star shares are in the Northeast and upper Midwest. The cross-state correlation
between the Energy Star share and state average residential electricity prices is 0.41. But
the correlation with average usage is -0.33 and the correlation with estimated annual
energy cost (electricity price multiplied by usage) is -0.23.29 Saturation of Energy Star
air conditioners appears to be systematically biased away from what would be required
for efficiency.
28

In order to obtain an Energy Star rating (and so display the Energy Star logo) product manufacturers
must meet design criteria that contribute to significant energy savings without sacrificing product quality,
features, and performance. Unit shipment data are from U.S. Department of Energy (2010) and come from
sales data that represent roughly 60 percent of the retail market. The shares in Figure 6 should therefore be
seen as indicative only.
29
In related work, Jacobsen (2014) finds using panel data no evidence that electricity prices increase
purchases of Energy Star appliances, and Houde (2014b) finds using transaction-level data from a major
retailer relatively little sensitivity of appliance choices to local electricity prices.

23

That states like Vermont and Massachusetts have a high penetration of Energy
Star air conditioners suggests that other factors including political ideology may come
into play when households make choices about energy-efficiency. Our experiment
provides some supportive evidence for this hypothesis. In particular, political party
affiliation did seem to matter for lifetime costs in Table 4. While being affiliated with the
Democratic Party does not have a statistically significant effect, affiliation with the
Republican Party increases lifetime costs by $9.30 As always, however, it is important to
interpret cross-sectional comparisons with caution. Political ideology is not the only
factor that could explain this geographic pattern of Energy Star adoption. Air
conditioning is less common in the North, so it tends to be higher-income households
making these purchases, and this compositional effect could provide an alternative
explanation.
Nonetheless, this pronounced lack of correlation between operating costs and
choices provides some real-world corroboration for the evidence from our stated-choice
experiment. Revealed preference cannot tell us how much choices would be improved by
better information, but it does provide suggestive evidence that the current labels are not
working as well as they could. It may not be enough to simply say, as the current labels
do, that “Your cost will depend on your utility rates and use.” We may need to provide
better information to help consumers connect the dots.

30

Previous papers have documented similar correlations between political ideology and adoption of
energy-efficient vehicles and buildings (Kahn and Vaughn, 2009). One of the potential explanations that
has been suggested is that in "green" communities, driving an energy-efficient vehicle or owning an
energy-efficient building could be perceived as a symbol of "status" (Kahn, 2007). We are not aware of
previous attempts to correlate political ideology with air conditioner choices, but these purchases are
considerably less visible than vehicles and buildings, suggesting that other more intrinsic explanations may
play a role.

24

E.

Discussion and Implications
The state-specific labels changed participants’ behavior, so it is not as if they are

ignoring these labels completely. But they are not exerting the effort that would be
required to understand the information beyond a superficial level. In the EnergyGuide
labels the annual operating cost appears in 24-point font, much bigger than all other text.
Participants in the experiment appear to have read and internalized that one number, but
then failed to read or internalize anything else. Moreover, there is no evidence of
individuals spontaneously incorporating local information when they see only nationalaverage information.
We are not trying to suggest that this behavior is a “mistake”. Analyzing this
information carefully and translating the information on the current EnergyGuide labels
into information relevant for a consumer's own state of residence requires real time and
cognitive effort. These costs are significant and the benefits are relatively modest, so
“rational inattention” makes sense for many consumers. In this context there can be large
gains from improving the government-mandated information. While each individual's
benefit from customized information is low, aggregate benefits are quite high, especially
when compared with the cost of providing that information.
Another point that emerges from this analysis is the distinction between
information programs and energy conservation programs. While providing state-specific
information to households appears to lead to more economically efficient appliance
purchases, it does not necessarily mean that aggregate energy use will fall. Table 10
shows that, in our experiment, electricity consumption, in fact, does go down, by an
average of 16.5 kilowatt hours per year, driven by significant decreases in consumption
high-cost states. However, this need not be the case. In general, providing better
information leads energy consumption to decrease in high-cost states but increase in lowcost states. Whether the net change in consumption is positive or negative depends on the
type of information provided and characteristics of the households receiving that better
information. But – and this is important – better information is efficiency enhancing

25

regardless of the effect on energy use.31

6.

Conclusion
Energy efficiency is critically important both as an element of a portfolio of

measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to address global climate change as well as
concerns about local pollutants from the burning of fossil fuels in electric generating
plants. This paper contributes to our understanding of the role information plays in
shaping consumer purchase decisions as well as possible instruments to improve
purchase decisions for optimal levels of energy efficient capital. Our experiment differs
from previous studies in focusing on the role that inaccurate information plays in
misdirecting consumers away from optimal choices.
Our results are consistent with an emerging view of consumers as “rationally
inattentive” when it comes to making energy-related decisions. They respond to the
information that is provided but with a poor understanding about where this information
is coming from or what it means. Remaining imperfectly informed may well be optimal
given the relatively small stakes involved, but if consumers are rationally inattentive, this
elevates the role of information provision. It matters what information is provided and
how it is provided. This also raises difficult public policy questions. If we can influence
decision-making through information, should we be “nudging” people toward choices
that reduce externalities?
The research has practical significance as well. The implied aggregate cost
savings are larger than any reasonable estimate of the cost of implementing state-specific
labels. The lowest-cost deployment approach would be to add QR scan codes to
EnergyGuide labels – just as they have been for the new EPA fuel economy labels – that
would allow consumers to pull up state-specific labels with their smart phones based on
the location of the phone. This could be done not only for air conditioners, but for all
appliances. While the usage of many appliances does not vary geographically as much as
31

This ignores the fact that the private cost of energy may not match the social cost. For an in depth
analysis of the externalities associated with energy production and consumption, see National Research
Council (2009).

26

air conditioning, electricity prices vary by more than 2:1 across states, so there are
significant potential efficiency gains from improved information even for products with
little variation in usage.

27

References
Allcott, Hunt. 2011a. "Consumers' Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs."
American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 101(3), 98-104.
Allcott, Hunt. 2011b. "Social Norms and Energy Conservation." Journal of Public
Economics, 95(9-10), 1082-1095.
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. "The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and
Calibrations from the Automobile Market." American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 5(3), 30-66.
Allcott, Hunt and Todd Rogers. forthcoming. "The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of
Behavioral Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation." American
Economic Review.
Allcott, Hunt and Richard Sweeney. 2014. "Information Disclosure through Agents:
Evidence from a Field Experiment," National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge,
MA, NBER Working Paper No. 20048.
Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2013. "The Lightbulb Paradox: Evidence from
Two Randomized Experiments," National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge,
MA, NBER Working Paper No. 19713.
Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny. forthcoming. "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and
the Energy Paradox." Review of Economics and Statistics.
Ayres, Ian; Sophie Raseman and Alice Shih. 2009. "Evidence from Two Large Field
Experiments That Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage,"
National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge, MA, NBER Working Paper No.
15386.
Brounen, Dirk and Nils Kok. 2011. "On the Economics of Energy Labels in the
Housing Market." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 62(2), 166179.
Busse, Megan R.; Christopher R. Knittel and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. "Are
Consumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases." American Economic
Review, 103(1), 220-256.
Camilleri, Adrian R. and Richard P. Larrick. 2014. "Metric and Scale Design as
Choice Architecture Tools." Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 33(1), 108-125.
Collaborative Labeling and Appliance Standards Program (CLASP). 2014. "Global
S&L Database," http://www.clasponline.org/en/Tools/Tools/SL_Search.aspx, Accessed
on Sept. 25, 2014.
28

Davis, Lucas W. 2008. "Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water:
Evidence from a Field Trial." RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), 530-546.
Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. "An Econometric Analysis of
Residential Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption." Econometrica, 52(2), 345362.
Federal Trade Commission. 2014. "Energyguide Labeling: Faqs for Appliance
Manufacturers," http://www.business.ftc.gov/documents/bus-82-energyguide-labels-faqs,
Accessed on October 9, 2014.
GfK. 2013. "Knowledgepanel Design Summary," http://www.gfk.com/Documents/GfKKnowledgePanel-Design-Summary.pdf, Accessed on September 26, 2014.
GfK. nd. "Gfk Methodology," provided with data; available from authors.
Gillingham, Kenneth; Richard G. Newell and Karen Palmer. 2009. "Energy
Efficiency Economics and Policy." Annual Review of Resource Economics, 1(1), 597619.
Gillingham, Kenneth and Karen Palmer. 2014. "Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap:
Policy Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence." Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy, 8(1), 18-38.
Graff Ziven, Joshua; Matthew J. Kotchen and Erin T. Mansur. 2014. "Spatial and
Temporal Heterogeneity of Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and Other
Electricity-Shifting Policies." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 107(Part
A, November), 248-268.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization
of Energy-Using Durables." Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 33-54.
Hausman, Jerry A. 2012. "Contingent Valuation: From Dubious to Hopeless." Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 26(4), 43-56.
Heutel, Garth. 2011. "Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable
Goods under Time Inconsistency," National Bureau of Economic Research: Cambridge,
MA, NBER Working Paper No. 17083.
Houde, Sebastien. 2014a. "Bunching with the Stars: How Firms Respond to
Environmental Certification," University of Maryland Working Paper: College Park,
MD.

29

Houde, Sebastien. 2014b. "How Consumers Respond to Environmental Certification and
the Value of Energy Information," E2e Project: Berkeley, CA, Working Paper 007.
Jacobsen, Grant. 2014. "Do Energy Prices Influence Investment in Energy Efficiency?
Evidence from Energy Star Appliances," University of Oregon Working Paper.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2007. "Do Greens Drive Hummers? Environmental Ideology as a
Determinant of Consumer Choice." Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 54, 129-145.
Kahn, Matthew E. and Ryan K. Vaughn. 2009. "Green Market Geography: The Spatial
Clustering of Hybrid Vehicles and Leed Registered Buildings." B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, 9(2, Article 2), 1-24.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. "Thinking Fast and Slow," New York: Farrar, Strauss and
Giroux,
McKinsey & Company and The Conference Board. 2007. "Reducing U.S. Greenhouse
Gas Emissions: How Much at What Cost?," Washington, DC.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 1994. "Economics and Rational Conservation Policy." Energy
Policy, 22(10), 819-825.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. and Kevin A. Hassett. 1999. "Measuring the Energy Savings from
Home Improvement Investments: Evidence from Monthly Billing Data." Review of
Economics and Statistics, 81(3), 516-528.
National Research Council. 2009. Hidden Costs of Energy: Unpriced Consequences of
Energy Production and Use. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Newell, Richard G. and Juha V. Siikamaki. 2013. "Nudging Energy Efficiency
Behavior: The Role of Information Labels," Cambridge, MA, NBER Working Paper No.
19224.
Revelt, David and Kenneth Train. 1998. "Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices:
Households' Choices of Appliance Efficiency Level." Review of Economics and
Statistics, 80(4), 647-657.
Sallee, James M. forthcoming. "Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency." Journal of
Law and Economics.
Spurlock, Anna. 2014. "Appliance Efficiency Standards and Price Discrimination,"
Lawrence Berkeley Lab: Berkeley, CA.

30

Thorne, Jennifer and Christine Egan. 2002. "An Evaluation of the Federal Trade
Commission's Energyguide Appliance Label," American Council for an Energy Efficient
Economy: Washington, DC.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2009. "Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS)
2009," http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2009/, Accessed on September
25, 2014.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2010. "2009 Unit Shipment Data Collection Forms,"
https://www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=partners.unit_shipment_data_archives,
Accessed
U.S. Department of Energy. 2013a. "Electric Power Annual," Washington, DC,
DOE/EIA-0348.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2013b. "Energy Star Unit Shipment and Market
Penetration Report Calendar Year 2012 Summary,"
https://www.energystar.gov/index.cfm?c=partners.unit_shipment_data_archives,
Accessed on September 25, 2014.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2014. "Room Air Conditioner Savings Calculator,"
http://www.energystar.gov/buildings/sites/default/uploads/files/RoomAC_Calculator.xls,
Accessed on September 26, 2014.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2014a. "Annual Energy Outlook 2014,"
Washington, DC:
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2014b. "Assumptions to the Annual Energy
Outlook 2014: Residential Demand Model," Washington, DC,
Wiel, Stephen and James E. McMahon. 2001. Energy-Efficiency Labels and
Standards. Washington, DC: Collaborative Labeling and Appliance Standards Program
(CLASP).

31

Table 1. Air Conditioner Penetration in U.S. Homes
US

Northeast

Midwest

South

West

Central Air Conditioner

62%

35%

66%

82%

46%

Room Air Conditioner(s)

24%

50%

22%

15%

17%

Both Central and Room Air
Conditioners

1%

1%

2%

1%

1%

No Air Conditioner

13%

13%

9%

2%

36%

Note: This table describes air conditioner penetration in the United States by region as estimated in the
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Residential Energy Consumption Survey, 2009. We have
excluded a small share of households who report having central or room air conditioners but not using
them. Regions are defined using standard Census definitions as Northeast (CT, MA, ME, NH, NJ, NY,
PA, RI, VT), Midwest (IA, IL, IN, KS, MI, MN, MO, ND, NE, OH, SD, WI), South (AL, AR, DC, DE,
FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, MS, NC, OK, SC, TN, TX, VA, WV) and West (AK, AZ, CA, CO, HI, ID,
MT, NM, NV, OR, UT, WA, WY).

32

Table 2. Testing for Balance in Randomized Sample
Control Treatment p-value
(1)
(2)
(3)
Annual Household Income (in
72,817
70,848
0.363
dollars)
High School Graduate
0.874
0.874
1.000
College Graduate
0.289
0.289
1.000
Household Size
2.745
2.756
0.871
Married
0.533
0.533
0.981
Employed
0.582
0.564
0.408
Age 65 and older
0.174
0.179
0.723
Female
0.519
0.519
1.000
Nonwhite
0.338
0.338
1.000
Homeowner
0.728
0.695
0.100
Multiunit Property
0.250
0.256
0.718
Household has a Central Air
0.655
0.675
0.322
Conditioner
Democratic Affiliation
0.316
0.314
0.942
Republican Affiliation
0.217
0.244
0.115
Average Residential Electricity
Price in the State of Residence
12.49
12.32
0.088
(cents per kWh)
Average Annual Hours of Air
Conditioning Use in the State
1,260
1,265
0.840
of Residence
Annual Cost of Operating a
Medium-Sized Room Air
154.58
153.04
0.601
Conditioner in the State of
Residence (in dollars)
Note: This table tests for balance between the control and treatment groups.
There are 1231 participants in the control group and 1209 participants in the
treatment group. Columns 1 and 2 report means of the variables listed in the
row headings, weighted using sampling weights. Proportion high school
graduate, college graduate, employment status, and the other individual
characteristics correspond to the individual in each household who participates
in the KnowledgePanel, not for the head of household. The annual cost of
operating a medium-sized room air conditioner is calculated for a 10,000 Btu
unit with an EER of 10.0. Column 3 reports p-values from tests that the
weighted means in the two groups are equal.

33

Table 3. Conditional Logit Regression Results
Variable

Coefficient Estimate

Purchase Price (PP)

-0.00223
(0.0004)

Energy cost (EC)

-0.01281
(0.0016)

Implied Discount Rate ( )

0.174
(0.013)

Note: This table reports coefficients from a conditional logit model
estimated using all 7,275 choices made by the 2,440 participants in
our online experiment. There are slightly less than 3 choices per
participant because a small number of participants failed to finish
the experiment. As described in the text, the implied discount rate
is calculated as the ratio of the two coefficients. Observations are
weighted using sampling weights. Standard errors, clustered by
state, are reported in parentheses. All coefficient estimates are
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

34

Table 4. Cost Impacts of State-Specific Labels, Regression Estimates
(1)
(2)
(3)
Annual
Purchase Price
Lifetime Cost
VARIABLES
Energy Cost
Treatment

Household
Income (x1000)
College Graduate
Nonwhite
Married
Age 65 and Over
Democrat
Republican
Constant

Observations
R-squared

3.436
(4.996)

-2.357*
(1.344)

-10.123***
(3.765)

0.307***
(0.055)
1.771
(5.812)
-13.869**
(6.187)
16.511***
(5.321)
18.366***
(6.131)
0.000
(6.066)
-9.026
(6.371)
365.458***
(6.456)

-0.081***
(0.014)
-1.738
(1.532)
5.532***
(1.740)
-3.232**
(1.415)
-5.816***
(1.575)
-0.413
(1.657)
3.102*
(1.685)
155.148***
(1.686)

-0.161***
(0.040)
-8.224*
(4.226)
17.954***
(5.004)
-2.078
(3.933)
-15.087***
(4.453)
-2.375
(4.619)
8.817*
(4.843)
1,257.890***
(4.674)

7,275
0.045

7,275
0.781

7,275
0.916

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from three separate
least squares regressions. The dependent variable varies across regression as
indicated in the column headings. Lifetime cost is calculated using the adjusted
discount rate ( ) of 17.4 percent. All regressions include state fixed effects in
addition to the covariates listed in the row headings. The sample includes all 7,275
choices made by the 2,440 participants in our online experiment. In all regressions
observations are weighted using sampling weights. Standard errors are clustered by
participant.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

35

Table 5. Cost Impacts of State-Specific Labels, Additional Regression Estimates
Lifetime Cost
Purchase Price
Annual Energy
=.174
=.124
Cost
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Entire Sample
$3.44
-$2.36*
-$10.12***
-$15.60**
(5.00)
(1.34)
(3.76)
(6.61)
Low Energy Cost States
-$12.49
$0.99
-$6.78**
-$4.48
(7.82)
(1.09)
(2.77)
(2.87)
Middle Energy Cost States
$1.50
-$0.02
$1.37
$1.32
(9.35)
(2.31)
(4.40)
(9.58)
High Energy Cost States
$22.86**
-$7.98**
-$23.06**
-$41.61**
(9.02)
(3.23)
(9.98)
(17.39)

=.224
(5)
-$7.09***
(2.49)
-$8.06**
(3.58)
$1.40
(1.99)
-$12.81**
(5.97)

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to the treatment indicator variable from twenty separate
least squares regressions. Positive numbers indicate a higher price or cost for the treatment group. The dependent variable varies across
regressions as indicated in the column headings. Lifetime costs are calculated using the adjusted discount rates ( ) of 17.4, 12.4, and
22.4 percent as indicated. All regressions include state fixed effects as well as household income and indicator variables for college
graduate, non-white, married, age 65 or over, and political party affiliation. For the first row the sample includes all 7,275 choices made by
the 2,440 participants in our online experiment. For the regressions reported in the second through fourth rows, states are divided into three
groups (terciles) based on average energy costs (residential electricity prices multiplied by annual hours of air conditioning use) and then
regressions are run using participants from each subset of states. In all regressions observations are weighted using sampling weights.
Standard errors are clustered by participant.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

36

Table 6. Implied Aggregate National Savings from State-Specific Labels
Lifetime Cost Savings per Room Air
$10.12
Conditioner
Annual Sales of Room Air Conditioners
4.4 million
Total Cost Savings per Year
$44.5 million
Total Cost Savings – All Future Years
$369.5 million
(discounted at 13.7 percent)
Note: This table reports the implied aggregate national savings implied by our estimates. Lifetime cost
savings per air conditioner come from the full-sample regression estimate corresponding to a discount rate
of 13.7% (appliance lifetime adjusted discount rate of 17.4%). Annual sales of room air conditioners come
from U.S. Department of Energy (2013b). Total cost savings for all room air conditioners is the product of
the first and second rows. The final row reports the present discounted value of total cost savings implied
by a permanent switch to state-specific labels.

37

Table 7. Testing Label Comprehension
Participants Shown Participants Shown
p-Values for
Current Labels
State-Specific
Equality of
(i.e. Control Group)
Labels
Proportions
(i.e. Treatment
Across Groups
Group)
(1)
(2)
(3)
What electricity price was used to calculate estimated yearly energy cost in the Energy Guide
labels you were shown?
The average electricity price in the
30.8%
0.152
33.6%
United States
The average electricity price in my
10.1%
0.000
17.0%
state.
I’m not sure.
56.3%
52.2%
Operating costs for an air conditioner depend on the cost of electricity and the number of
hours the air-conditioner is used. What usage level was used to calculate estimated yearly
energy cost in the Energy Guide labels you were shown?
The average usage level for air
32.2%
0.392
33.9%
conditioners in the United States.
The average usage level for air
9.8%
0.001
14.5%
conditioners in my state.
I’m not sure.
56.2%
53.2%
Note: This table reports the results from two qualitative questions we asked at the end of the experiment. The table
replicates the exact wording used for the question and the answers, including underlined text as indicated. We have
excluded a small number of observations (<1%) in which participants refused to answer the question. The correct
answers are highlighted in bold. We calculate all proportions using sampling weights.

38

Table 8: Testing Knowledge About Energy Costs
The national average residential electricity price is 12.4 cents per
kilowatt hour (kWh). How does the average residential electricity
price in your state compare to the national average?
My state’s electricity prices are higher than
14.3%
the national average.
My state’s electricity prices are lower than
16.6%
the national average.
I’m not sure.

69.2%

Percentage Correct

20.2%

How do you think average air conditioning usage in your state
compares to the average usage nationally?
Average usage in my state is probably
30.6%
higher than the national average.
Average usage in my state is probably
28.1%
lower than the national average.
I’m not sure.

41.3%

Percentage Correct

40.4%

Note: This table reports the results from two questions we asked at the end of the
experiment. The table replicates the exact wording used for the question and the
answers, including underlined text as indicated. We have excluded a small
number of observations (<1%) in which participants refused to answer the
question. The percentage correct is the fraction of participants who are able to
answer the question (i.e. they don’t respond “I’m not sure”) and are correct in
how their local conditions compare to the national average. We calculate all
proportions using sampling weights.

39

Table 9. Do Participants Take Local Factors Into Account?
Participants Shown
Participants Shown
Current Labels
State-Specific Labels
(i.e. Control Group)
(i.e. Treatment Group)
(1)
(2)
Electricity Price (cents per
-0.036
0.041*
kWh)
(0.025)
(0.024)
Annual Hours of Air
0.0050
0.0398***
Conditioning Usage
(0.0085)
(0.0085)
(in 100s)
p-value for joint test that
price and usage do not
0.245
0.000
influence EER choice
Number of Observations
3670
3605
Note: This table reports estimated coefficients and standard errors from two separate regressions. For
column (1) the sample is restricted to the 3,670 choices made by participants in the control group and for
column (2) the sample is restricted to the 3,605 choices made by participants in the treatment group. The
dependent variable in both regressions is the energy-efficiency of the selected air conditioner (measured in
EER). In addition to the independent variables listed in the row headings, both regressions include
household income and indicator variables for college graduate, non-white, married, age 65 or over, and
political party affiliation. In both regressions observations are weighted using sampling weights. Standard
errors are clustered by participant.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

40

Table 10. The Impact of State-Specific Labels on Electricity
Consumption
Annual Electricity Consumption
(in kilowatt hours)
Entire Sample

-16.5
(11.1)
10.2
(9.2)
8.5
(16.2)
-64.6**
(27.0)

Low Energy Cost States
Middle Energy Cost States
High Energy Cost States

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors corresponding to the
treatment indicator variable from four separate least squares regressions. The dependent
variable in all regressions is the annual electricity consumption in kilowatt hours of the air
conditioner selected by the participant based on annual cooling hours in the state where the
participant lives. All regressions include state fixed effects as well as household income and
indicator variables for college graduate, non-white, married, age 65 or over, and political
party affiliation. For the first row the sample includes all 7,275 choices made by the 2,440
participants in our online experiment. For the regressions reported in the second through
fourth rows, states are divided into three groups (terciles) based on average energy costs
(residential electricity prices multiplied by annual hours of air conditioning use) and then
regressions are run using participants from each subset of states. In all regressions
observations are weighted using sampling weights. Standard errors are clustered by
participant.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

41

Figure 1: Annual Cooling Hours by State

0 − 500
500 − 1000
1000 − 1500
1500 − 2000
2000 − 2500
2500 − 3000

42

Figure 2: Residential Electricity Prices by State

Cents/kWh
8 − 10
10 − 12
12 − 14
14 − 16
16 − 18

43

Figure 3: The Cost of Operating a Medium-Sized Room Air Conditioner

Dollars Per Year
25 − 100
100 − 175
175 − 250
250 − 325

44

Figure 4: Control and Treatment Labels
Control Group

Treatment Group

45

10.4

Mean Energy−Efficiency of Selected Units (EER)
10.6
10.8
11
11.2
11.4

Figure 5. Do Better Labels Lead to Better Choices?

States with Low Operating Costs

States with Medium Operating Costs

Current Labels

States with High Operating Costs

State−Specific Labels

46

Figure 6. Share of New Air Conditioners Sold in 2009 that are Energy Star

25 − 30
30 − 35
35 − 40
40 − 45
45 − 50
50 − 55

47

Appendix I: Additional Information About the Experiment
The experiment ran from July 16 to August 1, 2014. Participants in the experiment were
not allowed to go back to earlier questions upon moving forward to the next screen in the
experiment. If they did not answer a question, they were prompted once to answer and
then they were allowed to proceed. Less than one percent of responses were blank.
A1 – Complete Survey Instrument
[Screen 1]
Q1. What type of air conditioning equipment do you have in your dwelling?
I have a central air conditioning system. .............................1
I have a room air conditioning unit (or units). .....................2
I don’t have air conditioning in my dwelling. ......................3
[Screen 2]
Imagine that a room has been added to your house that is not cooled by your central air
conditioner.32 You have decided to purchase a room air conditioner for this room.
The next screen will describe three different air conditioners. For each option you will be
shown an Energy Guide label which provides information about operating costs. The
purchase price is also provided for each option. You will be asked to select your
preferred air conditioner.
Assume that all characteristics other than purchase and operating cost of the three options
are identical and that the air conditioner has been properly sized for this room. Feel free
to use a calculator and/or scratch pad to assist you in evaluating the options.
[Screens 3-5]
Q2 – Q4.
Note: The screen shot below is a representative set of room air conditioner choices
among which the participant were asked to choose.

32

If the participant does not have central air, the first sentence reads "Imagine a room in your house that is
not currently air conditioned."

48

[Screeen 6]
Q5. What
W electriccity price waas used to caalculate estim
mated yearlyy energy costt in the
Energ
gy Guide lab
bels you werre shown?
The av
verage electrricity price inn the Unitedd
Stattes. ..............................................................1
The av
verage electrricity price inn my state. ..........2
I’m no
ot sure. ........................................................3
[Screeen 7]
T national average residential elecctricity price is 12.4 centts per kilowaatt hour
Q6. The
(kWh
h). How doees the averag
ge residentiaal electricity price in youur state comppare to the
nation
nal average??
My staate’s electriccity prices arre higher thaan the
natiional averagge. ............................................1
My staate’s electriccity prices arre lower thann the
natiional averagge. ............................................2
I’m no
ot sure. ........................................................3
[Screeen 8]
O
co
osts for an aiir conditioneer depend onn the cost of eelectricity annd the
Q7. Operating
numb
ber of hours the air-cond
ditioner is used. What ussage level w
was used to caalculate
estim
mated yearly energy cost in the Energ
gy Guide labbels you were shown?
The av
verage usagee level for aiir conditioneers in
the United Statees. ...........................................1
49

The average usage level for air conditioners in
my state. .......................................................2
I’m not sure. .....................................................3
[Screen 9]
Q8. How do you think average air conditioning usage in your state compares to the
average usage nationally?
Average usage in my state is probably higher
than the national average. .............................1
Average usage in my state is probably lower
than the national average. ............................2
I’m not sure. .....................................................3
[Screen 10]
Q9. How do you think air conditioning usage in your home compares to the average
usage in your state?
Usage in my home is probably higher than the
state average. ................................................1
Usage in my home is probably lower than the
state average. ................................................2
Usage in my home is probably very close to the
state average. ................................................3

End of Experiment
A2 –Sampling Design
1. Sample designed to match key benchmarks
• Gender: Male or Female
• Age: 18–29, 30–44, 45–59, and 60+
• Race/Ethnicity: Hispanic and non-Hispanic White, Black, Other, and 2+ Races
• Education: Less than High School, High School, Some College, Bachelor and
beyond
• Census Region: Northeast, Midwest, South, and West
• Household Income: $0-$10K, $10K-<$25K, $25K-<$50K, $50K-<$75K, $75K<$100K, and $100K+
• Home Ownership: Own or Rent/Other
• Metropolitan Area: Yes or No
• Home Internet Access: Yes or No
2. Study specific final weights computed to adjust for experiment-specific nonresponse
along the following dimensions
 gender
50







race/ethnicity
education
census region
household income
home internet service

A3 – Appliance Choice Questions
Each participant in the experiment was shown a screen with three room air conditioner
choices and asked to select their most preferred model. The choices ranged from least to
most expensive. More energy-efficient air conditioners were more expensive. After
selecting their preferred model, they were asked to make two additional purchase
decisions in an identical manner to their first selection decision. The design matrix for
the three sets of choices was as follows:
Table A1. Purchase Prices for Air Conditioner Choices
Energy Efficiency Rating (EER)
7.8
11.0
13.1
$200
$420
$550
Decision 1
$200
$505
$600
Decision 2
$200
$335
$440
Decision 3
That is, the energy-efficiency rating of the three choices was the same for all participants
and all decisions. We varied the purchase prices across decisions as indicated above. For
all three questions, participants were shown labels that calculated energy costs as a
function of the EER rating (7.8, 11.0, or 13.1) and either average national usage and
electricity prices (control group) or average state usage and electricity prices. Annual
energy costs (EC) are given by the following formula:

∙

(A1)

where BTU is the rated size of the air conditioner (10,000 BTU's for our experiment).
We selected these EER values to reflect typical levels for room air conditioners in the
market for sale in 2014. Then we selected the purchase prices based on simulation
evidence to maximize the precision of our estimates. In particular, we constructed
synthetic nationally-representative data, and then for an assumed distribution of discount
rates simulated choices using draws from an extreme value distribution. We included
both a treatment group and a control group and assumed both would take the information
in the labels at face value. Then with the generated “data,” we estimated the discount rate
and examined the distribution of choices across states as in Figure 5 from the paper. The
purchase prices above were those that minimized the standard error of the estimated

51

discount rate and provided a good mix of choices across states for both the treatment and
control groups.

52

