NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF INTRAUTERINE EXPOSURE TO NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY:
EVIDENCE FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DATA ON MUSLIM IMMIGRANTS IN DENMARK
Marie Louise Schultz-Nielsen
Erdal Tekin
Jane Greve
Working Paper 20723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20723

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

This research is supported by a grant (12-125309) from the Danish Council for Independent Research.
We thank Janet Currie, Ezra Susser, Daniel Rees, and the seminar participants at the Rockwool Foundation
for comments and suggestions offered. The authors are solely responsible for any views expressed.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marie Louise Schultz-Nielsen, Erdal Tekin, and Jane Greve. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Labor Market Effects of Intrauterine Exposure to Nutritional Deficiency: Evidence from Administrative
Data on Muslim Immigrants in Denmark
Marie Louise Schultz-Nielsen, Erdal Tekin, and Jane Greve
NBER Working Paper No. 20723
December 2014
JEL No. I1,I12,J1,J13,J21,J24,J3
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether nutritional disruptions experienced during the stage of fetal development
impair an individual’s labor market productivity later in life. We consider intrauterine exposure to
the month of Ramadan as a natural experiment that might cause shocks to the inflow of nutrients essential
for fetal development. Specifically, we use administrative data from Denmark to investigate the impact
of exposure to Ramadan in utero on labor market outcomes of adult Muslim males, including employment
status, annual salary, hourly wage rate, and hours of work. Our findings indicate that potential exposure
to nutritional disruptions during a critical stage of fetal development has scarring effects on the fetus
expressed as poor labor market outcomes later in life. Specifically, exposure to Ramadan in the 7th
month of gestation results in a lower likelihood of employment, a lower salary, and reduced labor
supply, but not necessarily a lower wage rate. We also document suggestive evidence that these results
may partially be driven by increased disability and to a lesser extent by poor educational attainment
among those who were exposed to Ramadan during this particular period in utero.

Marie Louise Schultz-Nielsen
Rockwool Foundation Research Unit
Sölvgade 10, 2. tv.
1307 Copenhagen K
Denmark
and IZA
mls@rff.dk
Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu

Jane Greve
Rockwool Foundation Research Unit
Sölvgade 10, 2. tv.
1307 Copenhagen K
Denmark
jg@rff.dk

I. Introduction
The impact of intrauterine conditions on the well-being of infants at birth and during
adulthood has been a focus of major interest in epidemiology since the pioneering study of Stein
et al. (1975) on the long-term health consequences of prenatal famine exposure. The proposition
that fetal malnutrition could have long-term implications for an individual’s health gained a new
impulse in the 1990s following a series of studies by David Barker, who argued that many adult
chronic diseases have origins in utero (Barker, 1990; 1995; 2002). This argument, which has
become known as the “fetal origins hypothesis,” posits that adaptations to nutritional
insufficiency during the intrauterine growth period may permanently alter the physiology and
metabolism of the fetus through a process called fetal reprogramming, which, in turn, may
increase the risk of disease in adulthood (Barker, 2002; Godfrey and Barker, 2000, 2001). The
implications of the fetal origins hypothesis for health outcomes have been extensively studied in
the epidemiological literature (e.g., Susser et al., 1996; Susser and Lin, 1992; Heijmans et al.,
2008; Lumey, Stein, and Susser, 2011; Susser and Clair, 2013).
More recently, the fetal origins hypothesis has also attracted the attention of economists.
Motivated by the growing evidence establishing a causal relationship between initial
endowments and early life investments and future health and human capital accumulation (e.g.,
Heckman, 2007; Doyle et al., 2009), research by economists has typically considered outcomes
such as birthweight, health, test scores and educational attainment, labor market performance,
and mortality (Almond, 2006; Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Almond, Mazumder, van Ewijk,
2011; Majid, 2013; van Ewijk, 201l, Mansour and Rees, 2012; Neelsen and Stratmann, 2011;
Hernandez-Julian, Mansour, and Peters, in press; Scholte, Van den Berg, and Lindeboom,

3

2012). 1 One common thread through much of this research is the use of extreme real life events
such as famines, war, and pandemics as the primary sources of variation for identification. 2 One
advantage of this approach is that these events typically have well-defined start and end dates.
Therefore, the birth cohorts exposed to these extreme events can be identified with relative
certainty. But more importantly, these events are considered natural experiments, i.e., they are
uncorrelated with other determinants of health, such as income, maternal education, or prenatal
care. Therefore, the evidence obtained from these studies has a causal interpretation (Almond
and Currie, 2011). However, the disadvantage of using extreme natural events is that they are
relatively rare occurrences, especially in the context of societies in developed countries.
Therefore, the generalizability of conclusions drawn from these events to milder, but more
commonly experienced intrauterine shocks, such as undernourishment and disruptions to
nutrients, is complicated (Almond and Currie, 2011). Since extreme natural events are not
typically preventable by individual behaviors, evidence from these studies also provides little
scope for public policies aimed at inducing behaviors that would mitigate the adverse
consequences of extreme natural events (Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk, 2011).
Additionally, most of the evidence on these extreme natural events either come from less
developed countries (e.g., the Bangladeshi famine of 1974, the Chinese famine of 1959-61) or
from western societies exposed to these shocks in the distant past (e.g., the Dutch famine of
1944-45, the 1957 avian flu pandemic in Britain, the 1918 influenza pandemic in the United
States, the Greek famine of 1941-42). Finally, the majority of the studies on the impact of

1

See Currie (2009) and Almond and Currie (2011) for extensive reviews of the economic literature on the analysis
of the fetal origins hypothesis.
2
A few exceptions include Currie and Schwandt (2013) who show that seasonal influenza is associated with preterm
delivery and several studies demonstrating the impact of air pollution on birth outcomes (e.g., Currie and Neidell,
2005; Currie, Neidell, and Schmeider, 2009; Currie and Walker, 2011).

4

impairments in fetal development focuses on birth outcomes, while effects that may manifest
themselves at later stages in life, especially in adulthood, are relatively under-researched. 3
In this paper, we consider the labor market impacts of nutritional disruptions in utero
among immigrant Muslim males between 25-54 years of age living in Denmark, exploiting the
month of Ramadan as a natural experiment. In particular, we examine whether Muslim men
living in Denmark who had been exposed to Ramadan during specific months of gestation differ
in their labor market outcomes from Muslim men who had not been exposed to Ramadan in
utero. 4
Our analysis considers only men because among Muslims living in Denmark, women
have a particularly low and unstable labor market attachment with frequent interruptions. 5
Furthermore, for example, only 43 percent of Muslim women aged 25-54 are employed
compared to 57 percent of Muslim men. In contrast, native Danish men and women have
employment rates of 86 and 84 percent, respectively. Therefore, not only do native Danes have
much higher rates of employment than Muslims, but the gap between men and women is also
much narrower. Using data drawn from the administrative records of various Danish registries,

3

Indeed in their discussion of promising avenues for future research, Almond and Currie (2011) highlight that the
long-term effects of these experiments have not been fully determined. They thus point to the importance of
identifying the long-term effects of relatively less extreme events as an avenue for future research, which could have
serious policy implications.
4
While the vast majority of Muslims in Denmark are immigrants or descendant there are only approximately 2,000
Muslim converts among native Danes (Bonke and Schultz-Nielsen, 2013). Thus in the following we use the term
“Muslim immigrants” and “Muslims” interchangeably.
5
The roles expected from or assigned to Muslim women in their communities may also be different from those of
native Danish women. Accordingly, being employed need not necessarily be interpreted as a positive outcome, but
rather be an indication of a poor financial situation. For example, on one hand Muslim women who have poorer
health as a result of being exposed to Ramadan in utero may find it difficult to work. On the other hand, these
women may also have poorer marriage prospects in terms of spousal income, an effect that may then exert pressure
on them to seek jobs, including even low-paying ones.

5

we examine a full spectrum of labor market outcomes, including employment status, annual
salary, hourly wage rate, and annual hours of work. 6
Ramadan is the holiest month in Islam, during which healthy Muslims are expected to
refrain from eating and drinking between sunrise and sunset. Therefore, any potential changes in
dieting behavior among Muslim pregnant women during Ramadan may have significant
implications for their offspring. It is important to note that fasting during Ramadan is not
unconditionally obligatory. For example, those who are acutely ill, who are travelling, who are
menstruating or who are pregnant can postpone the Ramadan fast. However, there is an
abundance of anecdotal and survey evidence to suggest that many pregnant women do in fact
decide to observe the fast, citing a number of reasons, including local tradition, cultural
expectations, and familial pressure (Leiper and Molla, 2003; Almond and Mazumder, 2011). 7
Our research design represents a natural experiment under the assumption that the timing
of Ramadan is exogenous to the timing of pregnancy (Almond and Mazumder, 2011; van Ewijk,

6

We also considered the employment rates of a sample of immigrants to Denmark from predominantly non-Muslim
countries. To come up with a control group resembling the group of Muslim immigrants as closely as possible, we
eliminated immigrants coming from North American and Northern European countries. The rates of employment for
the group of immigrants from non-Muslim countries are 69 percent among men and 62 percent among women.
These figures are again considerably higher and also closer to each other than those for the Muslim group, indicating
that the group of non-Muslim women differs significantly from the group of Muslim women. Despite these
concerns, we estimated our empirical models for the female sample. Confirming our predictions, the results did not
produce a systematic picture for the impact of intrauterine exposure to Ramadan on labor market outcomes among
Muslim women. There appears to be a 7th month effect on their likelihood of employment, but the estimate is not
statistically significant at conventional levels. Again, the equivocal effect on employment is not surprising given
their low employment rate to begin with. Therefore, outcomes related to compensation are more likely to be a better
indicator of labor market performance among Muslim women since they are conditioned on employment. In fact, we
obtained more precisely estimated effects around the months of the second and third trimesters for the models of
annual salary and wage rate. However, we do not present results for females due to concerns described earlier. The
full results from these analyses are available upon request.
7
Almond and Mazumder (2011) provides a summary of the anecdotal and survey evidence that suggests that fasting
is the norm rather than the exception among pregnant Muslim women. For example, estimates of fasting obtained in
countries such as England, Gambia, Iran, Singapore, the United States, and Yemen range from 70 to 90 percent. The
prevalence of fasting during pregnancy among Muslim women is unknown. However, anecdotal evidence obtained
from pregnant Muslim women in Danish hospitals and provided to us by Dr. Jacob Alexander Lykke of Copenhagen
University Hospital Hvidovre suggests that fasting during pregnancy in this population is not uncommon.

6

2011). 8 It is important to note that Ramadan follows the Islamic Calendar, which is 11 days
shorter than the Gregorian calendar. This means that Ramadan’s occurrence moves forward 11
days each year. Therefore, with data spanning 30 birth cohorts, one can tease out any selection
effect that might be associated with seasonality of birth from the effect of exposure to Ramadan
in utero. In robustness analysis, we also make use of data from a sample of non-Muslim
immigrants to estimate difference-in-difference models in an attempt to eliminate any remaining
unobserved heterogeneity or artifacts of seasonality.
It must be noted that we do not observe fasting behavior in our data. Therefore, our
empirical results would represent an intent-to-treat effect (ITT), producing not the impact of
actual fasting during Ramadan, but rather the effect of exposure to Ramadan. An advantage of
estimating an ITT as opposed to an average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) is that an ITT
allows us to avoid the difficulty of addressing the endogeneity of the decision to fast. By
estimating an ITT, we implicitly assume that Muslim mothers who fasted during pregnancy are
different from those who did not in both observable and unobservable ways (Almond and Currie,
2011). To the extent that some pregnant Muslim women fast during Ramadan and some do not,
the estimates obtained in our study constitute a lower (or conservative) boundary for the true
effect of fasting. 9
In addition to constituting a fresh contribution to the broad literature on the analysis of
the fetal origins hypothesis, our paper also extends the body of evidence available from existing
Ramadan studies in a number of unique dimensions. First, this is the first study to focus on long

8

Previous studies have found no evidence that pre-determined maternal and paternal characteristics are
systematically related to the timing of conception relative to Ramadan (Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Almond,
Mazumder, and van Ewijk, 2011; van Ewijk, 2011).
9
Note that if we had information about the exact proportion of Muslim women who fast during Ramadan, the true
effect could be obtained by multiplying our estimates with the inverse of the rate of fasting women (Almond,
Mazumder, van Ewijk, 2011).

7

term effects of Ramadan exposure in the setting of a developed country. The only other evidence
of Ramadan exposure in utero on labor market outcomes stems from analyses of Census data
from Iraq, Uganda (Almond and Mazumder, 2011), and survey data from Indonesia (Majid,
2013). However, there are significant differences between Denmark and these countries in the
nature of labor market conditions. For example, a significant fraction of the labor force is
employed in the agricultural sector in those countries. According to data from the World Bank,
the share of total employment in agriculture is 30 percent in Iraq, 36 percent in Indonesia, and 66
percent in Uganda in comparison to only three percent in Denmark. 10 Furthermore, these
countries are likely to have a much larger proportion of their labor force in self-employment than
Denmark. 11 Second, this is the first study to use individual administrative records as measures of
labor market outcomes. This is an important novelty over the previous Ramadan studies, which
were based on cohort analyses using either survey or Census data. Administrative data have clear
advantages over other types of data in terms of both accuracy and coverage. Third, we are also
able to analyze a wide range of labor market outcomes, including measures of labor supply both
at the intensive and extensive margins as well as compensation.
We wish to stress that the implications of our analysis are not solely relevant for Muslim
communities, but extend to a much broader audience. This is because susceptibility to milder
forms of nutritional disruptions is frequently experienced in many populations across the western
world. Our analysis is particularly policy-relevant for women living in developed countries,

10

See http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS.
In fact, being an “employee” may be indicative of an inferior socio-economic status when compared to being selfemployed or being a landowner. To support this point, Almond and Mazumder (2011) show that among Iraqi males,
homeowners are less likely to be employed than non-homeowners, which they argue as evidence of a negative
relationship between employment status and economic status. These differences may be the source of inconsistent
results on their employment results obtained in their paper.
11

8

where meal-skipping, dieting (especially prior to pregnancy recognition), and morning sickness
are common phenomena (Currie, 2011; Almond and Mazumder, 2011). 12

II. Background
The potential mechanisms through which nutritional disruptions to the intrauterine
environment can influence health at birth and in the long term are extensively debated in the
medical literature although a consensus does not appear to exist. 13 One explanation that is
particularly relevant in the context of Ramadan fasting refers to a series of metabolic changes in
the intrauterine environment called “accelerated starvation” that are caused by fasting. It is
argued that accelerated starvation may be responsible for elevated levels of ketones and
reductions in glucose (Metzger, 1982; Prentice et al., 1983), which have been linked to poor birth
outcomes (Hunter and Sadler, 1987, Moore et al, 1989; Rizzo et al., 1991; Gluckman and
Hanson, 2005; ter Braak et al., 2002; Scholl et al., 2001). 14
Another hypothesis offered for the long-term effects of nutritional disruptions in utero is
fetal origins. As mentioned earlier, poor environmental conditions in utero can lead to poor
health in the long term through a process called fetal reprogramming. Interestingly, this theory
suggests that the fetus may have the ability to adapt to changes in the intrauterine environment
by reprogramming itself, which may be beneficial for survival in the short term, but raises the
risk of disease in the long term. For reasons that are not yet completely understood, the effects
appear to be influenced by the stage of fetal development during which the exposure occurs. In a

12

Aside from generalizability, there are close to two billion Muslims in the world and millions of pregnant Muslim
women fast each year.
13
Excellent summaries of these mechanisms in the economics literature can be found in Almond and Mazumder
(2011), Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk (2011), van Ewijk (2011), and Majid (2013).
14
See Almond and Mazumder (2011) for a detailed discussion of the literature linking these metabolic changes to
the physical and cognitive health of the offspring.

9

review of findings on the effects of exposure to the Dutch famine during pregnancy on infant
characteristics and health of the adult offspring, Painter et al. (2005) conclude that there are
significant adverse health effects, which vary according to the timing of the exposure to famine.
For example, exposure in early pregnancy appears to be associated with coronary heart disease,
obesity, raised lipids, altered clotting, and increased obesity, while exposure in mid and late
pregnancy is associated with obstructive airways disease and impaired glucose tolerance,
respectively. In addition to effects on physical health, studies have also documented ill effects of
exposure to the Dutch famine on mental health of the adult offspring, which also vary by the
timing of the exposure (Susser and Lin, 1992; Hoek, Brown, and Susser, 1998; Susser et al.,
1996; Hulshoff et al., 2000; Brown et al., 2000a). The evidence suggests that exposure to famine
in late pregnancy is associated with elevated risk of major depressive disorder, especially among
males (Brown et al., 1995; Brown et al., 2000b). With regard to infant characteristics, studies
found that exposure to famine in both mid and late pregnancy is associated with lower birth
weight and length, smaller head circumference and ponderal index compared to non-exposure
(Stein, Ravelli, and Lumey, 1995; Stein et al., 2004).
The above discussion also serves as a motivational background for our analysis of the
impact of intrauterine exposure to nutritional disruptions on labor market outcomes. The insights
for this motivation can also be gained by a simple formal model first developed by Heckman
(2007), but later adapted by Almond and Currie (2011) to suit to the conceptualization of the
fetal origins hypothesis. This model clearly outlines the link between prenatal conditions and
both health and human capital formation throughout the course of life. One basic proposition that
flows logically from the model is that if there are indeed significant health impacts associated
with exposure to nutritional disruptions in utero, these effects might also extend to outcomes in

10

other domains such as the labor market. This proposition is consistent with the sizeable and
compelling literature demonstrating that fetal health and early life conditions have profound
effects on adult well-being through influencing human capital formation and adult health (Cunha
and Heckman, 2007; Deaton, 2002 Currie, 2009; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010). This
literature furthermore suggests that the effects of fetal conditions might be larger than those of
postnatal conditions (Almond and Currie, 2011).
Previous studies of Ramadan exposure conducted outside the field of economics have
usually taken the approach of comparing the outcomes of Muslims whose mothers report having
fasted during pregnancy to the outcomes of children of either other Muslim women who do not
report having fasted or of non-Muslim women (e.g., Cross et al., 1990; Malhotra et al., 1989;
Azizi et al., 2004). The evidence from these studies is primarily correlational because women
who fast during pregnancy are likely to be different from those who do not in ways that are
correlated with the outcomes analyzed (Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Majid, 2013).
Our study is in the same vein as a recent wave of research conducted by economists, who
have considered the month of Ramadan as a natural experiment in their attempt to estimate the
impact of intrauterine exposure to malnutrition on birth and later life outcomes. The pioneering
study in this literature is Almond and Mazumder (2011). Using data on births to Arab parents in
Michigan, USA, these authors find that exposure to Ramadan is associated with reduced birth
weight and a decrease in the number of male births. They also find large effects on the
probability of disability among adults, using census data in Iraq and Uganda. Finally, the
investigation in Almond and Mazumder (2011) into non-health outcomes, including
employment, home ownership, and literacy produces typically smaller and somewhat
inconsistent results.

11

Another non-health outcome considered in the literature of Ramadan studies is education.
Using data from Britain, Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk (2011) show that test scores are
lower among Pakistani and Bangladeshi students who were exposed to Ramadan in utero than
among those with no in utero exposure. Since the authors had data on only ten cohorts, they had
to utilize a difference-in-difference strategy to eliminate the likely seasonality effects for
educational outcomes. In doing so, they constructed a control group of students from the
Caribbean.
Aside from these two papers, the only other evidence on the impact of Ramadan exposure
in utero comes from two separate studies, both of which use data from the Indonesian Family
Life Survey. In the first one, van Ewijk (2011) shows that Indonesian Muslims who were
prenatally exposed to the month of Ramadan are more likely to have poorer general health and to
develop symptoms of coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes than their counterparts who
were not prenatally exposed to Ramadan. In the second study, Majid (2013) uses survey data
from Indonesia to show that adults who were exposed to the month of Ramadan in utero are
more likely to be self-employed and work fewer hours than those who were not. It is not clear
whether results from a predominantly Muslim country like Indonesia, where over 60 percent of
all employees live in rural areas, can be generalized to Muslims living in a high income Western
country like Denmark. Furthermore, the evidence in that paper is based on survey data with selfreported measures on outcome variables. 15 Our paper thus represents a unique contribution to
this growing literature by focusing on a broad range of labor market outcomes and using
administrative data from immigrants settled in a western society.
15

Also outcomes of males and females are analyzed jointly in that paper. This is despite the evidence of
considerable differences in the patterns of behavior with respect to the level and types of employment between
males and females in Indonesia. For example, males are most likely to work as employees, while females are most
likely to work as unpaid family workers (Hasoloan, 2006).

12

III. Data
Our data are drawn from several Danish registers that are maintained by Statistics
Denmark. The employment indicator is extracted from the Register-based Labor Force Statistics
(RAS statistics). 16 The RAS statistics describes the Danish population’s attachment to the labor
market at the end of November in each year. The categories of labor market affiliation provided
in the RAS statistics closely follows the international guidelines specified by the International
Labour Organization (ILO). Both the validity and the coverage of the RAS statistics have been
shown to be high (Petersson, Baadsgaard, and Thygesen, 2011). We construct a binary indicator
for employment for individuals who are categorized as an employee in the RAS statistics in
2008, excluding self-employed persons and assisting spouses. 17 Given the way the RAS statistics
is structured, our employment indicator refers to the last week of November. The data on salary
income come from the Income Statistics Register. 18 The data on annual hours of work from 2008
are available from the eIncome Register. 19 These registers include information on anyone, who
has submitted a tax return to the Danish Tax Administration. Finally, the wage rate is calculated

16

See htttp://www.dst.dk/declarations/848.
Note that the annual hours of work – one of our outcome measures – is not available for years prior to 2008.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the global financial crisis did not spare Denmark, pushing its economy into
multiple periods of recession, first in the third quarter of 2008 (which lasted for 12 months), second in the third
quarter of 2011 (which lasted for 6 months) and again in the fourth quarter of 2012 (which lasted for 6 months)
(OECD, 2014). Although, the recession initially affected the construction sector, in which very few immigrants are
employed, it spread to other parts of the economy including the public sector from the beginning of 2009. Especially
hard hit by these economic downturns have been the immigrants whose labor market outcomes have deteriorated
significantly and have not recovered much since then. Therefore, the post-2008 period may not reflect the labor
market behavior of a typical immigrant, which may complicate the interpretation of results from an analysis using
data from those years. Despite these concerns, we have estimated all of our models using data from subsequent years
including 2009 and 2010. The results for these years are mostly similar, although the coefficients in some of the
outcome models are less precise, possibly due to reasons explained above. These results are available from the
authors upon request.
18
See htttp://www.dst.dk/declarations/94760.
19
See http://www.dst.dk/declarations/148522.
17

13

on the basis of salary income in 2008 divided by hours of work in that year. Note that all of these
data are based on official reports by employers (Baadsgaard and Quitzau, 2011).
We have limited our sample to male immigrants from Muslim and non-Muslim countries
residing in Denmark between the ages of 24 and 55 in 2008. We excluded individuals who were
self-employed from our analysis since there is no reliable wage information for individuals in
this group in the Danish registers. In addition, we observed spikes in the proportion of
individuals reporting birthdays as January 1st and July 1st. Note that misreporting is only possible
among first generation Muslim immigrants because we have the exact birthday information for
the descendants. To eliminate measurement error due to heaping, we excluded first generation
Muslim immigrants with a birthday on January 1st (1,704 persons) and July 1st (1,049 persons)
from our analysis. These criteria have resulted in an analysis sample of 38,637 individuals. 20 We
categorized an individual as Muslim if he/she or his/her parents migrated from a country with a
population comprised of at least 90 percent Muslims. 21 According to this criterion, 29.6 percent
of Muslim immigrants in Denmark are of Turkish origin, followed by Iraqis (13.4 percent),
Iranians (11.9 percent), Palestinians (11.1 percent), and Pakistanis (10.4 percent).
In Table 1, we present means for our analysis sample. Approximately, 57 percent of
Muslim males between the ages of 24 and 55 in Denmark are employed. The average number of
annual hours of work in our sample is 1,432 and the average annual salary income is 250,469
DKK. 22 Finally, the hourly wage rate is 172.4 DKK. As expected, there are sharp differences in
the labor market outcomes between native Danish males and immigrant males from Muslim

20

Note that the analysis sample for each of our outcome models differs slightly in size due to missing observations
on outcome variables.
21
These countries include Turkey, Algeria, Cameroon, Gambia, Mali, Morocco, Tunisia, Mauritius, Senegal,
Somalia, Yemen, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Palestine, Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Syria, Djibouti, Azerbaijan,
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Tajikistan.
22
1 DKK is about $0.17.

14

countries. For instance, the employment rate among similarly aged native Danish males is 0.86.
Similarly, the average number of hours worked annually is over 1,600 for the native Danish male
sample. The gap is similarly wide for the compensation outcomes with native Danish males
earning 380,579 DKK annually and 219.9 DKK per hour. There are a multitude of factors
offered as potential explanations for the wide differences in labor market attachment between
Muslims and native Danes including low level of education, discrimination, language barriers,
and cultural factors (Bonke and Schultz-Nielsen, 2013).
We also have data on the highest level of educational attainment drawn from the
Education Registry, which enables us to highlight the differences in education between Muslim
immigrants and the native Danish population. The average length of education among Muslims
in Denmark is about 138 months, which is again considerably lower than that of native Danish
males who have close to two additional years of education. The average Muslim male in the
sample is about 41 years old and has been in Denmark for over 15 years. Over 91 percent of
Muslims in Denmark were born outside Denmark, so the remaining 9 percent are represented by
descendants.
For each male Muslim immigrant in our dataset, we have constructed binary indicators to
determine whether the beginning of Ramadan coincided with any of the nine months of
gestation. The algorithm that we used to determine intrauterine exposure to Ramadan is
illustrated in Table 2. We assume that all individuals have a normal gestation period of 266 days.
In addition to generating indicators for each of the nine months of pregnancy, we also
constructed a “Month 0” indicator, which represents individuals who were conceived during
Ramadan. Individuals who are not in any of these categories are divided into groups. The first
group contains individuals who were “definitely not exposed” if they were conceived more than

15

14 days after Ramadan. The second group referred to as “probably not exposed” includes those
who were conceived within 14 days following the end of Ramadan. Note that our categorization
of the months of exposure to Ramadan is identical to that employed by Almond, Mazumder, and
van Ewijk (2011). Inevitably, our assumption of a normal gestation period of 266 days for all
mothers would introduce some measurement error to our assignment rule to the extent that some
births will be preterm and some pregnancies will last longer than the full term. Additional
measurement error in the assignment would also result from the possibility that the date of birth
is misreported for some individuals. 23 As shown in Table 1, 13 percent of males in our sample
were definitely not exposed to Ramadan in any months of the gestation period and another four
percent were probably not exposed.

IV. Empirical Framework
With data covering 30 birth cohorts, we rely on the sample of Muslims only and attempt
to remove confounding factors using month of birth fixed effects as well as a set of individual
and neighborhood characteristics. Controlling for month of birth fixed effects may be
particularly important in our context because previous research has established that season of
birth is associated with adult health and occupational outcomes (Buckles and Hangerman, 2013;
23

Misreporting in the date of birth is possible only for first generation immigrants for whom the information on the
date of birth is self-reported. Since descendants are all born in Denmark, birth date information for them is derived
from the official records, and thus is free of misreporting. Note that individuals who are in the “Definitely not
exposed” category would be misclassified only if their period in utero exceeded 280 days. In that case, these
individuals should have been labeled as exposed in the month we define as month 0. However, gestations lasting
longer than 280 days are rare (Kieler et al., 1995). We have tested the measure of overlap with Ramadan calculated
from date of birth on a sample of descendants with information on exact gestational age. Here we find that the cases
in the “Definitely not exposed” category calculated from date of birth are also definitely not exposed when we use
the exact gestational age to calculate overlap with Ramadan. For the other categories with cases in which Ramadan
overlaps with months 1,2…9, the categories calculated using date of birth are similar to the categories calculated
using exact gestational age. More specifically, approximately 75% of the cases with a specific month overlap
calculated from birth are in the same month category when we use gestational age to calculate overlap with
Ramadan in utero. Approximately 25 percent of the cases with a specific month overlap calculated from birth are
placed in the month categories close to this month when we use gestational age to calculate overlap with Ramadan
in utero.

16

Doblhammer and Vaupel, 2001; Costa and Lahey, 2005; Currie and Schwandt 2013). It is
possible to include both month of birth dummies and the indicators of month of exposure to
Ramadan in utero in the models at the same time because Ramadan follows the Islamic Calendar,
which is 11 days shorter than the Gregorian calendar.
Our empirical strategy to estimate the effect of Ramadan exposure in utero on labor
market outcomes can be expressed by the following empirical model:

Yickm= α0 + β0 0th_Monthickm + β1 1st_Monthickm + …….+ β9 9th_Monthickm + β10
Probably_NEickm + monthm + countryc + communityk + Xickm β11 + εickm,

(1)

where Yickm is one of our four outcome measures (binary employment, logarithm of annual
salary income, logarithm of hourly wage rate, and logarithm of annual hours of work) for
individual i from country c living in community k and born in month m. Our variables of interest
are 0th_Monthickm, ……..., 9th_Monthickm, and Probably_NEickm. As explained above, these
variables indicate whether Ramadan began during the given month of pregnancy. Note that
0th_Monthickm refers to the month of conception and Probably_NEickm indicates individuals who
were probably not exposed to Ramadan in utero. The excluded category in our regressions
contains those who are categorized as “Definitely not exposed”, so the effects are interpreted
relative to this group. We also control for month of birth fixed effects (monthm), country of
origin fixed effects (countryc), and community of current residence fixed effects (communityk).
Finally, we control for a vector of individual characteristics represented by Xickm. These include a
binary indicator variable for whether the Muslim male immigrant was born in Denmark or in the
country from which his parents emigrated, year since migration and its squared term, and age in

17

flexible functional form with its polynomials up to the fourth order. 24 The εickm is an
idiosyncratic error term. We estimate equation (1) using ordinary least squares, adjusting
standard errors for clustering at the community level. The coefficients of interest in equation (1)
are β0 to β10.
Since we have access to administrative records on the labor market outcomes of all
individuals living in Denmark, we can in principle utilize data on immigrants from non-Muslim
countries to employ a difference-in-difference strategy in a further attempt to tease out any
effects due to seasonality. However, it is not clear whether non-Muslim immigrants in Denmark
would be a good comparison group. For example, a large proportion of non-Muslim immigrants
living in Denmark came from western countries such as France, Sweden, Germany, the
Netherlands, the United States, and Canada. These immigrants are significantly different from
Muslims immigrants in socio-economic characteristics as they tend to be much more highly
educated, with substantially higher income, and have a stronger and more stable labor market
attachment. Many of these individuals have migrated to Denmark for reasons such as marriage,
job transfer, and pursuing higher education. In contrast, most Muslim immigrants come to
Denmark for mainly economic reasons or to seek refuge from political or civil conflicts in their
home countries.
Keeping these limitations in mind, we still discuss estimates in the results section from a
robustness analysis, in which we use a sub-sample of non-Muslim immigrants as a control group
in a difference-in-difference framework. We categorize a country as non-Muslim if less than 15
percent of its population is made up of Muslims. The use of such a cut-off is necessitated by the
fact that in most countries part of their population is Muslim. Furthermore, we have eliminated
immigrants from North America and Northern Europe, who would constitute a poor control
24

Entering age in a fully non-parametric form did not change our results.

18

group for reasons explained above. It is important to note that countries like Bulgaria and Russia
with Muslim populations of 13.4 percent and 11.7 percent, respectively, are included in the
control group under this criterion. 25 In addition to these countries, the largest denominations of
non-Muslim immigrants come from countries such as Poland, Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines,
China, and Sri Lanka. The characteristics of immigrants from these non-Muslim counties are
displayed in Table 3. As illustrated in the table, non-Muslim male immigrants, as defined under
the above criteria, still have a stronger labor market attachment, as measured by employment,
working hours, wage rate, and annual salary income, than Muslim immigrants. Consistent with
the differences in labor market outcomes, non-Muslim immigrants have also had more years with
education than Muslim immigrants (154 months versus 138 months). The non-Muslim males are
slightly younger on average than their Muslim counterparts and they have been living in
Denmark for a shorter period since immigration than Muslim immigrants. Accordingly, a higher
percentage of non-Muslim males are first generation immigrants, i.e., they were born outside
Denmark, than Muslim males. Finally, Muslim immigrants more often live in larger cities such
as Copenhagen, Aarhus, Odense, and Aalborg than non-Muslim immigrants.
To implement the difference-in-difference strategy, we fully interact each regressor
(except for community and country of origin fixed effects) in equation (1) with an indicator for
being Muslim. This estimation strategy produces the impacts on Muslims for whom Ramadan
coincided with their period in utero compared to Muslims with no in utero exposure to Ramadan,
relative to non-Muslim immigrants. Note that the difference-in-difference strategy does not
require the pregnancy experiences of Muslim and non-Muslim women to be identical, but rather
requires the month of Ramadan to have no effect on the offspring of non-Muslim women and
25

Muslim Populations by Country. The Future of the Global Muslim Population. Pew Research Center.
http://www.pewforum.org/2011/01/27/table-muslim-population-by-country/.

19

that the labor market outcomes of Muslim and non-Muslim immigrants are parallel between
months in utero that coincided with Ramadan and those that did not. A particular advantage of
using non-Muslim immigrants as an additional control group is that it accounts for any
confounding caused by the seasonal effects of birth (or conception) (Doblhammer and Vaupel,
2001; Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk, 2011). The difference-in-difference strategy
employed in our context is similar to the one used by Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk
(2011), which considers Pakistani and Bangladeshi immigrants in England as the treatment and
individuals from Caribbean as the control group to study the effect of intrauterine exposure to
Ramadan on children’s test scores at age seven. We could also use native Danes as a control
group in the difference-in-difference strategy. However, native Danes, with much stronger
attachment to the labor market, are quite a different group from the other two.

V. Results
The results from our empirical analysis are presented in Table 4. To economize on space,
we only report the figures on our “month of exposure” indicators, but full results are available
from the authors upon request. The excluded category contains those who are classified as
“certainly not exposed,” and thus all effects are relative to this group. These indicators represent
the effects of Ramadan on Muslims starting in each month of pregnancy compared to Muslims
with no in utero exposure. In Column I, we present the estimates from the employment model.
Column II displays the results on the logarithm of annual salary income and Column III shows
the estimates for the logarithm of the hourly wage model. Finally, we present the estimates for
the logarithm of the annual hours of work in Column IV.

20

The employment results presented in Column I of Table 4 indicate that being exposed to
the month of Ramadan in the 7th month of gestation is associated with a 2.6 percentage point
decrease in employment, which is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. Given the mean
employment rate of 56.7 percent among Muslim males, this estimate translates into a non-trivial
effect size of 4.6 percent. It should be remembered that these results represent a lower boundary
since only a fraction of pregnant Muslim women observe the Ramadan fast.
The estimates for the model of annual salary income shown in Column II are consistent
with the employment results. Specifically, Muslim males, whose mothers were in the 7th month
of gestation when the month of Ramadan had begun, have an annual income that is 5.3 percent
less than those whose period in utero had not overlapped with the month of Ramadan. Given the
annual salary income of 250,469 DKK among Muslim males in 2008, this estimate indicates an
effect size of about DKK 13,000.
Focusing next on the results for the model of hourly wage rate shown in Column III, we
detected no 7th month effect in contrast to the case for employment and annual salary income. In
fact, the estimates on all indicators of exposure for months 1 to 9 are insignificant both
statistically and economically. Somewhat surprisingly, however, those who were in the
“probably not exposed" and “0th month” categories earn a lower wage rate than those who were
definitely not in utero during Ramadan. Interestingly, Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk
(2011), whose assignment rule for exposure to Ramadan is identical to ours, find similar negative
and statistically significant results for these two indicators. In examining this further, they find
some evidence to indicate that Muslims who were in utero during these periods are of lower
socio-economic status proxied by Free School Meal status. One possible explanation is that
children who were conceived during Ramadan or within the 14 days following the end of

21

Ramadan may come from families that differ in their socio-economic characteristics and these
differences may manifest themselves in their sexual practices or levels of Ramadan observance
(Almond, Mazumder, and van Ewijk, 2011).
Although Islam does not prohibit sexual intercourse between spouses during Ramadan as
long as it takes place outside the fasting hours, there may be a negative selection effect
associated with conception during Ramadan. For example, if these individuals are also more
likely to engage in certain behaviors such as smoking and alcohol consumption during
pregnancy, then this may serve as a potential explanation for the negative coefficient on the “0th
month” indicator. However, our data do not allow us to investigate this hypothesis. A similar
argument can be made for the negative effect for those who were conceived within 14 days after
Ramadan. Note that some of these individuals might have been conceived during the month of
Ramadan in so far as their gestation might have lasted longer than 266 days. Then calculating
backwards from the date of birth, some of these individuals might have actually been conceived
during Ramadan.
The only measure of socio-economic status that we could use to examine the issue of
selective timing of pregnancy is maternal education, which is only available to us in the
descendant sample. Indeed the individuals in the “probably not exposed” category are more
likely to have mothers with no formal education than other categories. However, the difference
is not statistically significant at conventional levels likely due to the much smaller sample size
among descendants. Taken together, this exercise produced no clear evidence for selective
timing of pregnancy based on education. Notably, we did not find any evidence to indicate that
mothers whose pregnancy overlapped with Ramadan during the 7th month of gestation differ
with respect to maternal education from those whose pregnancy did not overlap with Ramadan.

22

Therefore, it is unlikely that the7th month effect that we observe for employment and salary
income outcomes are driven by negative selection.
Finally, we present results for the effect of Ramadan exposure in utero on annual hours of
work in Column IV of Table 4. Consistent with the earlier findings, the estimate on the 7th month
exposure stands out as the largest estimate in magnitude and with statistical significance at the 10
percent level. The coefficient of -0.047 percent translates into an effect size of about 67 hours per
year. Aside from this result, the most precisely estimated coefficient is the “probably not
exposed" category, and surprisingly with a positive sign (p-value=0.045). Note that the estimate
on this indicator was positive, although insignificant, for the annual salary model, but negative
and statistically significant at the 10 percent level for the hourly wage model. In light of the
negative wage effect, one possible explanation for the positive effect on labor supply is that
Muslim males attempt to make up for the reduced income by increasing their labor supply,
possibly by working long shifts and overtime. In other words, this result is consistent with the
notion that income effect dominates the substitution effect for Muslim males in this group.
The picture emerging from the results presented in Table 4 is that Ramadan exposure in
utero tends to have negative effects for those exposed during and around the 7th month of
gestation on labor market outcomes measured by employment, annual salary, and annual hours
of work. In other words, the results described thus far support the hypothesis that exposure to
Ramadan in utero is associated with a penalty in the labor market that manifests itself in the form
of a lower likelihood of employment, a lower salary, or reduced labor supply, but not necessarily
a lower wage rate.

23

Robustness Analysis using Non-Muslim Male Immigrants as a Control Group
Next, we present results from the difference-in-difference analysis using non-Muslim
male immigrants as a control group. The estimates for each of the labor market outcomes are
presented in Table 5 in the same order as they were in Table 4. We only show the estimates on
the interaction terms between the Muslim indicator and our nine indicators of Ramadan
exposure. These estimates represent the effects of Ramadan exposure on Muslim immigrants
starting in each month of pregnancy compared to Muslims with no in utero exposure to
Ramadan, relative to non-Muslim immigrants. The results for the employment outcome shown in
Column I consistently point to negative effects of Ramadan exposure during the 3rd trimester,
i.e., the indicators for the 7th, 8th, and 9th months, with the largest effect in the 7th month, although
none of the estimates are statistically significant.
As illustrated in Column II of Table 5, the estimates for the logarithm of annual salary
income again indicate a negative and statistically significant effect for male Muslims who were
in the 7th month of gestation when Ramadan began. Furthermore, the point estimate on the 7th
month indicator suggests that these individuals earn about 8 percent less than their counterparts
who were definitely not in utero at the time of Ramadan. This finding is consistent with our main
result presented in Table 4.
The results from the wage model as shown in Column III are not out of line with the
results from our main specification presented in Table 4, i.e., none of the indicators for month of
exposure are statistically significant. Furthermore, consistent with the Muslim-only analysis, the
indicators on “Probably not exposed” and “0th Month” are still negative and larger in magnitude
than other estimates. However, they are no longer statistically significant, which is possibly due

24

to the ability to controlling for seasonal effects more effectively in the difference-in-difference
analysis.
Finally, we present the results for annual hours of work in Column IV. Again, we find
effects rather similar to the results from the main specification presented in Table 4. In particular,
the estimate on the 7th month of exposure is negative and significant at the 5 percent level
suggesting that Muslims males who were exposed to Ramadan in the 7th month of gestation work
about 7 percent fewer hours than those with no exposure to Ramadan, relative to male
immigrants from non-Muslim countries. Interestingly, the estimate on the 8th month exposure
indicator is now also statistically significant and has the same magnitude as the coefficient on the
7th month indicator.
To sum up, the results from the robustness analysis discussed above generally reaffirm
our main finding that intrauterine exposure to Ramadan is associated with penalties in the labor
market, as measured by likelihood of employment, earnings and labor supply. This is evidenced
by the pattern whereby the signs on Ramadan exposure indicators are all negative when they are
estimated with statistical significance. Aside from this pattern, the exact timing of the effects is
also fairly consistent between the main results and those from the difference-in-difference
analysis, despite the potential problems with the control group already mentioned.

Potential Mechanisms
The predictions of the fetal origins hypothesis may offer informative insights for our
results. More specifically, one potentially key pathway through which a fetal insult such as
nutritional disruptions may affect future labor market productivity may be health at birth and
later in life, which in turn may influence human capital accumulation. To provide further insights

25

into this proposition, we estimated a basic model on human capital accumulation, drawing on
data on the highest level of educational attainment measured in months from the Education
Register available to us from Statistics Denmark. Note that this is rather a crude measure since
the educational attainment is based on self-reports for the over two-thirds of our sample who had
not obtained any of their education in Denmark. Accordingly, none of the estimates on our
indicators of month of exposure to Ramadan are estimated with statistical precision at
conventional levels, which is consistent with the notion that the educational attainment is
measured with considerable error. What we think is interesting and informative, however, is that
the estimates on the 6th and 7th month indicators are the only coefficients that are negative in sign
and in both cases the estimates are economically significant, which suggests that there may
indeed be an adverse effect on human capital accumulation associated with intrauterine exposure
to Ramadan around the 7th month of gestation.
Next we considered whether health in adulthood is affected by prenatal Ramadan
exposure as another potential channel by which our results could be explained. Disability is a
good candidate for a measure of overall adult health and one that has also been considered in
recent relevant literature. For example, Almond and Mazumder (2011) find a higher likelihood
of disability for those who were exposed to Ramadan in the 9th month of pregnancy using census
data from Iraq and Uganda. Although we do not have a direct measure of disability in our
dataset, we have an indicator for “early retirement” as a reason for figuring as not being
employed in our register of labor force statistics (RAS). For the majority of individuals, this
indicator reflects having some sort of physical or mental disability. The results from the
estimation of our empirical model using the early retirement indicator as an outcome reveal
statistically significant and positive effects associated with exposure to Ramadan in the 0th and

26

7th months of gestation. 26 In particular, Muslim males who were exposed to Ramadan in the 7th
month of gestation are 1.1 percentage points more likely to have retired early from the labor
market. None of the other indicators were estimated with precision. Our results were very similar
when we repeated this analysis using non-Muslim immigrants as a control in a difference-indifference framework. In particular, we obtained a statistically significant 7th month estimate
with an impact size of 1.2 percentage points, which is almost identical to the one from the model
using the Muslim sample only.
The fact that we find more robust evidence of an impact on disability than education may
also be revealing for our overall findings in this paper. Note that the overall findings are that
exposure to Ramadan in utero is associated with a lower likelihood of employment, a lower
salary, or reduced labor supply, but not necessarily a lower wage rate. This pattern is consistent
with the explanation that the labor market penalty associated with Ramadan exposure may be
more of a physical impact rather than a cognitive impact. In other words, those who are exposed
to Ramadan are not able to work as many hours as others even though their marginal
productivity is not necessarily any different.

VI. Conclusions
Using administrative data from immigrants in Denmark, this paper provides the novel
evidence on the impact of exposure to nutritional deficiency during fetal development on the
labor market productivity of Muslim males. Our findings indicate that exposure to nutritional
disruptions during a critical stage of fetal development has scarring effects expressed as poor
labor market outcomes in adulthood. Specifically, exposure to Ramadan in utero results in a
26

The sets of full results from the analyses of educational attainment and disability are available from the authors
upon request.

27

lower likelihood of employment, a lower salary, and reduced labor supply, but not necessarily a
lower wage rate. Furthermore, our auxiliary analysis shows suggestive evidence that these results
may partially be driven by increased disability and to a lesser extent by poor educational
attainment among those who were exposed to Ramadan during this particular period in utero. It
is important to highlight that the overlap between Ramadan and pregnancy appears to have
adverse effects on the labor market outcomes of the adult offspring regardless of the specific
month during which the exposure occurred. Moreover, whenever an impact is estimated with
precision, the sign is negative. Also the effects appear to be strongest both statistically and
economically around the 7th month of exposure, which corresponds with the third trimester of
pregnancy.
It is possible that individuals with biological deficits due to their exposure to Ramadan in
utero may have received more favorable resources from society or their parents in an effort to
mitigate their disadvantages. In that case, it is important to keep in mind that the results obtained
in our study should be interpreted as the long-term biological and social effects of Ramadan
exposure (Royer, 2009; Almond and Currie, 2011). This implies that the pure biological impact
without remediation would be larger.
The findings in this paper have implications for societies in both Western and developing
worlds where millions of babies continue to be born malnourished due to problems such as
poverty. Therefore, the findings such as those obtained in our paper could be considered a basis
for advocating interventions that provide benefits to pregnant mothers or families with young
children (e.g., subsidized child care or kindergarten, parental leave policies, mentoring programs
for children from low socio-economic backgrounds, etc.). One example is the federal Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) program in the United States, which provides grants to states for

28

supplemental foods, health care referrals, and nutrition education for low-income pregnant and
breastfeeding women, and to infants and children who are at nutritional risk. The results
documented in this paper may suggest that a program like WIC would not only improve birth
outcomes as shown in previous studies (e.g., Hoynes and Stevens, 2009), but could also have
large impacts down the road to the extent that it improves maternal nutrition. Furthermore
susceptibility to milder nutrient disruptions in utero is frequently experienced, even in developed
countries, where meal skipping, dieting, and morning sickness are common, especially prior to
pregnancy recognition (Currie, 2011; Almond and Mazumder, 2011). 27

27

Aside from generalizability, there are close to two billion Muslims in the world and millions of pregnant Muslim
women fast each year.

29

References
Almond, Douglas. 2006. "Is the 1918 Influenza pandemic over? Long‐term effects of in utero
Influenza exposure in the post‐1940 US population." Journal of Political Economy no.
114 (4):672-712.
Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. "Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis." The
Journal of Economic Perspectives:153-172.
Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. "Health capital and the prenatal environment:
the effect of Ramadan observance during pregnancy." American Economic JournalApplied Economics no. 3 (4):56.
Almond, Douglas, Bhashkar Mazumder, and Reyn van Ewijk. 2011. Fasting During Pregnancy
and Children's Academic Performance. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Azizi, Fereidoun, Hossein Sadeghipour, Behnam Siahkolah, and Nasrollah Rezaei-Ghaleh. 2004.
"Intellectual development of children born of mothers who fasted in Ramadan during
pregnancy." International journal for vitamin and nutrition research no. 74 (5):374-380.
Baadsgaard, Mikkel, and Jarl Quitzau. 2011. "Danish registers on personal income and transfer
payments." Scandinavian journal of public health no. 39 (7 suppl):103-105.
Barker, DJ, AR Bull, C Osmond, and SJ Simmonds. 1990. "Fetal and placental size and risk of
hypertension in adult life." BMJ: British Medical Journal no. 301 (6746):259.
Barker, David J. 1990. "The fetal and infant origins of adult disease." BMJ: British Medical
Journal no. 301 (6761):1111.
Barker, David JP. 1995. "Intrauterine programming of adult disease." Molecular medicine today
no. 1 (9):418-423.
Barker, David JP. 2002. "Fetal programming of coronary heart disease." TRENDS in
Endocrinology & Metabolism no. 13 (9):364-368.
Bonke, J, and ML Schultz-Nielsen. 2013. Integration blandt ikke-vestlige indvandrere
(Immigration among non-western immigrants, English summary). University Press of
Southern Denmark.
Brown AS, Susser ES, Lin SP, Neugebauer R, Gorman JM. 1995. Increased risk of affective
disorder in males after second trimester prenatal exposure to the Dutch Hunger Winter of
1944–1945. Br J Psychiatry, 166:601–606
Brown, Alan S, Catherine A Schaefer, Richard Jed Wyatt, Raymond Goetz, Melissa D Begg,
Jack M Gorman, and Ezra S Susser. 2000a "Maternal exposure to respiratory infections
and adult schizophrenia spectrum disorders: a prospective birth cohort study."
30

Schizophrenia Bulletin no. 26 (2):287-295.
Brown, A. S., van Os, J., Driessens, C., Hoek, H. W., & Susser, E. S. 2000b. Further evidence of
relation between prenatal famine and major affective disorder. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 157(2), 190-195.
Buckles, K. S., & Hungerman, D. M. 2013. Season of birth and later outcomes: Old questions,
new answers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 711-724.
Costa, D. L., & Lahey, J. N. 2005. Predicting older age mortality trends. Journal of the European
Economic Association, 3(2‐3), 487-493.
Cross, JH, J Eminson, and BA Wharton. 1990. "Ramadan and birth weight at full term in Asian
Moslem pregnant women in Birmingham." Archives of disease in childhood no. 65 (10
Spec No):1053-1056.
Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. 2007. The technology of skill formation (No. w12840). National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. "Estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation." Econometrica 78.3 (2010): 883-931.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
From California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 10031030.
Currie, Janet. 2009. "Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development," Journal of Economic Literature,
American Economic Association, vol. 47(1), pages 87-122, March.
Currie, Janet and Johannes F. Schmeider. 2009. “Fetal Exposures to Toxic Releases and Infant
Health.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of
the American Economic Association, 99(2): 177-183.
Currie, Janet and Reed Walker. 2011. “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from
EZPass.” American Economic Journals-Applied Economics.
Currie, Janet. 2011. Inequality at birth: Some causes and consequences. American Economic
Review, 101 #3, 1-22 (Ely lecture).
Currie, J., & Almond, D. 2011. Human capital development before age five. Handbook of labor
economics, 4, 1315-1486.
Currie, J., & Schwandt, H. 2013. Within-mother analysis of seasonal patterns in health at birth.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(30), 12265-12270.

31

Deaton, Angus.2002. Policy implications of the gradient of health and wealth. Health Affairs
21.2: 13-30.
Doblhammer, Gabriele, and James W Vaupel. 2001. "Lifespan depends on month of birth."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. 98 (5):2934-2939.
Doyle, Orla, Colm P Harmon, James J Heckman, and Richard E Tremblay. 2009. "Investing in
early human development: timing and economic efficiency." Economics & Human
Biology no. 7 (1):1-6.
Gluckman, P., & Hanson, M. 2005. The fetal matrix: evolution, development and disease.
Cambridge University Press.
Godfrey, Keith M, and David JP Barker. 2000. "Fetal nutrition and adult disease." The American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition no. 71 (5):1344s-1352s.
Godfrey, Keith M, and David JP Barker. 2001. "Fetal programming and adult health." Public
health nutrition no. 4 (2b):611-624.
Hasoloan, Maruli A. 2006. The Indonesian Labour Market: Indonesia Country Report. The
OECD Forum on the restated OECD Jobs Strategy.
http://www.oecd.org/fr/els/emp/37873500.pdf. Accessed on November 20, 2014.
Heckman, James J. 2007. "The economics, technology, and neuroscience of human capability
formation." Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences no. 104 (33):13250-13255.
Heijmans, B. T., Tobi, E. W., Stein, A. D., Putter, H., Blauw, G. J., Susser, E. S., ... & Lumey, L.
H. 2008. Persistent epigenetic differences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in
humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(44), 17046-17049.
Hernández-Julián, Rey, Hani Mansour, and Christina Peters. In press. The effects of intrauterine
malnutrition on birth and fertility outcomes: evidence from the 1974 Bangladesh famine.
Demography.
Hoek, HW, AS Brown, and E Susser. 1998. "The Dutch famine and schizophrenia spectrum
disorders." Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology no. 33 (8):373-379.
Hoynes, H., Page, M., & Stevens, A. H. 2011. Can targeted transfers improve birth outcomes?:
Evidence from the introduction of the WIC program. Journal of Public Economics, 95(7),
813-827.
Hulshoff Pol, H. E., Hoek, H. W., Susser, E., Brown, A. S., Dingemans, A., Schnack, H. G., ... &
Kahn, R. S. 2000. Prenatal exposure to famine and brain morphology in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 41(1), 6.

32

Hunter ES and Sadler,TW. 1987. beta hydroxybutyrate induced effects on mouse embryos in
vitro. Teratology, 36:259 64.
Kieler, H, O Axelsson, S Nilsson, and U Waldenströ. 1995. "The length of human pregnancy as
calculated by ultrasonographic measurement of the fetal biparietal diameter." Ultrasound
in obstetrics & gynecology no. 6 (5):353-357.
Leiper, JB, and AM Molla. 2003. "Effects on health of fluid restriction during fasting in
Ramadan." European journal of clinical Nutrition no. 57:S30-S38.
Lumey, L. H., Stein, A. D., & Susser, E. 2011. Prenatal famine and adult health. Annual review
of public health, 32.
Majid, Muhammad Farhan. 2013. "The Persistent Effects of in Utero Nutrition Shocks Over the
Life Cycle: Evidence From Ramadan Fasting." Unpublished manuscript.
Malhotra, Ashok, PH Scott, J Scott, H Gee, and BA Wharton. 1989. "Metabolic changes in
Asian Muslim pregnant mothers observing the Ramadan fast in Britain." British Journal
of Nutrition no. 61 (03):663-672.
Mansour, Hani, and Daniel I Rees. 2012. "Armed conflict and birth weight: Evidence from the
al-Aqsa Intifada." Journal of Development Economics no. 99 (1):190-199.
Metzger, Boyd E, Rita A Vileisis, Veronica Ravnikar, and Norbert Freinkel. 1982. ""
Accelerated starvation" and the skipped breakfast in late normal pregnancy." The Lancet
no. 319 (8272):588-592.
Moore DCP, Stanisstreet M., and Clarke, CA. 1989. Morphological and physiological effects of
beta-hydroxybutyrate on rat embryos grown in vitro at different stages. Teratology, 40:
237(51).
Neelsen, Sven, and Thomas Stratmann. 2011. "Effects of prenatal and early life malnutrition:
Evidence from the Greek famine." Journal of Health Economics no. 30 (3):479-488.
OECD (2014). Quarterly National Accounts MetaData: Quarterly Growth Rates of real GDP,
change over previous quarter. http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?QueryId=350
Painter, Rebecca C, Tessa J Roseboom, and Otto P Bleker. 2005. "Prenatal exposure to the
Dutch famine and disease in later life: an overview." Reproductive toxicology no. 20
(3):345-352.
Petersson, Flemming, Mikkel Baadsgaard, and Lau Caspar Thygesen. 2011. "Danish registers on
personal labour market affiliation." Scandinavian journal of public health no. 39 (7
suppl):95-98.
Prentice, AM, Ann Prentice, WH Lamb, PG Lunn, and S Austin. 1983. "Metabolic consequences
33

of fasting during Ramadan in pregnant and lactating women." Human nutrition. Clinical
nutrition no. 37 (4):283-294.
Rizzo, Thomas, Boyd E Metzger, William J Burns, and Kayreen Burns. 1991. "Correlations
between antepartum maternal metabolism and intelligence of offspring." New England
Journal of Medicine no. 325 (13):911-916.
Royer, Heather. 2009. "Separated at girth: US twin estimates of the effects of birth weight."
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics no. 1 (1):49-85.
Scholl, Theresa O, Sowers, MaryFran, Chen, Xinhua, & Lenders, Carine. 2001. Maternal
Glucose Concentration Influences Fetal Growth, Gestation and Pregnancy Complications.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 154(6), 514-520.
Scholte, Robert, Gerard J Van den Berg, and Maarten Lindeboom. 2012. "Long-run effects of
gestation during the Dutch hunger winter famine on labor market and hospitalization
outcomes."
Stein, Zena, and Mervyn Susser. 1975. "The Dutch famine, 1944–1945, and the reproductive
process. I. Effects on six indices at birth." Pediatric Research no. 9 (2):70-76.
Stein, Aryeh D., Anite CJ Ravelli, and LH Lumey. 1995. “Famine, Third-Trimester Pregnancy
Weight Gain, and Intrauterine Growth: The Dutch Famine Birth Cohort Study.” Human
Biology, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 135-150.
Stein, Aryeh D., PA Zybert, M van der Bor, and LH Lumey. 2004. “Intrauterine famine exposure
and body propotions at birth: the Dutch Hunger Winter.” International Journal of
Epidemiology 33: 831-836.
Susser Ezra, Lin SP. Schizophrenia after prenatal exposure to the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944–
1945. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1992;49(12):983–988.
Susser, Ezra, Richard Neugebauer, Hans W Hoek, Alan S Brown, Shang Lin, Daniel Labovitz,
and Jack M Gorman. 1996. "Schizophrenia after prenatal famine: further evidence."
Archives of general psychiatry no. 53 (1):25.
Susser, Ezra, St Clair, D. 2013. Prenatal famine and adult mental illness: interpreting concordant
and discordant results from the Dutch and Chinese Famines. Social science & medicine
(1982), 97, 325.
ter Braak, Edith W. M. T., Evers, Inge M., Erkelens, D. Willem, & Visser, Gerard H. A. 2002.
Maternal hypoglycemia during pregnancy in type 1 diabetes: maternal and fetal
consequences. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and Reviews, 19, 96-105.
van Ewijk, Reyn. 2011. "Long-term health effects on the next generation of Ramadan fasting
during pregnancy." Journal of health economics no. 30 (6):1246-1260.
34

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Male Muslim Immigrants (excluding self-employed
individuals) in Denmark

Variable
Employment (0/1)
Education (in months)
Hours of work (including zeros)
Hours of work (>0)
Salary income, (>0) DKK
Hourly wage rate, DKK
Age
Born outside Denmark
Years since migration (0 if born in Denmark)
Month of Birth
1 (January)
2 (February)
3 (March)
4 (April)
5 (May)
6 (June)
7 (July)
8 (August)
9 (September)
10 (October)
11 (November)
12 (December)
Country of Origin
Turkey
Pakistan
Iraq
Lebanon (Palestinians)
Iran
Somalia
Afghanistan
Other Muslim countries
Exposure to Ramadan in Utero
Definitely not exposed to Ramadan
Probably not exposed to Ramadan
0th Month
1st Month
2nd Month
3rd Month
4th Month
5th Month
6th Month
7th Month
8th Month
9th Month
Community of Residence
Copenhagen area (0/1)
Aarhus, Odense, Aalborg (0/1)
All other areas (0/1)
Number of observations
.

35

Mean
0.567
138.30
992.94
1431.61
250,469
172.40
40.788
0.916
15.629

Standard Deviation
(0.495)
(40.13)
(882.46)
(703.40)
(160,225)
(86.63)
(8.173)
(0.278)
(9.288)

0.083
0.089
0.105
0.088
0.090
0.082
0.071
0.079
0.082
0.082
0.071
0.078

(0.276)
(0.285)
(0.307)
(0.283)
0.286)
(0.274)
(0.256)
(0.270)
(0.275)
(0.274)
(0.257)
(0.268)

0.296
0.104
0.134
0.111
0.119
0.077
0.052
0.106

(0.456)
(0.305)
(0.340)
(0.315)
(0.324)
(0.267)
(0.222)
(0.308)

0.129
0.039
0.083
0.081
0.079
0.084
0.080
0.082
0.079
0.089
0.089
0.087

(0.336)
(0.193)
(0.275)
(0.273)
(0.269)
(0.277)
(0.271)
(0.274)
(0.271)
(0.284)
(0.285)
(0.281)

0.479
0.185
0.336

0.500
0.389
0.472

38,637

Table 2: Determining the Month of Intrauterine Exposure to Ramadan
Days between date of birth and start date of the last
Month of gestation in which Ramadan began
Ramadan
1-30 days
9
31-59 days
8
60-89 days
7
90-118 days
6
119-148 days
5
149-177 days
4
178-207 days
3
208-236 days
2
237-266 days
1
267-296 days
0
297-310 days
Probably not exposed to Ramadan
311-355 days
Definitely not exposed to Ramadan
Notes: We assume a normal human gestation period of 266 days. Following the algorithm used by
Almond, Mazumder, van Ewijk (2011), we assign those individuals conceived within 14 days after
Ramadan into the “Probably not exposed” category and those conceived later than 14 days after Ramadan
into the “Definitely not exposed” category. A new month of Ramadan begins on the 356th day after the
start date of the last Ramadan.

36

Table 3: Summary Statistics for Non-Muslim Immigrants (excluding self-employed
individuals) in Denmark

Variable
Employment (0/1)
Education (in months)
Hours of work (including zeros)
Hours of work (>0)
Salary income, (>0) DKK
Hourly wage rate, DKK
Age
Born outside Denmark
Years since migration (0 if born in Denmark)
Month of Birth
1 (January)
2 (February)
3 (March)
4 (April)
5 (May)
6 (June)
7 (July)
8 (August)
9 (September)
10 (October)
11 (November)
12 (December)
Country of Origin
Poland
Vietnam
Thailand
Philippines
China
Sri Lanka
Other non-Muslim countries
Exposure to Ramadan in Utero
Definitely not exposed to Ramadan
Probably not exposed to Ramadan
0th Month
1st Month
2nd Month
3rd Month
4th Month
5th Month
6th Month
7th Month
8th Month
9th Month
Community of Residence
Copenhagen area (0/1)
Aarhus, Odense, Aalborg (0/1)
All other areas (0/1)
Number of observations

37

Means
0.692
153.82
1159.76
1442.87
258,960
182.07
37.871
0.963
9.319

Standard Deviation
(0.462)
(35.38)
(809.91)
(638.43)
(173,106)
(113.14)
(8.4382)
(0.190)
(9.451)

0.078
0.079
0.085
0.085
0.086
0.082
0.080
0.084
0.083
0.086
0.083
0.088

(0.268)
(0.270)
(0.279)
(0.279)
(0.280)
(0.275)
(0.271)
(0.278)
(0.276)
(0.280)
(0.277)
(0.283)

0.252
0.084
0.014
0.020
0.059
0.066
0.505

(0.434)
(0.278)
(0.117)
(0.141)
(0.235)
(0.248)
(0.500)

0.120
0.037
0.084
0.081
0.081
0.088
0.083
0.087
0.081
0.085
0.083
0.086

(0.325)
(0.190)
(0.278)
(0.273)
(0.273)
(0.283)
(0.276)
(0.282)
(0.277)
(0.278)
(0.276)
(0.281)

0.346
0.150
0.504

(0.476)
(0.357)
(0.500)

35,100

Table 4: The Effect of Ramadan Exposure in Utero on Labor Market Performance – Sample of Muslim Males
Ramadan Exposure
Employment
Logarithm of Annual
Logarithm of Hourly
Logarithm of Annual Hours of
Salary Income
Wage Rate
Work
Probably not
-0.007
0.019
-0.022*
0.055**
(0.016)
(0.030)
(0.009)
(0.027)
th
0 Month
-0.006
-0.005
-0.014*
0.038
(0.009)
(0.028)
(0.008)
(0.028)
1st Month
0.000
0.031
-0.001
0.033
(0.012)
(0.028)
(0.007)
(0.024)
2nd Month
-0.002
-0.003
0.004
0.001
(0.011)
(0.028)
(0.008)
(0.027)
3rd Month
0.001
0.033
-0.002
0.031
(0.010)
(0.034)
(0.008)
(0.029)
4th Month
0.011
0.013
0.001
0.009
(0.011)
(0.052)
(0.008)
(0.045)
5th Month
0.013
0.041
0.005
0.031
(0.009)
(0.027)
(0.008)
(0.034)
6th Month
0.009
0.004
-0.003
-0.000
(0.008)
(0.034)
(0.008)
(0.033)
7th Month
-0.026**
-0.053*
-0.003
-0.047*
(0.012)
(0.029)
(0.008)
(0.028)
th
8 Month
0.009
-0.018
-0.004
-0.023
(0.009)
(0.031)
(0.008)
(0.026)
9th Month
0.005
0.007
0.000
-0.005
(0.010)
(0.041)
(0.007)
(0.042)
Number of observations
38,627
26,763
26,608
26,799

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the community are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at
the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively. The omitted category includes persons who are classified as “Certainly not
exposed.” The following control variables are included in the estimations but not shown: age, country of origin, years since immigration, month of
birth, and community of residence.

38

Table 5: Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Effect of Ramadan Exposure in Utero on Labor Market Performance
Ramadan
Employment
Logarithm of Annual
Logarithm of Hourly
Logarithm of Annual
Exposure*Muslim
Salary Income
Wage Rate
Hours of Work
Probably not*Muslim
-0.009
0.047
-0.014
0.073*
(0.019)
(0.038)
(0.012)
(0.037)
0th Month*Muslim
0.009
-0.012
-0.017
0.007
(0.012)
(0.035)
(0.011)
(0.032)
1st Month*Muslim
0.003
0.039
0.008
0.014
(0.013)
(0.035)
(0.009)
(0.032)
2nd Month*Muslim
-0.000
-0.032
0.005
-0.025
(0.013)
(0.040)
(0.012)
(0.039)
3rd Month*Muslim
0.014
0.001
0.011
-0.015
(0.014)
(0.039)
(0.012)
(0.035)
4th Month*Muslim
0.006
-0.021
-0.006
-0.015
(0.014)
(0.059)
(0.011)
(0.051)
5th Month*Muslim
0.018
-0.003
0.016
-0.016
(0.011)
(0.035)
(0.011)
(0.040)
6th Month*Muslim
0.013
0.011
-0.001
0.003
(0.012)
(0.039)
(0.011)
(0.037)
7th Month*Muslim
-0.016
-0.082**
0.007
-0.068**
(0.014)
(0.037)
(0.013)
(0.034)
8th Month*Muslim
-0.003
-0.062
-0.005
-0.072**
(0.011)
(0.038)
(0.012)
(0.035)
9th Month*Muslim
-0.011
-0.013
-0.009
-0.017
(0.014)
(0.047)
(0.011)
(0.044)
Number of observations
73,659
54,570
54,226
54,976
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the community are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate that the estimate is statistically significant at
the 99th, 95th, and 90th percent level of confidence, respectively.

39

