                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE MINIMUM WAGE AND THE GREAT RECESSION:
   EVIDENCE OF EFFECTS ON THE EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME TRAJECTORIES
                       OF LOW-SKILLED WORKERS

                                          Jeffrey Clemens
                                          Michael Wither

                                        Working Paper 20724
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20724


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank Jean Roth for greatly easing the navigation and analysis of SIPP data, as made accessible
through NBER. We thank Prashant Bharadwaj, Julie Cullen, Gordon Dahl, Roger Gordon, Jim Hamilton,
Karthik Muralidharan, Johannes Wieland, and seminar participants at Brown, Cornell-PAM, Texas
A&M, and the 2014 Young Economists Jamboree at Duke University for helpful comments and suggestions.
We also thank the University of California at San Diego for grant funding through the General Campus
Subcommittee on Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20724.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jeffrey Clemens and Michael Wither. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of Effects on the Employment and
Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers
Jeffrey Clemens and Michael Wither
NBER Working Paper No. 20724
December 2014
JEL No. I38,J08,J21,J38

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the minimum wage's effects on low-skilled workers' employment and income trajectories.
Our approach exploits two dimensions of the data we analyze. First, we compare workers in states
that were bound by recent increases in the federal minimum wage to workers in states that were not.
Second, we use 12 months of baseline data to divide low-skilled workers into a "target" group, whose
baseline wage rates were directly affected, and a "within-state control" group with slightly higher baseline
wage rates. Over three subsequent years, we find that binding minimum wage increases had significant,
negative effects on the employment and income growth of targeted workers. Lost income reflects
contributions from employment declines, increased probabilities of working without pay (i.e., an
"internship" effect), and lost wage growth associated with reductions in experience accumulation.
Methodologically, we show that our approach identifies targeted workers more precisely than the
demographic and industrial proxies used regularly in the literature. Additionally, because we identify
targeted workers on a population-wide basis, our approach is relatively well suited for extrapolating
to estimates of the minimum wage's effects on aggregate employment. Over the late 2000s, the average
effective minimum wage rose by 30 percent across the United States. We estimate that these minimum
wage increases reduced the national employment-to-population ratio by 0.7 percentage point.


Jeffrey Clemens
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Michael Wither
University of California, San Diego, Department of
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
mwither@ucsd.edu
   Between July 23, 2007, and July 24, 2009, the federal minimum wage rose from $5.15
to $7.25 per hour. Over a similar time period, the employment-to-population ratio de-
clined by 4 percentage points among adults aged 25 to 54 and by 8 percentage points
among those aged 15 to 24. Both ratios remain well below their pre-recession peaks. The
empirical literature is quite far from consensus, however, regarding the minimum wage’s
potential contribution to these employment changes (Card and Krueger, 1995; Neumark
and Wascher, 2008; Dube, Lester, and Reich, 2010; Neumark, Salas, and Wascher, 2013;
Meer and West, 2013). In this paper, we analyze the minimum wage’s effects on the
employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers during the Great Recession
and subsequent recovery.
   Our analysis harnesses the fact that the 2007 through 2009 increases in the federal
minimum wage were differentially binding across states. Between December 2007 and
July 2009, the effective minimum wage rose by $1.31 in the states we designate as
“bound” and by $0.43 in the states we designate as “unbound.” Of the $0.88 differ-
ential, $0.58 took effect on July 24, 2009. We analyze the effects of these differentially
binding minimum wage increases using monthly, individual-level panel data from the
2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP allows
us to use 12 months of individual-level wage data, from August 2008 through July 2009,
to further divide low-skilled individuals into those whose wages were directly targeted
by the new federal minimum and those whose wages were moderately above. These rich
baseline data yield a number of advantages over the literature’s standard approaches.1

   1 Analyses  of individual-level panel data are not as common in the minimum wage literature as one
might expect. Examples include Currie and Fallick (1996), who analyze teenage employment in the 1979
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher (2004) and Neumark and
Wascher (2002), who use the short panels made possible by the matched monthly outgoing rotation files
of the Current Population Survey (CPS), and Linneman (1982), who analyzed the minimum wage using
1973-1975 data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Burkhauser, Couch, and Wittenburg (2000)
analyze the minimum wage using the 1990 SIPP, but adopt the conventional state-panel approach of
analyzing its effects on the employment of low-wage demographic groups rather than isolating samples
of targeted individuals on the basis of baseline wage data.

                                                 1
    Our approach’s first advantage is its capacity to describe the minimum wage’s effects
on a broad population of targeted workers. Past work focuses primarily on the mini-
mum wage’s effects on particular demographic groups, such as teenagers (Card, 1992a,b;
Currie and Fallick, 1996), and/or specific industries, like food service and retail (Katz
and Krueger, 1992; Card and Krueger, 1994; Kim and Taylor, 1995; Dube, Lester, and
Reich, 2010; Addison, Blackburn, and Cotti, 2013; Giuliano, 2013). While minimum and
sub-minimum wage workers are disproportionately represented among these groups,
both are selected snapshots of the relevant population. Furthermore, it is primarily low-
skilled adults, rather than teenage dependents, who are the intended beneficiaries of
anti-poverty efforts (Burkhauser and Sabia, 2007; Sabia and Burkhauser, 2010). Assess-
ing the minimum wage from an anti-poverty perspective thus requires characterizing its
effects on the broader population of low-skilled workers, which we are able to do.2
    Econometrically, our setting has several advantages. One benefit of our rich baseline
data is that they allow us to limit the extent to which our “target” group contains unaf-
fected individuals. Second, the data allow us to identify relatively low-skilled workers
whose wage distributions were not directly bound by the new federal minimum. We use
these workers’ employment trajectories to construct a set of within-state counterfactuals.
The experience of these workers allows us to control for the form of time varying, state-
specific shocks that are a source of contention in the recent literature (Dube, Lester, and
Reich, 2010; Meer and West, 2013; Allegretto, Dube, Reich, and Zipperer, 2013). Third,

   2 Linneman     (1982) similarly discusses this benefit of analyzing individual-level panel data in the con-
text of minimum wage increases during the 1970s. A drawback of the individual-panel approach is that
the resulting samples of targeted workers exclude individuals who were not employed when baseline data
were collected. It is best suited for estimating the effects of minimum wage increases on the employment
trajectories of those directly targeted. An advantage of this study’s analysis of monthly panel data is that
our estimates capture the minimum wage’s effects on both the regularly employed and on highly marginal
labor force participants. Specifically, the only individuals we are unable classify on the basis of baseline
wages are those who were unemployed for all 12 baseline months. Additionally, although we do not
have a reported wage for such individuals, we can directly estimate the effect of binding minimum wage
increases on this group’s subsequent employment; the estimated effect is negative, economically small,
and statistically indistinguishable from 0.

                                                      2
our research design allows for transparent, graphical presentations of the employment
and income trajectories underlying our regression estimates.
   We begin by assessing the extent to which minimum wage increases affected the
wage distributions of low-skilled workers. Among workers with average baseline wages
less than $7.50, the probability of reporting a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 declined
substantially. We find that the wage distributions of low-skilled workers in bound and
unbound states fully converge along this dimension. Further, we estimate that the min-
imum wage’s bite on our target group’s wage distribution is nearly twice its bite for a
comparison sample of food service workers and teenagers.
   We next estimate the minimum wage’s effects on employment. We find that increases
in the minimum wage significantly reduced the employment of low-skilled workers.
By the second year following the $7.25 minimum’s implementation, we estimate that
targeted workers’ employment rates had fallen by 6 percentage points (8 percent) more
in bound states than in unbound states.
   We further analyze a sample of teenagers and food service workers to compare our
approach with approaches commonly used in the literature. For this sample, we estimate
an employment decline of just under 4 percentage points. The estimated employment
effects thus scale roughly in proportion to the minimum wage’s bite on these groups’
wage distributions. All else equal, Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen (2012) note that esti-
mates of the minimum wage’s effects on employment will scale with the extent to which
an analysis sample contains unaffected workers. Their insight thus points to a partial
line of reconciliation between the disemployment effects we observe and the statistical
null results found in some of the recent literature. The magnitude of our estimated em-
ployment effects also likely reflects the setting we analyze, namely the Great Recession
and subsequently sluggish recovery.
   The primary threat to our estimation framework is the possibility that low-skilled


                                           3
workers in the bound and unbound states were differentially affected by the Great Re-
cession. We show graphically that the housing crisis was more severe in unbound states,
potentially biasing our estimates towards zero. In our baseline specification, we control
directly for a proxy for the severity of the crisis. As noted above, our use of monthly,
individual-level panel data enables us to more systematically construct within-state con-
trol groups with baseline wages only moderately higher than the new federal minimum.
Our initial results are robust to netting out changes in the employment of these slightly
higher skilled workers. We further find our estimates to be robust to a broad range of
potentially relevant changes to our baseline specification.
   In addition to reducing employment, we find that binding minimum wage increases
increased the likelihood that targeted individuals work without pay (by 2 percentage
points or 12 percent). This novel effect is concentrated among individuals with at least
some college education. We take this as suggestive that such workers’ entry level jobs
are relatively readily posted as internships. For low-skilled, low-education workers, the
entire change in the probability of having no earnings comes through unemployment.
   We next estimate the effects of binding minimum wage increases on low-skilled work-
ers’ incomes and income trajectories. Our data provide a unique opportunity to inves-
tigate such effects, as the SIPP’s monthly, individual-level panel extends for 3 years
following the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this enables us to provide the first direct estimates of the minimum wage’s effects
on medium-run economic mobility. Given longstanding and widespread concern over
developments in inequality (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2008;
Kopczuk, Saez, and Song, 2010), such effects may be of significant interest.
   We find that this period’s binding minimum wage increases reduced low-skilled in-
dividuals’ average monthly incomes. Relative to low-skilled workers in unbound states,
targeted workers’ average incomes fell by $100 over the first year and by an additional


                                            4
$50 over the following 2 years. While surprising at first glance, we show that the short-
run estimate follows directly from our estimated effects on employment and the likeli-
hood of working without pay. The medium-run estimate reflects additional contributions
from lost wage growth associated with lost experience. Because most minimum wage
workers are on the steep portion of the wage-experience profile (Murphy and Welch,
1990; Smith and Vavrichek, 1992), this effect can be substantial. We directly estimate,
for example, that targeted workers experienced a 5 percentage point decline in their
medium-run probability of reaching earnings greater than $1500 per month.3 Like pre-
vious results, these estimates are robust to netting out the experience of workers with
average baseline wages just above the new federal minimum. As in Kahn (2010) and
Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz’s (2012) analyses of the effects of graduating dur-
ing recessions, we thus find that early-career opportunities have persistent effects.
   After presenting these results, we compare our estimates of the minimum wage’s
effects with results from research on the effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
an alternative policy for increasing the incomes of low-skilled workers. The EITC has
been found to significantly increase the employment and incomes of low-skilled workers
(Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Eissa and Hoynes, 2006), reduce
inequality (Liebman, 1998), and reduce tax-inclusive measures of poverty (Hoynes, Page,
and Stevens, 2006). The results thus contrast rather sharply.
   We conclude by assessing our estimates’ implications for the effects of this period’s
minimum wage increases on aggregate employment. Over the late 2000s, the average
effective minimum wage rose by nearly 30 percent across the United States. Our best
estimate is that these minimum wage increases reduced the employment-to-population
ratio of working-age adults by 0.7 percentage point. This accounts for 14 percent of the


   3 Earning $1500 would require working full time (40 hours per week for 4.33 weeks per month) at a
wage of $8.80. We characterize $1500 as a “lower middle class” earnings threshold.

                                                 5
total decline over the relevant time period.



1     The Minimum Wage’s Potential Effects

    This section briefly motivates the outcomes on which we focus our empirical anal-
ysis.4 The minimum wage can affect firm operations and workers’ well-being through
many channels. Following is a non-exhaustive list of potential margins of interest:


    1. Wages of low-skilled workers.

    2. Employment of low-skilled workers.

    3. Income of low-skilled workers.

    4. Income trajectories of low-skilled workers.

    5. Firm offerings of benefits including health insurance.

    6. Firm spending on the quality of workplace conditions.

    7. Firm substitution between low-skilled labor, high-skilled labor, and capital.

    8. Firm utilization of inputs with which low-skilled labor is complementary.

    9. Incomes of firm owners.

 10. Prices of goods produced by firms that employ minimum wage workers.


    The list highlights the potential complementarity of firm-, industry-, and individual-
level analyses of the minimum wage. Our analysis of individual-level panel data speaks
to the minimum wage’s most direct effects on its targeted beneficiaries. These include

    4 Because
           the relevant theoretical insights have been made in a literature extending from Stigler (1946)
through Gramlich (1976) to Lee and Saez (2012), we do not intend to break new ground.

                                                   6
its intended and unintended effects on the wage distributions, employment, income,
and income trajectories of low-skilled workers. Firm- and industry-level analyses may
best speak to outcomes related to the quality of workplace conditions, the utilization of
inputs that complement or substitute for low-skilled labor, the incomes of firm owners,
and output prices.



2    Background on the Late 2000s Increases in the Federal

     Minimum Wage

    We estimate the minimum wage’s effects on employment and income trajectories
using variation driven by federally mandated increases in the minimum wage rates ap-
plicable across the U.S. states. On May 25, 2007, Congress legislated a series of minimum
wage increases through the ”U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and
Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act.” Increases went into effect on July 24th of 2007,
2008, and 2009. In July 2007, the federal minimum rose from $5.15 to $5.85; in July 2008
it rose to $6.55, and in July 2009 it rose to $7.25.
    Figure 1 shows our division of states into those that were and were not bound by
changes in the federal minimum wage. We base this designation on whether a state’s
January 2008 minimum was below $6.55, rendering it partially bound by the July 2008
increase and fully bound by the July 2009 increase. Using Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) data on states’ prevailing minimum wage rates, we designate 27 states as fitting
this description.
    Figure 2 shows the time paths of the average effective minimum wages in the states
to which we do and do not apply our “bound” designation. Two characteristics of the
paths of the minimum wage rates in unbound states are worth noting. First, their aver-
age minimum wage exceeded the minimum applicable in the bound states prior to the

                                               7
passage of the 2007 to 2009 federal increases. Second, these states voluntarily increased
their minimums well ahead of the required schedule. On average, the effective mini-
mum across these states had surpassed $7.25 by January of 2008. This group’s effective
minimums rose, on average, by roughly 20 cents over the period we study, which ex-
tends for 4 years beginning in August 2008. By contrast, bound states saw their effective
minimums rise by nearly the full, legislated $0.70 on July 24, 2009. As borne in mind
throughout, these states experienced differentially binding minimum wage increases in
both July 2008 and July 2009. Our estimation framework, which we describe in the
following section, may thus capture both the July 2009 increase’s full effect and some
dynamic effects of the increase from July 2008.
   Allegretto, Dube, Reich, and Zipperer (2013) emphasize several distinguishing char-
acteristics of states that have typically maintained minimum wage rates higher than the
federal minimum and have thus been less likely to be bound by federal increases. They
find these to be states with relatively liberal voting publics, relatively volatile business
cycles, and relatively high degrees of job polarization. Figure 1 confirms the political
divisions one might expect, as Republican-leaning states were much more likely to be
bound by the recent increases in the federal minimum.
   In past studies, business cycles have been particularly relevant due to the timing of
state initiated increases in the minimum wage, which often take place near the busi-
ness cycle’s peak. This typically raises the possibility of an upward bias to estimated
unemployment effects; states’ economies tend to be in decline as their minimum wage
increases go into effect. Because we estimate the effects of a binding federal minimum,
the endogeneity of the timing with which any one state enacts an increase is of less
concern. We must be wary of differences, however, in the Great Recession’s severity
in bound and unbound states. If unbound states experienced relatively severe housing
bubbles, our estimates would potentially be biased towards 0.


                                             8
    Figure 3 presents data from the BLS, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and the
Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) on the macroeconomic experiences of bound
and unbound states during the Great Recession.5 Throughout this time period, unbound
states have higher per capita incomes, but lower employment-to-population ratios, than
do bound states. While the economic indicators of both groups turned significantly for
the worse over the recession’s course, bound states were less severely impacted by the
Great Recession than were unbound states. It is particularly apparent that unbound
states had relatively severe housing bubbles (Panel C). These macroeconomic factors
would, if controlled for insufficiently, tend to bias the magnitudes of our estimated em-
ployment impacts towards 0. The following section describes our empirical strategy for
addressing this concern.



3     Data Sources and Estimation Framework

    We estimate the effects of minimum wage increases using data from the 2008 panel of
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). We analyze a sample restricted
to individuals aged 16 to 64 for whom the relevant employment and earnings data are
available for at least 36 months between August 2008 and July 2012. For each individual,
this yields up to 12 months of data preceding the July 2009 increase in the minimum
wage. In the low-wage samples on which we focus, hourly wage rates are reported
directly for 77 percent of the observations with positive earnings. For the remaining 23
percent, we impute hourly wages as earnings divided the individual’s usual hours per
week times their reported number of weeks worked. We use these 12 months of baseline
wage, hours, and earnings data to divide low-skilled workers into 3 groups.
    The first group we analyze includes those most directly impacted by the federal

    5 Allseries are weighted by state population so as to reflect the weighting implicit in our individual-
level regression analysis.

                                                    9
minimum wage. Specifically, it includes those whose average wage, when employed
during the baseline period, was less than $7.50.6 An essential early step of the anal-
ysis is to confirm that the increase in the federal minimum wage shifted this group’s
wage distribution as intended. The second group includes individuals whose average
baseline wages were between $7.50 and $8.50. Because the employment situations of
low-skilled workers are relatively volatile, this group’s workers had non-trivial probabil-
ities of working in minimum wage jobs in any given month. The extent of the minimum
wage increase’s effect on this group’s wage distribution is an empirical question to which
we allow the data to speak. The third group includes individuals whose average baseline
wages were between $8.50 and $10.00. Guided by the baseline wage data, we character-
ize these workers as a comparison group of low-skilled workers for whom increases in
the effective minimum wage had no direct effect.
   Our initial estimates, conducted on a sample consisting of group 1 individuals, take
the following, dynamic difference-in-differences form:



                          Yi,s,t =    ∑        β p(t) Bounds × Period p(t)
                                     p(t)6=0

                               + α1s States + α2t Timet + α3i Individuali

                               + Xs,t γ + Di × Trendt φ + ε i,s,t .                                (1)


We control for the standard features of difference-in-differences estimation, namely sets
of state, States , and time, Timet , fixed effects. Our ability to control for individual fixed
effects, Individuali , renders controls for individual-level, time-invariant characteristics

   6 The average is calculated over months in which the individual was employed, excluding months when
unemployed. The measure’s intent is to capture the individual’s average marginal product as remunerated
by the firms for which he or she works. One consequence of this approach is that individuals who were
unemployed throughout the baseline period are excluded from all samples. Because we estimate average
wages using 12 months of baseline data, however, our samples include marginally attached individuals so
long as they worked for at least one month between August 2008 and July 2009.

                                                       10
redundant. The vector Xs,t contains time varying controls for each state’s macroeconomic
conditions. In our baseline specification, Xs,t includes the FHFA housing price index,
which proxies for the state-level severity of the housing crisis.7
   Equation (1) allows for dynamics motivated by graphical evidence reported in Section
4. Specifically, we show in Section 4 that the prevalence of wages between the old and
new federal minimum declined rapidly beginning in April 2009. We thus characterize
May to July 2009 as a ”Transition” period. Prior months correspond to the baseline, or
period p = 0. We characterize August 2009 through July 2010 as period Post 1 and all
subsequent months as period Post 2. The primary coefficients of interest are β Post 1(t) and
β Post 2(t) , which characterize the differential evolution of the dependent variable in states
that were bound by the new federal minimum relative to states that were not bound.
We calculate the standard errors on these coefficients allowing for the errors, ε i,s,t , to
be correlated at the state level. Because our treatment group contains 27 states, we do
not face common inference concerns associated with imbalance between the number of
treatment and control states (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004).8
   We initially use equation (1) to confirm that binding minimum wage increases shift
the distribution of wages as intended. For this analysis, we construct a set of outcome
variables of the following form:


                             j
                           Yi,s,t = 1{W j−1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }.                              (2)


   7 It is not uncommon for minimum wage studies to control directly for a region’s overall employment
or unemployment rate. Conceptually, we find it preferable to exclude such variables because they may
be affected by the policy change of interest. The housing price index is a conceptually cleaner, though
still imperfect, proxy for time varying economic conditions that were not directly affected by minimum
wage changes. Our results are essentially unaffected by the inclusion of additional state macroeconomic
aggregates in Xs,t . An analysis of our baseline result’s robustness along this margin can be found in
appendix table A6.
   8 We have confirmed that our standard errors change little when estimated using a block-bootstrap
procedure with samples drawn at the state level. We conducted this exercise on a sample restricted to the
94 percent of the group 1 individuals that live in the same state throughout the sample.

                                                   11
         j
These Yi,s,t are indicators that are set equal to 1 if an individual’s hourly wage is between
W j−1 and W j . In practice each band is a 50 cent interval. The β p(t) from these regressions
thus trace out the short and medium run shifts in the wage distribution’s probability
mass function that were associated with binding minimum wage increases.
   We then move to our primary outcome of interest, namely the likelihood that an in-
dividual is employed. There are standard threats to interpreting the resulting β p(t) as
unbiased, causal estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage increases. Most im-
portantly, our estimates could be biased by differences in the Great Recession’s severity
in bound states relative to unbound states.
   Within the difference-in-differences specification, we directly control for proxies for
the macroeconomic experiences of each state. Recent debate within the minimum wage
literature suggests that such controls may be insufficient.9 Although we find our esti-
mates of equation (1) to be robust to a range of approaches to controlling for heterogene-
ity in macroeconomic conditions, we additionally implement a triple-difference model.
In this framework, displayed below, we use workers whose average baseline wages were
between $8.50 and $10.00 to construct a set of within-state control groups:



   Yi,s,t =    ∑        β p(t) Period p(t) × Bounds × Targetg(i)
              p(t)6=0

         + α1s,p(t) States × Period p(t) + α2s,g(i) States × Targetg(i) + α3t,g(i) Timet × Targetg(i)

         + α4s States + α5t Timet + α6i Individuali + Xs,t,g(i) γ + Di × Trendt φ + ε i,s,t .           (3)


Equation (3) augments equation (1) with the standard components of triple-difference es-
timation. These include group-by-time-period effects, group-by-state effects, and state-


   9 Specifically,
                 in criticizing work by Neumark and Wascher (2008) and Meer and West (2013), Allegretto,
Dube, Reich, and Zipperer (2013) argue that their estimates of the minimum wage’s effects are biased due
to time varying spatial heterogeneity in economic conditions.

                                                     12
by-time-period effects. These controls account for differential changes in the employ-
ment of the target and within-state control groups over time, cross-state differences in
the relative employment of these groups at baseline, and time varying spatial hetero-
geneity in economic conditions.
   A shortcoming of the triple-difference approach involves the possibility of employer
substitution of “within state control” workers for “target group” workers. Substitution
of this form would lead the triple-difference estimates to overstate minimum wage in-
creases’ total employment impacts. In our context, we find that the estimated effects
of minimum wage increases are relatively insensitive to shifting from the difference-in-
differences framework to this triple-difference framework.
   Table 1 presents summary statistics characterizing the samples on which we estimate
equations (1) and (3). Focusing on columns 1 and 2, which characterize group 1 indi-
viduals, several differences between the samples from bound and unbound states are
apparent. Individuals in bound states are moderately more likely to be employed and
less likely to work without pay than are individuals in unbound states. They also tend
to be slightly younger and less likely to obtain at least some college eduction.
   By construction, our bound and unbound states differ in terms of their baseline min-
imum wage rates. Their policy environments converge upon the enactment of the new
federal minimum. Baseline employment differences should thus not be surprising.10
Demographic differences create the risk, however, that one might expect the employ-
ment trajectories of individuals in bound and unbound states to differ. Consequently,
we test our specifications’ robustness to the inclusion of Di × Trendt , an extensive set
of demographic dummy variables interacted with linear time trends. We similarly con-
firm that our estimates are robust to controlling for a set of linear trends interacted with

  10 In a standard experimental setting, treatment and control groups are in similar environments at
baseline, after which the treatment group is exposed to the treatment. In our setting, effective minimum
wage rates differ at baseline and converge upon the implementation of the higher new minimum.

                                                  13
dummy variables associated with each individual’s modal industry of employment over
the baseline period. We further check the robustness of our estimates to a variety of
additional specification modifications. Before presenting our estimates of equations (1)
and (3), we use the following section to graphically present the raw data underlying our
results.



4      Graphical View of the Wages, Employment, and Incomes

       of Low-Skilled Workers

     Figure 4 presents time series tabulations of the raw data underlying our estimates
of equations (1) and (3). In the panels of column 1, the sample consists of individuals
whose average baseline wages were less than $7.50 per hour. In the panels of column
2, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages were between $7.50
and $10.00 per hour.
     The panels in row 1 plot the fraction of individuals that, in any given month, had an
hourly wage between $5.15 and $7.25. Prior to the implementation of the $7.25 federal
minimum, individuals in states that were bound by the federal minimum were much
more likely to have wages in this range than individuals in unbound states. Those in
bound states spent roughly 40 percent of their months in jobs with wages between $5.15
and $7.25, 22 percent of their months unemployed, 17 percent of their months in unpaid
work, and their remaining months in sub-minimum wage jobs (e.g., tipped work) or
in jobs paying more than $7.25. By contrast, individuals in unbound states spent 22
percent of their baseline months in jobs with hourly wages between $5.15 and $7.25.
These fractions began converging in April 2009, three months before the new federal
minimum took effect.11 The observed transition period motivates our accounting for

    11 The   transition window likely reflects a combination of real economic factors and measurement arti-

                                                      14
dynamics when estimating equations (1) and (3). By November 2009, individuals in the
bound and unbound states have equal likelihoods of being in jobs with wages between
$5.15 and $7.25.
   Panel B shows that the wages of individuals with average baseline wages between
$7.50 and $10.00 per hour were largely unaffected by the increase in the federal mini-
mum. Their probability of having a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 in any given month
was around 5 percent. Prior to the increase in the federal minimum, individuals in
bound states had marginally higher probabilities of having such wages.
   The panels in row 2 plot our initial outcome of interest, namely the fraction of in-
dividuals who are employed. Low-skilled workers in states with low minimum wages
initially had moderately higher employment rates, by about 3 percentage points, than
those in states with higher minimums. As wages adjusted to the new federal minimum,
this baseline difference narrows. Over subsequent years, the employment of those in
bound states is, on average, roughly 1 percentage point less than that of low-skilled in-
dividuals in unbound states. Relative to the baseline period, the differential employment
change observable in the raw data is 3 percentage points in the first year and 4 percent-
age points in subsequent years. The data exhibit the seasonality one would expect in the
employment patterns of the relevant populations. The employment series’ convergence
appears linked, at least initially and in part, to a relatively weak summer hiring season
in states bound by the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum.
   If these employment changes were driven primarily by cross-state differences in the
severity of the Great Recession, similar (perhaps slightly smaller) changes would be



facts. Employers hiring workers in May and June 2009 may simply have found it sensible to post positions
at the wage which would apply by mid-summer rather than at the contemporaneous minimum. The mea-
surement issue involves the SIPP’s 4 month recall windows. Individuals interviewed about their May and
June wages in August 2009 may have mistakenly reported their August wage as their wage throughout
the recall window. Our response to both potential explanations is to allow for flexible dynamics when
estimating the minimum wage’s effects on employment.

                                                  15
expected among workers with modestly greater skills. Panel D shows that such changes
did not occur. Comparing the bound and unbound states, the employment of workers
with average baseline wages between $7.50 and $10.00 moved in parallel over this period.
These data reveal that estimates of equations (1) and (3) will yield similar results.
   The panels in row 3 show similar patterns for trends in average monthly income.
During the baseline period, the average incomes of low-skilled individuals in bound
and unbound states evolve similarly. Several months following the increase in the fed-
eral minimum wage, the income growth of low-skilled individuals in the bound states
begins to lag the income growth of low-skilled individuals in unbound states. No such
divergence is apparent among individuals with baseline wages between $7.50 and $10.00.
The data reported in Panel E suggest that the wage gains and employment declines of
targeted workers initially offset one another. Subsequently, declines in employment and
experience accumulation appear to have led the income growth of low-skilled individ-
uals in bound states to lag that of low-skilled workers in unbound states. In Section
5.5 we present a detailed analysis of the factors contributing to these differential income
trajectories.
   Figures 5 and 6 present these data in regression-adjusted form. Each marker in the
figures is an estimate of a coefficient of the form β p(t) from equations (1) and (3), where
each p(t) corresponds with an individual month; period p = 0 is April 2009, the month
immediately preceding the transition period. The regression-adjusted changes in em-
ployment and income are largely as one would expect based on the raw data presented
in Figure 4. Adjusting for the housing bubble’s greater severity in unbound states rel-
ative to bound states moderately increases the estimated magnitudes. The following
section presents these and other results in a more summary, tabular fashion.




                                            16
5      Regression Analysis of the Minimum Wage’s Effects

     This section presents our estimates of equations (1) and (3). We begin by verifying
that the enacted minimum wage increases shifted the wage distributions of workers with
average baseline wages below $7.50 as intended. We then estimate the minimum wage’s
effect on employment, after which we explore several additional outcomes relevant to
the welfare of affected individuals and their families.



5.1      Effects on Low-Skilled Workers’ Wage Distributions

     This section first presents data on the baseline wage distributions of low-skilled work-
ers. It then presents estimates of the extent to which these distributions shift following
binding minimum wage increases. Figure 7 characterizes the wage distributions of work-
ers with average baseline wages below $7.50 (Panel A), average baseline wages between
$7.50 and $8.50 (Panel B), and average baseline wages between $8.50 and $10.00 (Panel
C). The histogram in each panel presents the distribution of each group’s wages during
the baseline period. This distribution, and in particular the frequency of wage rates in
the affected region, is the basis upon which we select our “target” and “within-state
control” groups.12 Note that the histograms exclude the large mass of observations with
no earnings, which includes months spent either unemployed or working without pay.
     The histogram for workers with average baseline wages below $7.50 has substantial
mass associated with monthly wage rates between $6.50 and $7.50, as shown in Panel A.
Panel B shows that workers with average baseline wages between $7.50 and $8.50 have
far less mass in the affected region. Nonetheless, this groups’ employment and earnings


    12 Specifically,
                  we choose our “target” group to be a group with significant baseline mass in the affected
region and our “within-state control” group to be the lowest-skilled group that spends essentially no
baseline months with wage rates in the affected region. The estimated effects of binding minimum wage
increases on these distributions confirms that the former’s distribution shifted significantly while the
latter’s did not.

                                                    17
are sufficiently volatile that they appear to spend non-trivial numbers of months in
minimum or near-minimum wage jobs. Panel C reveals workers with average baseline
wages between $8.50 and $10.00 to be low-skilled workers who spent essentially none
of their baseline months at affected wage rates. Because these individuals were not
directly affected by the increased federal minimum, we view them as an ideal sample
for constructing within-state employment counterfactuals for estimating equation (3).
   Table 2 and the panels of Figure 7 present estimates of the wage distribution shifts
that were associated with binding minimum wage increases. Each of the relevant mark-
ers represents a point estimate from a separate estimate of equation (1). The marker just
to the right of the dashed line at $6.55, for example, represents the change in the proba-
bility of having a wage between $6.50 and $7.00. As in all of this paper’s specifications,
the sample includes observations whether or not an individual was unemployed.13
   Panel A shows that, for individuals with average baseline wages below $7.50, the
wage distribution shifted significantly out of precisely the targeted region. As summa-
rized in Table 2’s column 1, the probability of having a wage between $5.15 and $7.25
declined by just over 16 percentage points. This mass does not shift exclusively to the
new federal minimum; a portion collects between $7.50 and $8.00.14
   Appendix Figure A1 and Table A1 characterize the bite of binding minimum wage
increases on the wage distributions of groups of workers that are commonly analyzed
in the literature. Figure A1’s Panels A and B display the wage distributions of teenagers
and food service workers. As summarized in Table A1, the minimum wage’s bite on
these groups’ wage distributions is just over half the size of its bite on the distribution
for workers with average baseline wages below $7.50. Relative to our analysis of workers


  13 The panels of this figure do not report a marker associated with having a wage of 0, which would
correspond to the “No Earnings” outcome analyzed in Section 5.5.
  14 We take this evidence as being consistent with that found in Katz and Krueger’s (1992) longitudinal
survey of Texas food service establishments.

                                                  18
with average baseline wages in the affected range, analyses of these groups will thus have
an attenuated ability to detect any effects of minimum wage increases on employment.
   In Figure 7’s Panels B and C we characterize the extent to which the wage distri-
butions of workers higher up the skill distribution were bound by the increase in the
minimum wage. For Panel B we repeat the exercise conducted for Panel A, but on
the sample of workers with average baseline wages between $7.50 and $8.50. Because
this group’s members spent non-trivial numbers of months in jobs with directly affected
wages, its wage distribution shifts non-trivially out of the affected region. As reported in
Table 2’s column 2, the direct effect of the increased minimum wage was to reduce this
group’s probability of having a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 by 4 percentage points.
The shifted mass collects entirely in the lower half of this group’s average baseline wage
range, i.e., between $7.50 and $8.00.
   Finally, we characterize the minimum wage’s bite on the distribution of wages for
those with average baseline wages between $8.50 and $10.00. Figure 7’s Panel C reveals
no evidence of systematic movements in this group’s wage distribution. Table 2’s column
3 confirms that the minimum wage increase had an economically negligible effect on this
group’s wages; the upper bound of the 95 percent confidence interval suggests that the
reduction in the probability of earning a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 was less than 2
percentage points.
   The histograms in Figures 7 and A1 display our approach’s suitability for identifying
both targeted workers and workers who were low-skilled but unaffected, making them
attractive as within-state controls. As desired, the baseline wage distribution for workers
with average baseline wages less than $7.50 has significant mass between $6.50 and
$7.50. Our within-state control group has a baseline wage distribution tightly clustered
between $8.00 and $10.00. As illustrated in figure A1’s panel C, comparison samples
drawn based on industries will tend to contain many much higher skilled, and thus less


                                            19
directly comparable, individuals. Figure A1’s panels A and B show that analysis samples
of teenagers and food service workers similarly have baseline wage distributions more
diffuse than that of our target sample.



5.2   Baseline Results on Employment

   Table 2’s columns 4 through 6 present estimates of equation (1) in which the outcome
is an indicator for being employed. Column 4 reports the result for individuals with
average baseline wages less than $7.50. The coefficient in row 1 implies that binding in-
creases in the federal minimum wage resulted in a 4.3 percentage point decline between
the baseline period and the following year. The decline relative to baseline averaged 6.3
percentage points over the two subsequent years (the “medium run”).
   Column 5 shows the result for the group with average baseline wages between $7.50
and $8.50. The estimated effect of the minimum wage on this group’s employment is
statistically indistinguishable from 0, with a medium-run point estimate of negative 1.1
percentage points. Finally, column 6 shows the result for the group with average baseline
wages between $8.50 and $10.00. The estimated effect on this group’s employment is
again quite close to zero. Like the raw data from Figure 4, these results reveal that
estimates of equations (1) and (3) will yield similar results.
   Appendix Table A5 further fleshes out our estimates of the effect of binding minimum
wage increases on employment among the adult population. To the results reported in
Table 2, it adds estimates associated with adults who were either unemployed through-
out the baseline period (column 1) or whose average baseline wages were equal to or
greater than $10.00 (column 5). The estimates for both groups are economically and
statistically indistinguishable from 0. The point estimate for the effect of binding mini-
mum wage increases on the subsequent employment of those who were unemployed at
baseline is modestly negative.


                                             20
5.3   Contrasting Approaches To Evaluating the Minimum Wage

   In further analysis, we estimate the minimum wage’s effects on the employment
of populations studied frequently in the literature, namely teenagers and food service
workers. More specifically, we estimate equation (1) on a sample selected to include
individuals who were teenagers or for whom food service was the modal industry of
employment during the baseline period. Column 5 of Appendix Table A1 reports our
estimate that binding minimum wage increases reduced this sample’s medium-run em-
ployment by 3.9 percentage points. Column 6 reports an estimate near 0 for the mini-
mum wage increase’s effect on the employment of manufacturing workers, whose wage
distribution was unaffected. Our specification thus passes the primary falsification test
emphasized in a recent exchange involving Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010), Meer and
West (2013), and Dube (2013).
   We draw two lessons from comparing the estimates associated with our baseline sam-
ple and the sample of teenagers and food service workers. First, the estimates associated
with teenagers and food service workers reinforce the conclusion that this period’s min-
imum wage increases reduced the employment of low-skilled workers. Second, they
point to a potential line of reconciliation between some of the literature’s null results
and our finding of significant disemployment effects.
   As emphasized by Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen (2012), cross-study comparisons
require scaling estimates by the extent to which alternative analysis samples are actually
affected by the minimum wage. Comparisons involving estimates from industry-level
studies are particularly difficult because such studies typically lack the individual-level
data required to directly estimate the minimum wage’s bite on the underlying workers’
wage distribution.15 We estimate that the wage distribution of our target sample was

  15 The extent of the minimum wage’s bite on populations under study is often inferred from CPS
data. A variety of measurement issues make it rare, however, to have directly comparable estimates
of the minimum wage’s effects on the wage distributions of alternative study populations. Relevant

                                               21
nearly twice as affected as the wage distribution of teenagers and food service workers.
Our estimates of the minimum wage increase’s effects on these groups’ employment
were similarly proportioned. It is thus important to note that, all else equal, estimates
of a minimum wage increase’s effects on relatively untargeted groups will be attenuated
and, as a result, more prone to type II error.
    Appendix Table A4 provides a further line of comparison between our results and
the findings of industry-specific analyses of the minimum wage. In our baseline analy-
sis and our analysis of teenagers and food service workers, we estimate the minimum
wage’s effects on the employment of low-skilled individuals. By contrast, analyses of
industry-level data estimate the minimum wage’s effects on total employment in low-
skill-intensive industries. In Table A4 we present estimates of the minimum wage’s effect
on the probability that any given individual is employed in the food service sector. For
the full sample of individuals aged 16 to 64, the estimated effect on food service employ-
ment is economically negligible and statistically indistinguishable from 0. As revealed
in column 2, this masks a 3 percentage point decline in food service employment among
individuals with average baseline wages below $7.50. Column 3 reports an offsetting
increase in the food service employment of workers with higher baseline wage rates.16
    We draw two additional lessons from this analysis. First, we note that the minimum
wage’s effects may vary significantly across industries, making it difficult to extrapolate
from industry-specific estimates to aggregate employment. In a standard model, the


measurement issues include survey reporting error and variation in the minimum wage’s applicability
due to exceptions such as those made for tipped workers. Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen (2012) and the
present study’s appendix materials are the only recent examples of such analyses of which we are aware.
An alternative approach to inferring the minimum wage increase’s direct effect involves using industry- or
firm-level data to estimate its effect on average earnings per worker, as in Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010).
In such data, however, increases in earnings per worker may reflect either increases in the earnings of the
low-skilled or substitution of high-skilled workers for low-skilled workers. Absent additional information,
such data will not enable researchers to distinguish between these outcomes.
   16 Because
           the sample in column 3 is roughly 10 times the size of the sample in column 1, the -0.03
employment effect from column 2 is essentially fully offset by the estimate of 0.003 from column 3.

                                                    22
determinants of an industry’s adaptation to a minimum wage change include its ability
to substitute between low-skilled workers, high-skilled workers, and capital, as well as
the elasticity of demand for its output. The results in Table A4 provide evidence that,
during the period we study, food-service employers had significant scope for substituting
between low- and high-skilled workers.
   Second, the results highlight that substitution between low- and high-skilled workers
can complicate efforts to evaluate the minimum wage’s effects using data on industry-
level wage bills and employment. In such data, the results in Table A4 would be indis-
tinguishable from an outcome in which an increase in the minimum wage non-trivially
increased per-worker earnings and had minimal effects on employment. In the setting
we analyze, this mistaken interpretation would leave the impression that the minimum
wage had achieved its objective of increasing low-skilled workers’ incomes at little cost.



5.4   Robustness of the Estimated Employment Effects

   Table 2’s primary result of interest is column 4’s estimate of the minimum wage
increase’s effect on the employment of targeted workers. Tables 3 and A6 present an
analysis of this result’s robustness. In Table 3, estimates in Panel A are of equation
(1)’s difference-in-differences model. Estimates in Panel B are of equation (3)’s triple
difference model, in which we use workers with average baseline wages between $8.50
and $10.00 as a within state control group.
   The result in column 1 of Panel A replicates the finding from Table 2’s column 4. The
result in column 1 of Panel B shows this result to be robust to estimating the minimum
wage’s effect using the triple-difference framework. The medium run estimate implies
that binding minimum wage increases reduced the target group’s employment rate by
5.9 percentage points.
   Column 2 presents results in which we exclude our controls for states’ macroeco-


                                              23
nomic conditions. Not controlling for variation in the housing bubble’s severity across
states reduces the estimated coefficients by 2 percentage points. The estimated em-
ployment decline is 4.2 percentage points in the difference-in-differences model and 3.8
percentage points in the triple-difference model. This reflects the fact that, as shown in
Figure 3, the housing bubble was more severe in unbound states than in bound states.
We further explore the relevance of macroeconomic controls in Table A5, which we dis-
cussion momentarily.
    Column 3 shows that our results are robust to controlling for state-specific linear
time trends.17 In the difference-in-differences specification, including these controls in-
creases the estimated medium-run coefficient from 6.3 to 7.2 percentage points. Column
4 shows that our results are relatively insensitive to controlling for exhaustive sets of
age, education, and family-size indicators interacted with linear time trends.18 Differen-
tial trajectories linked to moderate differences in the demographic characteristics of the
group 1 samples in bound and unbound states thus appear unlikely to underlie our es-
timates. We find the same to be true of differences associated with bound and unbound
states’ industrial compositions.
    The remaining columns involve changes in our sample inclusion criteria. Column
5 shows that our results are robust to requiring that, for inclusion in the final sample,


   17 We  share Meer and West’s (2013) concern that, because of the dynamics with which minimum-
wage induced employment losses may unfold, direct inclusion of state-specific trends is not a particularly
attractive method for controlling for the possibility of differential changes in the economic conditions of
each state over time. The dynamics allowed for by our Transition, Post 1, and Post 2 periods turn out,
in this context, to be sufficient to render state-specific trends largely irrelevant. This is less true in later
analysis of the minimum wage’s effects on income. The minimum wage may affect income through direct
disemployment effects, subsequent effects on experience accumulation, and related effects on training
opportunities. The latter effects will be realized as effects on income growth, making Meer and West’s
(2013) critique particularly pertinent.
   18 We similarly find our results to be robust to controlling for time trends interacted with dummy
variables for 20 cent bins in our measure of average baseline wages (result not shown). This check is
addressed at the concern that, because minimum wage workers in unbound states had relatively high
wages at baseline, their employment and earnings trajectories might differ for reasons related to mean
reversion.

                                                      24
individuals appear in the sample for at least 42 months rather than our baseline re-
quirement of 36 months. The specifications in columns 6 and 7 involve modifications to
our criteria for categorizing the bound and unbound states. Column 6 drops unbound
states in which the January 2008 minimum wage was less than $7.00, as such states were
moderately bound by subsequent increases in the federal minimum. Removing these 4
states (Arizona, Florida, Missouri, and West Virginia) from the control group modestly
increases the medium-run point estimate to 6.7 percentage points in the difference-in-
differences model and leaves the triple-difference estimate unchanged at 5.9 percentage
points. Finally, column 7 removes from the sample any bound state with a January 2009
minimum wage above $6.55. Our baseline designation uses states’ January 2008 mini-
mum wage rates to ensure that it is based on decisions made before our sample begins.
We observe that 4 states (Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, and New Mexico) with
January 2008 minimum wage rates below $6.55 voluntarily increased their minimums
before they were required to do so. Dropping these states from the sample modestly
decreases the medium-run estimates in both the difference-in-differences and triple dif-
ference specifications (by several tenths of a percentage point in each case).
   Appendix Table A6 provides additional evidence regarding the relevance of controls
for differences in the severity of the Great Recession in bound and unbound states.
Columns 1 and 2 replicate columns 1 and 2 from panel A of Table 3. As an alterna-
tive to controlling for the housing price index, column 3 adds controls for state level
income and employment per capita. Column 4 adds controls for stimulus spending per
capita and two additional variables. The first, “Predicted State Income,” is a projec-
tion of state-specific changes in aggregate output that are predictable on the basis of
each state’s historical relationship with the national business cycle. The second, “Pre-
dicted State Employment,” is a projected change in employment based on each states’
baseline industrial composition and subsequent industry-specific employment growth


                                            25
at the national level (Bartik, 1991; Blanchard and Katz, 1992). The inclusion of these
alternative macroeconomic control variables increases the estimated effect of binding
minimum wage increases relative to specifications that include no such controls. When
these variables are included alongside the housing price index, the estimates are essen-
tially unchanged from the baseline. The housing price index consistently emerges as
a stronger predictor of employment among low-skilled individuals than the alternative
macroeconomic control variables. The specifications in columns 6 and 7 incorporate
state-specific trends, the full sets of trends in various demographic characteristics, and
trends specific to each individual’s modal industry of employment at baseline. In both
of these specifications, we estimate that binding minimum wage increases resulted in 7
percentage point declines in the employment of low-skilled workers.



5.5   Further Employment Outcomes, Average Income, and Poverty

   Tables 4 and 5 report the results of a more in depth analysis of the minimum wage’s
effects on employment and income related outcomes. In Table 4’s second column we
present evidence of a novel channel through which job markets may respond to min-
imum wage increases. Specifically, we show that binding minimum wage increases
resulted in an increase in the probability that targeted individuals work without pay,
perhaps in internships, by 2 percentage points. Between disemployment and work with-
out pay, column 3 reports a combined 8 percentage point reduction in paid employment.
Appendix Tables A7 and A8 show that our estimates of both the “internship” effect and
the total effect on paid employment are robust to the same set of specification changes
as our estimate of the traditional disemployment effect. Estimates of the medium-run
effect on the probability of working without pay range from 1.3 to 2.5 percentage points.
Estimates of the total effect on the probability of paid employment range from 6.0 to 9.4
percentage points.


                                           26
   Table 5 presents estimates of these effects separately for individuals with and without
at least some college education. Here it is important to keep in mind that all of the
individuals in the sample have average baseline wages less than $7.50. Those with at
least some college education are relatively likely to be current students or very early in
their careers.
   We find that low-skilled workers with at least some college education underlie the
entirety of the minimum wage’s effect on the likelihood of working without pay. The in-
crease in the federal minimum wage made low-skilled workers with at least some college
education 4 percentage points (roughly 20 percent) more likely to work without pay. For
individuals with less education, the entirety of the minimum wage’s effect on paid em-
ployment comes through unemployment. These findings are suggestive of a difference
in the entry-level positions of high- and low-education workers. Entry positions sought
by high-education workers appear relatively interchangeable with unpaid internships.
Appendix Tables A11 and A12 report further analysis of demographic heterogeneity in
our estimates of the minimum wage’s effects.
   Returning to outcomes more central to the minimum wage’s redistributive proper-
ties, Table 4’s columns 4 and 5 report the effect of binding minimum wage increases on
average monthly incomes. Column 4 reports the effect on individual-level income while
column 5 reports the effect on family-level income. We censor these outcomes at $7,500
and $22,500 per month respectively; this affects fewer than 1 percent of observations,
which are associated with incomes far beyond those attainable through minimum wage
employment. In our difference-in-differences specification, we estimate that binding
minimum wage increases reduced the average monthly income of low-skilled workers
by $97 in the short-run and $153 in the medium-run. Results are slightly larger, though
estimated with significantly less precision, in our triple-difference specification. Robust-
ness across these specifications is particularly relevant for outcomes involving income.


                                            27
Specifically, it reassures us that the results are not spuriously driven by growth in the
control-group workers’ incomes towards the relatively high per capita incomes associ-
ated with unbound states (recall Panel D of Figure 3).
   Figure 6 more fully highlights the dynamics underlying these results. In the figure it
is apparent that employment losses and wage gains offset one another over the transition
months. Accumulating employment losses and lost wage gains associated with lost ex-
perience begin outstripping the legislated wage gains in subsequent periods. Appendix
Table A9 reports the robustness of the estimated effects on average income to the same
set of specification checks as the outcomes previously analyzed.
   To better understand these estimates, note that targeted individuals in bound states
had positive earnings in 61 percent of baseline months. In 22 percent they were unem-
ployed and in 17 percent they worked with 0 earnings. Average income for the target
sample was $770 across all baseline months, and thus roughly $1,260 in months with
positive earnings. For the short run (i.e., year 1), we estimated a 6 percentage point de-
cline in the probability of having positive earnings. This effect is thus directly associated
with an average decline of roughly $75, or $1, 260 × 0.06. The decline in months with
positive earnings rises to 8 percentage points over the following two years, implying
a direct earnings decline of $100. Gains for workers successfully shifted from the old
minimum to the new minimum offset very little of this decline.19


  19 Recall  that we estimated a 16 percentage point decline in the probability of having a wage between
$5.15 and $7.25. Nearly half of this turns out to involve shifts into unemployment or unpaid work. The
wage increase for the remaining 8 percentage points was roughly 10 percent (from the $6.55 minimum
for 2008 to the $7.25 minimum for 2009). A 10 percent increase on the $1,260 base, realized by 8 percent
of workers, averages to a gain of $10. Measurement error in self-reported wage rates likely leads this
approach to understate the true gain; it likely attenuates our estimates of the minimum wage’s bite on the
wage distributions of low-skilled workers. An alternative approach, likely generating an upper bound, is
to infer the minimum wage’s bite from the data displayed in Figure 4. Figure 4’s panel A showed that low-
skilled workers in bound states saw their probability of reporting a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 decline
by roughly 35 percentage points from a base of just over 40 percentage points. Even the 35 percentage
points of bite one could maximally infer from figure 4 implies quite modest offsets of the income losses
associated with disemployment, work without pay, and lost experience accumulation.

                                                   28
    The effects of lost employment rise over time due to lost experience. Minimum wage
workers tend to be on the steep portion of the wage-experience profile (Murphy and
Welch, 1990). Using mid-1980s SIPP data, Smith and Vavrichek (1992) found that 40 per-
cent of minimum wage workers experienced wage gains within 4 months and that nearly
two-thirds did so within 12 months. The median gain among the one-year gainers was
a substantial 20 percent. Among those unemployed or working without pay, foregone
wage growth of these magnitudes brings the implied medium-run earnings decline to
$130.20 Targeted workers who maintain employment may also experience slow earnings
growth if employers reduce opportunities for on the job training.
    Our estimates of the minimum wage increase’s effect on income are initially some-
what surprising. As illustrated above, however, they follow from the magnitude of our
estimated employment effects coupled with three more conceptually novel factors. These
factors include our finding of an “internship” effect, effects on income growth through
reduced experience accumulation, and the fact that direct effects on wages were smaller
than typically assumed.
    We emphasize that our analysis involves increases in the minimum wage that took
effect during a period of significant labor shedding. The employment, internship, and
experience-accumulation effects are thus likely to have been particularly potent during
this historical episode. Finally we note that our income point estimates come with con-
siderable uncertainty. The associated standard errors are sufficiently large that we cannot
rule out relatively modest declines in average income.
    Returning to Table 4, we estimate the minimum wage’s effects on family-level out-
comes. On average in our sample, each targeted worker is in a family with 1.3 targeted
workers. This is roughly the average of the ratio of our estimates of the minimum wage

  20 Two  years of early-career earnings growth at 15 percent per year would bring earnings from a baseline
of $1,260 to $1,670. An 8 percentage point decline in months at such earnings implies an average reduction
of $133.

                                                    29
increase’s effect on family-level income to its effect on individual-level income. In the
triple-difference specifications, for example, the short-run effect on individual-level in-
come is $112 per month while the estimated effect on family-level income is $120 (the
medium-run estimates are $185 and $300).
   Finally, column 6 shows that the effect of binding minimum wage increases on the
incidence of poverty was statistically indistinguishable from 0. Unsurprisingly, given
our finding on family-level earnings, the point estimate for the medium-run effect on
the likelihood of being in poverty is positive. The absence of a decline in poverty echoes
findings by Burkhauser and Sabia (2007), Sabia and Burkhauser (2010), Neumark and
Wascher (2002), and Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher (2005), as well as a summary of
earlier evidence by Brown (1999).



5.6   Transitions from Low-Wage Work into Middle Class Earnings

   We next analyze income growth through the lens of economic mobility, a topic of
significant recent interest (Kopczuk, Saez, and Song, 2010; Chetty, Hendren, Kline, and
Saez, 2014; Chetty, Hendren, Kline, Saez, and Turner, 2014). Concern regarding the
minimum wage’s effects on upward mobility has a long history (Feldstein, 1973). A
potential mechanism for such effects, namely the availability of on-the-job training, has
received some attention in the literature (Hashimoto, 1982; Arulampalam, Booth, and
Bryan, 2004). We are not aware, however, of direct evidence of the minimum wage’s
effects on individuals’ transitions into employment at higher wages and earnings levels.
   Because we observe individuals for four years, we are able to track transitions of low-
wage workers into middle and lower middle class earnings. The data reveal that initially
low-wage workers spend non-trivial numbers of months with earnings exceeding those
of a full time, minimum wage worker. Consider earnings above $1500, which could
be generated by full time work at $8.80 per hour. During the first year of our sample,


                                            30
workers with average baseline wages less than $7.50 earn more than $1500 in 8 percent
of months. By the sample’s last two years this rises, adjusting for inflation, to 18 percent.
We investigate the minimum wage’s effects on the likelihood of reaching such earnings.
   Table 6 reports the results. We find significant declines in economic mobility, in
particular for transitions into lower middle class earnings. For the full sample with
average baseline wages less than $7.50, the difference-in-differences estimate implies that
binding minimum wage increases reduced the probability of reaching earnings above
$1500 by 4.9 percentage points. This represents a 24 percent reduction relative to the
control group’s medium-run probability of attaining such earnings. As with previous
results, this finding cannot readily be explained by cross-state differences in economic
conditions. Netting out the experience of individuals with baseline wages between $8.50
and $10.00 moderately increases the point estimate to 5.4 percentage points (26 percent).
   The estimated reductions in the probability of reaching lower middle class earnings
levels are particularly meaningful for low-skilled workers with no college education. In
the difference-in-differences specification, the estimated decline in this group’s proba-
bility of earning more than $1500 per month is 4.9 percentage points (see column 2).
In the triple-difference specification the estimate is 8.2 percentage points. Declines of
these magnitudes represent 32 and 54 percent declines relative to the control group’s
probability of reaching such earnings. For those with at least some college education,
the estimated declines average a more moderate 4 percentage points, equivalent to 17
percent of the control group’s probability of reaching such earnings. Figure 8 presents
the raw data underlying these results, and Appendix Table A10 reports the robustness of
the estimated effects to the same set of specifications checks as the outcomes previously
analyzed.
   We next examine the probability of reaching the middle-income threshold of $3000
per month. For the full sample, we estimate that binding minimum wage increases


                                             31
reduced this probability by 1.8 percentage points. In the difference-in-differences spec-
ification, this estimate is statistically distinguishable from 0 at the 10 percent level; in
the triple-difference specification this is not the case, although the point estimate is es-
sentially unchanged. Though our sub-sample analysis has little precision, the average
medium-run effect appears to be driven primarily by those with at least some college
education. The full sample decline of 1.7 percentage points is a non-trivial 26 percent of
the control group’s medium-run probability of reaching such earnings.
   We interpret the evidence as implying that binding minimum wage increases re-
duced the medium-run class mobility of low-skilled workers. Such workers became
significantly less likely to rise to the lower middle class earnings threshold of $1500 per
month. The reduction was particularly large for low-skilled workers with relatively little
education.
   The dynamics of our estimated employment and class mobility results are suggestive
of the underlying mechanisms. Our employment results emerge largely during the first
year following the increase in the federal minimum wage. By construction, our mobil-
ity outcomes are not outcomes that can be affected by the loss of a full time minimum
wage job. Effects on mobility into lower middle class earnings only emerge over subse-
quent years. It appears that binding minimum wage increases blunted these workers’
prospects for medium-run economic mobility by reducing their short-run access to op-
portunities for accumulating experience and developing skills. This period’s minimum
wage increases may thus have made the first rung on the earnings ladder more difficult
for low-skilled workers to reach.



5.7   Contrasting the Minimum Wage and the Earned Income Tax Credit

   The minimum wage is one of many policies implemented with an objective of in-
creasing the effective wage rates or earnings of low-skilled workers. In the U.S. context,


                                            32
the policy most obviously interchangeable with the minimum wage is the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC).21 Analyses of the relative effectiveness of redistributing via wage reg-
ulation versus the tax code date at least as far back as Stigler (1946), whose discussion
ranged from potential employment effects to target-efficiency and administrative com-
plexity. Our estimates speak to the minimum wage’s effectiveness in achieving its direct
objective of increasing the incomes of targeted workers. In the paragraph below, we
contrast our estimates with the relevant results from the literature on the EITC.
    Our estimates provide evidence that binding minimum wage increases reduced the
employment, average income, and income growth of low-skilled workers over short-
and medium-run time horizons. By contrast, analyses of the EITC have found it to in-
crease both the employment of low-skilled adults and the incomes available to their fam-
ilies (Eissa and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Eissa and Hoynes, 2006).
The EITC has also been found to significantly reduce both inequality (Liebman, 1998)
and tax-inclusive poverty metrics, in particular for children (Hoynes, Page, and Stevens,
2006). Evidence on outcomes with long-run implications further suggest that the EITC
has tended to have its intended effects. Dahl and Lochner (2012), for example, find
that influxes of EITC dollars improve the academic performance of recipient house-
holds’ children. This too contrasts with our evidence on the minimum wage’s effects on
medium-run economic mobility.




  21 The  potential substitutability and complementarity of regulatory and tax-financed redistributive mea-
sures is an underlying theme in Clemens’s (2014) analysis of community rating regulations in insurance
markets.

                                                    33
6      Implications for Changes in Aggregate Employment Over

       the Great Recession

     Between December 2006 and December 2012, the average effective minimum wage
rose from $5.88 to $7.56 across the United States. Over this same time period, the
employment-to-population ratio for adults aged 16 to 64 declined by nearly 5 percent-
age points. Clemens and Wither (2014) more fully characterize this period’s employ-
ment declines, including its demographic and cross-country dimensions. Sustained U.S.
employment declines were particularly dramatic for young adults aged 15 to 24. As
of September 2014, this group’s employment remained down by 7.5 percentage points
from its pre-recession peak. Additionally, U.S. employment declines generally exceeded
those that occurred in other advanced economies.22 These dimensions of the data sug-
gest that U.S.-specific developments in low-skilled labor markets underlie much of the
slump in U.S. employment. We thus conclude by considering our results’ implications
for the relationship between minimum wage increases and these sustained employment
declines.
     Panel B of Appendix Table A5 presents the full set of results required to infer aggre-
gate employments effects from our estimates. The table presents estimates of equation
(1) on sub-samples that fully partition the set of adults aged 16 to 64. Column 2 repli-
cates our baseline estimate that binding minimum wage increases reduced the target
population’s employment rate by 6 percentage points. The remaining estimates provide
evidence that these minimum wage increases had little if any effect on the employment
of other groups, which is the assumption maintained for this section’s calculation.23


    22 See
       Hoffmann and Lemieux (2014) for related characterizations of cross-country developments in
unemployment rates.
    23 Notethat for this exercise the estimated effects on other groups’ employment must be directly inter-
preted as estimates of the minimum wage increase’s effects rather than as evidence supporting the validity

                                                    34
    Several factors make extrapolating our results into changes in national employment-
to-population ratios somewhat speculative. First, as emphasized earlier, we have likely
estimated both the full effect of the July 2009 increase and some dynamic effects of the
July 2008 increase in the federal minimum. In July 2009, the differential increase between
bound and unbound states was $0.58. We may more plausibly be detecting the effect of
an increase equivalent to $0.80 or $0.90 (roughly 13 percent of initial levels). Second, the
employment effects of minimum wage increases may be non-linear, with larger effects
for final increments than for initial increases. Third, the nominal value of the minimum
wage has more purchasing power, and hence more bite, in the typical bound state than in
the typical unbound state. Figure 3 showed bound states to have relatively low incomes
and housing costs, making it unsurprising that they had not voluntarily brought their
minimums to the levels seen in the unbound states. These issues inform the lower and
upper bounds we place on our estimates of the minimum wage’s aggregate effects.
    The calculation proceeds as follows. Our baseline estimate is that binding minimum
wage increases reduced the employment of workers with average baseline wages below
$7.50 by 6 percentage points (8 percent).24 For this section’s purposes, the estimates
reported in Appendix Table A5 make us reasonably confident in treating the decline in
the target group’s employment as the sole effect of this period’s binding minimum wage
increases on aggregate employment. Applying the relevant weights, the target sample
represents 7.4 percent of the U.S. population aged 16 to 64. A 6 percentage point decline

of our estimates of the minimum wage’s effect on the target group.
   24 The implied elasticity of the sample-group’s employment with respect to the minimum wage is thus
around two-thirds (8 percent divided by the 13 percent from the previous paragraph). Comparing elastic-
ities across studies is more difficult than one might expect due to the need to scale appropriately by the
extent to which each study’s “target” group was actually affected by the relevant minimum wage increase
(Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen, 2012). This is made difficult by the fact that most minimum wage studies
do not directly estimate the extent to which legislated minimum wage changes shift the wage distributions
of the populations whose employment they study. As shown in Appendix Figure 1, standard approaches
identify targeted individuals with significantly less precision than the approach employed in the current
study. While our full-group elasticity is thus larger than those estimated in most past research, it appears
more moderately sized when compared on an appropriately scaled basis.

                                                    35
in this group’s employment thus implies a 7.4 × 0.06 = 0.45 percentage point decline
in the employment-to-population ratio. We take this to be a conservative lower bound
estimate for the total effect of the $1.68 average rise in the effective minimum wage across
the country. We consider twice this amount, or 0.90 percentage points, to be a reasonable
upper bound. Our best estimate is that this period’s minimum wage increases resulted in
a 0.7 percentage point decline in the national employment-to-population ratio for adults
aged 16 to 64. This accounts for 14 percent of the total decline in the employment-to-
population ratio over this time period.



7    Conclusion

    We investigate the effects of recent federal minimum wage increases on the employ-
ment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers. While the wage distribution of
low-skilled workers shifts as intended, the estimated effects on employment, income, and
income growth are negative. We infer from our employment estimates that minimum
wage increases reduced the national employment-to-population ratio by 0.7 percentage
point between December 2006 and December 2012. As noted above, this accounts for 14
percent of the national decline in the employment-to-population ratio over this period.
    We also present evidence of the minimum wage’s effects on low-skilled workers’ eco-
nomic mobility. We find that binding minimum wage increases significantly reduced
the likelihood that low-skilled workers rose to what we characterize as lower middle
class earnings. This curtailment of transitions into lower middle class earnings began
to emerge roughly one year following initial declines in low wage employment. Reduc-
tions in upward mobility thus appear to follow reductions in access to opportunities for
accumulating work experience.




                                            36
References

Addison, J. T., M. L. Blackburn, and C. D. Cotti (2013): “Minimum wage increases in
  a recessionary environment,” Labour Economics, 23, 30–39.

Allegretto, S., A. Dube, M. Reich, and B. Zipperer (2013): “Credible Research Designs
  for Minimum Wage Studies,” Discussion paper, Institute of Industrial Relations, UC
  Berkeley.

Arulampalam, W., A. L. Booth, and M. L. Bryan (2004): “Training and the new mini-
  mum wage*,” The Economic Journal, 114(494), C87–C94.

Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2008): “Trends in US wage inequality:
  Revising the revisionists,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300–323.

Bartik, T. J. (1991): “Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?,”
  Books from Upjohn Press.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2004): “How Much Should We Trust
  Differences-in-Differences Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1).

Blanchard, O. J., and L. F. Katz (1992): “Regional evolutions,” Brookings papers on
  economic activity, pp. 1–75.

Brown, C. (1999): “Minimum wages, employment, and the distribution of income,”
  Handbook of labor economics, 3, 2101–2163.

Burkhauser, R. V., K. A. Couch, and D. C. Wittenburg (2000): “Who minimum wage
  increases bite: An analysis using monthly data from the SIPP and the CPS,” Southern
  Economic Journal, pp. 16–40.




                                               37
Burkhauser, R. V., and J. J. Sabia (2007): “The Effectiveness of Minimum Wage Increases
  in Reducing Poverty: Past, Present, and Future,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 25(2),
  262–281.

Card, D. (1992a): “Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of Califor-
  nia, 1987-89,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 38–54.

       (1992b): “Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal
  Minimum Wage,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46(1), 22–37.

Card, D., and A. B. Krueger (1994): “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
  of the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania,” The American Economic
  Review, 84(4).

        (1995): Myth and measurement: the new economics of the minimum wage. Princeton
  University Press.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014): “Where is the Land of Oppor-
  tunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” NBER
  Working Paper 19843.

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez, and N. Turner (2014): “Is the United States
  still a land of opportunity? Recent trends in intergenerational mobility,” NBER Work-
  ing Paper 19844.

Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012): “Does state
  fiscal relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence from the American
  Recovery and Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3),
  118–145.




                                             38
Clemens, J. (2014): “Regulatory Redistribution in the Market for Health Insurance,”
  NBER Working Paper 19904.

Clemens, J., and M. Wither (2014): “Just the Facts: Demographic and Cross-Country
  Dimensions of the Employment Slump,” Discussion paper, University of California at
  San Diego.

Currie, J., and B. C. Fallick (1996): “The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth
  Evidence from the NLSY,” Journal of Human Resources, pp. 404–428.

Dahl, G. B., and L. Lochner (2012): “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achieve-
  ment: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit,” The American Economic Review,
  102(5), 1927–1956.

Dube, A. (2013): “Minimum Wages and Aggregate Job Growth: Causal Effect or Statisti-
  cal Artifact?,” Discussion paper, IZA Discussion Paper.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010): “Minimum wage effects across state bor-
  ders: Estimates using contiguous counties,” The review of economics and statistics, 92(4),
  945–964.

Eissa, N., and H. W. Hoynes (2006): “Behavioral responses to taxes: Lessons from the
  EITC and labor supply,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 20, pp. 73–110. The MIT
  Press.

Eissa, N., and J. B. Liebman (1996): “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
  Credit,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 605–637.

Feldstein, M. (1973): “Economics of the New Unemployment,” Public Interest, 33(Fall).

Giuliano, L. (2013): “Minimum wage effects on employment, substitution, and the



                                            39
  teenage labor supply: evidence from personnel data,” Journal of Labor Economics, 31(1),
  155–194.

Gramlich, E. M. (1976): “Impact of minimum wages on other wages, employment, and
  family incomes,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 409–461.

Hashimoto, M. (1982): “Minimum wage effects on training on the job,” The American
  Economic Review, pp. 1070–1087.

Hoffmann, F., and T. Lemieux (2014): “Unemployment in the Great Recession: A Com-
  parison of Germany, Canada and the United States,” NBER Working Paper 20694.

Hoynes, H. W., M. E. Page, and A. H. Stevens (2006): “Poverty in America: Trends and
  explanations,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 47–68.

Kahn, L. B. (2010): “The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from col-
  lege in a bad economy,” Labour Economics, 17(2), 303–316.

Katz, L. F., and A. B. Krueger (1992): “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast-
  Food Industry,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, pp. 6–21.

Katz, L. F., and K. M. Murphy (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
  and Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35–78.

Kim, T., and L. J. Taylor (1995): “The employment effect in retail trade of California’s
  1988 minimum wage increase,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13(2), 175–182.

Kopczuk, W., E. Saez, and J. Song (2010): “Earnings inequality and mobility in the
  United States: evidence from social security data since 1937,” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(1), 91–128.

Lee, D., and E. Saez (2012): “Optimal minimum wage policy in competitive labor mar-
  kets,” Journal of Public Economics, 96(9), 739–749.

                                             40
Liebman, J. B. (1998): “The impact of the earned income tax credit on incentives and
  income distribution,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 12, pp. 83–120. MIT Press.

Linneman, P. (1982): “The economic impacts of minimum wage laws: a new look at an
  old question,” The Journal of Political Economy, pp. 443–469.

Meer, J., and J. West (2013): “Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics,”
  NBER Working Paper 19262.

Meyer, B. D., and D. T. Rosenbaum (2001): “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
  the Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3).

Murphy, K. M., and F. Welch (1990): “Empirical age-earnings profiles,” Journal of Labor
  economics, pp. 202–229.

Neumark, D., J. Salas, and W. Wascher (2013): “Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
  Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?,” NBER Working
  Paper 18681.

Neumark, D., M. Schweitzer, and W. Wascher (2004): “Minimum wage effects
  throughout the wage distribution,” Journal of Human Resources, 39(2), 425–450.

        (2005): “The Effects of Minimum Wages on the Distribution of Family Incomes
  A Nonparametric Analysis,” Journal of Human Resources, 40(4), 867–894.

Neumark, D., and W. Wascher (2002): “Do minimum wages fight poverty?,” Economic
  Inquiry, 40(3), 315–333.

Neumark, D., and W. L. Wascher (2008): Minimum wages. MIT Press.

Oreopoulos, P., T. von Wachter, and A. Heisz (2012): “The short-and long-term career
  effects of graduating in a recession,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  4(1), 1–29.

                                            41
Sabia, J. J., and R. V. Burkhauser (2010): “Minimum wages and poverty: will a $9.50
  Federal minimum wage really help the working poor?,” Southern Economic Journal,
  76(3), 592–623.

Sabia, J. J., R. V. Burkhauser, and B. Hansen (2012): “Are the Effects of Minimum Wage
  Increases Always Small-New Evidence from a Case Study of New York State,” Indus.
  & Lab. Rel. Rev., 65, 350.

Smith, R. E., and B. Vavrichek (1992): “The wage mobility of minimum wage workers,”
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, pp. 82–88.

Stigler, G. J. (1946): “The economics of minimum wage legislation,” The American Eco-
  nomic Review, pp. 358–365.




                                            42
Tables and Figures




Figure 1: States Bound by the 2008 and 2009 Federal Minimum Wage Increase:
The map labels states on the basis of whether we characterize them as bound by the July 2008 and July
2009 increases in the federal minimum wage. We define bound states as states reported by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) to have had a minimum wage less than $6.55 in January 2008. Such states were at
least partially bound by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009
increase from $6.55 to $7.25.




                                                  43
                                           Average Effective Minimum Wages


                        $8.00
           Avg. Effective Min. Wage
             $6.00         $7.00
                        $5.00




                                  Jul,06       Jul,08             Jul,10             Jul,12

                                           States Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases
                                           States Not Bound by Federal Minimum Wage Increases


Figure 2: Evolution of the Average Minimum Wage in Bound and Unbound States:
As in the previous figure, we define bound states as states reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
to have had a minimum wage less than $6.55 in January 2008. Such states were at least partially bound
by the July 2008 increase in the federal minimum and fully bound by the July 2009 increase from $6.55 to
$7.25. Effective monthly minimum wage data were taken from the detailed replication materials associated
with Meer and West (2014). Within each group, the average effective minimum wage is weighted by
state population. The first solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal
minimum wage as well as the first month of data available in our samples from the 2008 panel of the
Survey of Income and Program Participation. The second solid vertical line indicates the timing of the
July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage.




                                                            44
                     Macroeconomic Trends Across Bound and Unbound States
                                            Panel A: BLS Unemployment Rate                                          Panel B: BLS Employment to Pop.




                                     12
                                                                                                             66




                               9
                                                                                                       63




                          6
                                                                                                 60




                     3
                                                                                            57
                                                                                        BLS Employment to Pop.




                 BLS Unemployment Rate
                0
                                                                                       54
                                      Jul,05       Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13                          Jul,05       Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13

                                               Panel C: Housing Price Index                                           Panel D: Per Capita Real GDP




                                                                                                              56




45
                                                                                            44    48    52




                 300 400 500 600
                Housing Price Index
                                                                                       Per Cap. Real GDP (1000s)
                                                                                       40




                             200
                                          Jul,05   Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13                              Jul,05   Jul,07   Jul,09   Jul,11   Jul,13




     Figure 3: Macroeconomic Trends in Bound and Unbound States:
     Bound and unbound states are defined as in previous figures. This figure’s panels plot the evolution of macroeconomic indicators over the
     course of the housing bubble and Great Recession. All series are weighted by state population so as to reflect the weighting implicit in our
     individual-level regression analysis. Panel A plots the average monthly unemployment rate, as reported by the BLS. Panel B plots the average
     monthtly employment to population ratio, also as reported by the BLS. Panel C plots the average of the quarterly Federal Housing Finance
     Agency’s housing price index. Panel D plots the average of annual real per capita GDP, as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
     (BEA). In each panel, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage.
                                            Evolution of Employment and Income
                                Ave. Baseline Wages: < $7.50                                             Ave. Baseline Wages: $7.50−$10.00
  Fraction of Population




                                                                                Fraction of Population
                                Panel A: Wage Between $5.15−$7.25                                             Panel B: Wage Between $5.15−$7.25
     0 .15 .3 .45




                                                                                   0 .15 .3 .45
                       Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12                        Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12

                                       Panel C: Employment                                                           Panel D: Employment
  .67 .71 .75 .79




                                                                                 .78 .82 .86
     Employment




                                                                                Employment
                                                                                           .74
                       Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12                        Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12

                                            Panel E: Income                                                               Panel F: Income
  600 900 1200 1500




                                                                                600 900 1200 1500
       Income




                                                                                     Income




                       Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12                        Jul,08      Jul,09        Jul,10       Jul,11   Jul,12




Figure 4: Employment and Income Trends in Bound and Unbound States:
Bound and unbound states are defined as in previous figures. The figure plots the evolution of three
wage, employment, and earnings related outcomes for groups of low-skilled workers. In all cases the
series are constructed by the authors using data from the 2008 panel of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). In column 1, the samples in each panel consist of individuals whose average baseline
wages (meaning wages when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less than $7.50. In
column 2, the samples in each panel consist of individuals whose average baseline wages are between
$7.50 and $10.00. In row 1, the reported outcome is the fraction of observations for which an individual’s
wage falls between $5.15 and $7.25. In row 2, the reported outcome is the fraction of observations for
which an individual is employed. In row 3, the reported outcome is the average earnings of all in-sample
individuals. In each panel, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the
federal minimum wage. The dashed vertical line indicates the April 2009 beginning of the transition of
wages out of the range between the old and new federal minimum; the date for the latter designation is
driven by the data displayed in this figure’s Panel A.




                                                                         46
                                                        Dynamic Regression Estimates
                                Panel A: Dynamic Difference−in−Differences                                            Panel B: Dynamic Triple−Differences
                                         Probability of Employment                                                        Probability of Employment




               0.2
                                                                                               0.2




             0.0 0.1
                                                                                             0.0 0.1




           Change
                                                                                           Change




               −0.2 −0.1
                                                                                               −0.2 −0.1
                       Jul,08              Jul,09       Jul,10       Jul,11       Jul,12               Jul,08              Jul,09       Jul,10       Jul,11       Jul,12

                                    Prob. of Affected Wage       Prob. of Employment                                Prob. of Affected Wage       Prob. of Employment

                                Panel C: Dynamic Difference−in−Differences                                             Panel D: Dynamic Triple−Difference
                                         Probability of No Earnings                                                        Probability of No Earnings




               0.2
                                                                                               0.2




47
             0.0 0.1
                                                                                             0.0 0.1




           Change
                                                                                           Change




               −0.2 −0.1
                                                                                               −0.2 −0.1




                           Jul,08          Jul,09       Jul,10       Jul,11       Jul,12                   Jul,08          Jul,09       Jul,10       Jul,11       Jul,12

                                    Prob. of Affected Wage       Prob. of No Earnings                               Prob. of Affected Wage       Prob. of No Earnings



     Figure 5: Dynamic Regression Estimates: The figure reports fully dynamic estimates of the minimum wage’s effects on the wages and
     employment of low-skilled workers. Each marker is an estimate of a coefficient of the form β p(t) from equations (1) and (3), where the relevant
     p(t) correspond with individual months and period p = 0 is April 2009, the month immediately preceding the transition period. Panels A
     and C present estimates of the difference-in-differences model of equation (1), while panels B and D present estimates of the triple-difference
     model of equation (3). In each panel, the green X’s are estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage changes on the probability of having
     a wage between $5.15 and $7.25. In panels A and B, the blue dots are estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage increases on the
     probability of employment (with accompanying 95 percent confidence intervals). In panels C and D, the blue dots are estimates of the effect
     of binding minimum wage increases on the probability of having no earnings (with accompanying 95 percent confidence intervals).
                                                    Dynamic Regression Estimates
                         Panel A: Dynamic Difference−in−Differences                                               Panel B: Dynamic Triple−Differences
                                  Monthly Individual Income                                                           Monthly Individual Income




               300
                                                                                                 300



                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 0.15




                   0
                                                                                                     0



                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                         0.0




             Income
                                                                                               Income
                                                                                  Change
                                                                                                                                                                    Change




           −300
                                                                                             −300



                                                                               −0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 −0.15




                                                                               −0.3
                                                                                                                                                                 −0.3




               −600
                                                                                                 −600
                       Jul,08         Jul,09      Jul,10    Jul,11      Jul,12                           Jul,08         Jul,09      Jul,10   Jul,11        Jul,12

                                Prob. of Affected Wage     Monthly Ind. Inc.                                      Prob. of Affected Wage      Montly Ind. Inc.

                        Panel C: Dynamic Difference−in−Differences                                                Panel D: Dynamic Triple−Differences
                                  Monthly Family Income                                                                 Monthly Family Income




               600
                                                                                                 600



                                                                               0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 0.15




48
                   0
                                                                                                     0



                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                         0.0




             Income
                                                                                               Income
                                                                                  Change
                                                                                                                                                                    Change




           −600
                                                                                             −600



                                                                               −0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 −0.15




                                                                               −0.3
                                                                                                                                                                 −0.3




               −1200
                                                                                                 −1200




                   Jul,08             Jul,09      Jul,10    Jul,11      Jul,12                       Jul,08            Jul,09       Jul,10   Jul,11        Jul,12

                                Prob. of Affected Wage     Monthly Fam. Inc.                                      Prob. of Affected Wage     Montly Fam. Inc.



     Figure 6: Dynamic Regression Estimates: The figure reports fully dynamic estimates of the minimum wage’s effects on the wages and
     income of low-skilled workers. Each marker is an estimate of a coefficient of the form β p(t) from equations (1) and (3), where the relevant p(t)
     correspond with individual months and period p = 0 is April 2009, the month immediately preceding the transition period. Panels A and C
     present estimates of the difference-in-differences model of equation (1), while panels B and D present estimates of the triple-difference model
     of equation (3). In each panel, the green X’s are estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage changes on the probability of having a wage
     between $5.15 and $7.25. In panels A and B, the blue dots are estimates of the effect of binding minimum wage increases on individual-level
     monthly income (with accompanying 95 percent confidence intervals). In panels C and D, the blue dots are estimates of the effect of binding
     minimum wage increases on family-level monthly income (with accompanying 95 percent confidence intervals).
                                                         Medium Run Changes in Wage Distribution
                                                           Panel A: Under $7.50                                                                                                           Panel B: $7.50 − $8.50




                     .2
                                                                                                                                                     .2


                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10




                              .1
                                                                                                                                                              .1


                                                                                                                                   7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7.5




                    0
                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5




            D−in−D Coefficients
                                                                                                                                            D−in−D Coefficients

                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.5




           −.1
                                                                                                                                           −.1

                                                                                                                Number of Obs. (1,000’s)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number of Obs. (1,000’s)




                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                     −.2
                                                                                                                                                     −.2
                                                                $6 $7                                                                                                                             $6 $7
                                   $0.00              $5.00       .5 .2
                                                                    5 5   $10.00        $15.00           $20.00                                                    $0.00              $5.00         .5 .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      5 5   $10.00        $15.00           $20.00
                                                                  Hourly Wage Cutoffs                                                                                                               Hourly Wage Cutoffs

                                           D−in−D Coefficient                95% CI              Num. of Obs.                                                              D−in−D Coefficient                  95% CI              Num. of Obs.

                                                         Panel C: $8.50 − $10.00




                     .2
                                                                                                                10




                              .1
                                                                                                                                   7.5




49
                    0
                                                                                                                          5




            D−in−D Coefficients
                                                                                                                 2.5




           −.1
                                                                                                                Number of Obs. (1,000’s)
                                                                                                                0




                     −.2
                                                                $6 $7
                                   $0.00              $5.00       .5 .2
                                                                    5 5   $10.00        $15.00           $20.00
                                                                  Hourly Wage Cutoffs

                                           D−in−D Coefficient                95% CI              Num. of Obs.




     Figure 7: Estimated Effects of the Minimum Wage on Hourly Wage Distributions: The figure reports estimates of binding minimum wage
     increase’s medium run effects on the wage distributions of three groups of low-skilled earners. More specifically, each dot is an estimate of
     the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in
                                                                                                                                                                                              j
     the federal minimum wage. The dependent variables in each specification take the form Yi,s,t = 1{W j−1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }. These
     Yi,s,t are indicators equal to 1 if an individual’s hourly wage is in the band between W j−1 and W j , where each band is a 50 cent interval. The
     results can thus be described as estimates of the minimum wage’s effect on the wage distribution’s probability mass function. In Panel A,
     the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are
     less than $7.50. In Panel B, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages are between $7.50 and $8.50. In Panel C, the
     sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00. In the background of each panel is a histogram
     characterizing the frequency distribution of hourly wages during the sample’s baseline period.
                            Probabilities of Reaching Middle Class Earnings
                            Ave. Baseline Wages: < $7.50                                     Ave. Baseline Wages: $7.50−$10.00
                                   Panel A: Full Sample                                               Panel B: Full Sample
  Prob(Earn $1500+)




                                                                        Prob(Earn $1500+)
   .05 .15 .25 .35




                                                                         .15 .25 .35 .45
                   Jul,08      Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12                    Jul,08   Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12

                                   Panel C: H.S. or Less                                              Panel D: H.S. or Less
  .05 .15 .25 .35




                                                                        .15 .25 .35 .45
   Prob(Earn $1500+)




                                                                         Prob(Earn $1500+)
                   Jul,08      Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12                    Jul,08   Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12

                                 Panel E: Some College +                                            Panel F: Some College +
  .05 .15 .25 .35




                                                                        .15 .25 .35 .45
   Prob(Earn $1500+)




                                                                         Prob(Earn $1500+)




                   Jul,08      Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12                    Jul,08   Jul,09     Jul,10      Jul,11   Jul,12




Figure 8: Probabilities of Reaching Middle Class Earnings:
Bound and unbound states are defined as in previous figures. In all panels, the figure plots the evolution
the fraction of all in-sample individuals with earnings greater than $1500, which is equivalent to full time
work at a wage of $8.82. The series are constructed by the authors using data from the 2008 panel of
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). In column 1, the samples in each panel consist
of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages when employed between August 2008 and
July 2009) are less than $7.50. In column 2, the samples in each panel consist of individuals whose average
baseline wages are between $7.50 and $10.00. Row 1 presents tabulations of the outcome of interest for the
full sample of individuals as defined above. In row 2 the sample is limited to individuals with no college
education, while in row 3 the sample is limited to individuals with at least some college education. In
each panel, the solid vertical line indicates the timing of the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum
wage. The dashed vertical line indicates the April 2009 beginning of the transition of wages out of the
range between the old and new federal minimum; the date for the latter designation is driven by the data
displayed in figure 4’s Panel A.




                                                                50
Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics by Treatment Status and Average Baseline Wages
                                   (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
  Ave. Baseline Wage                 Wage < $7.50              $7.50-$8.49             $8.50-$9.99
  Treatment Status               Bound Not Bound          Bound Not Bound         Bound Not Bound
  Earn $5.15-$7.25                0.374      0.218        0.0806      0.0405      0.0330      0.0240
                                 (0.484)    (0.413)       (0.272)     (0.197)     (0.179)     (0.153)

  Employed                        0.777        0.751       0.825       0.810       0.889        0.865
                                 (0.416)      (0.433)     (0.380)     (0.393)     (0.314)      (0.341)

  Unpaid Work                     0.168        0.211       0.101       0.116      0.0842       0.0922
                                 (0.374)      (0.408)     (0.302)     (0.320)     (0.278)      (0.289)

  No Earnings                     0.391        0.461       0.276       0.306       0.195        0.227
                                 (0.488)      (0.498)     (0.447)     (0.461)     (0.396)      (0.419)

  Num hours worked/week           24.36        23.57       27.13       24.21       31.83        29.60
                                 (18.29)      (19.13)     (17.43)     (17.07)     (15.98)      (16.52)

  Income                          770.1       748.2        993.5      886.7        1319.3      1269.9
                                 (1409.0)    (1115.4)     (949.8)    (1037.0)     (1012.4)    (1179.9)

  Below FPL                       0.474        0.439       0.393       0.411       0.307        0.344
                                 (0.499)      (0.496)     (0.489)     (0.492)     (0.461)      (0.475)

  Age                             35.79        37.05       36.92       34.89       40.58        38.02
                                 (13.92)      (14.51)     (13.56)     (13.65)     (13.10)      (13.29)

  Num. of Children                1.345        1.265       1.263       1.333       1.110        1.085
                                 (1.408)      (1.423)     (1.340)     (1.350)     (1.352)      (1.311)

  More than H.S. Deg.             0.580        0.635       0.584       0.591       0.585        0.595
                                 (0.494)      (0.481)     (0.493)     (0.492)     (0.493)      (0.491)

   Num. of Individuals             1876         1546       1038        1335         1249        1589
   Observations                   22493        18566       12561      16061        15211        19273
 Sources: Baseline summary statistics were calculated by the authors using data from the 2008 panel of the
Survey of Income and Program Participation. The baseline corresponds with the period extending from
August 2008 through July 2009. Columns 1, 3, and 5 report summary statistics for individuals in states we
designate as bound by increases in the federal minimum, as described in the note to Figure 1. Column 2, 4,
and 6 report summary statistics for individuals in the remaining states, which we designate as unbound.
In Columns 1 and 2, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages
when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less than $7.50. In Columns 3 and 4, the sample
consists of individuals whose average baseline wages are between $7.50 and $8.50. In Columns 5 and 6,
the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00.




                                                   51
                        Table 2: Effects on Wage Distributions and Employment by Average Baseline Wages

                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)                        (4)        (5)                    (6)
             Dependent Variable                 Wage between $5.15 and $7.25                               Employed
             Bound x Post 1                  -0.161***    -0.036***    -0.008*                   -0.043*       0.020                 -0.011
                                              (0.022)      (0.010)     (0.004)                   (0.018)     (0.022)                (0.011)
             Bound x Post 2                  -0.164***    -0.042***     -0.007                  -0.063**      -0.011                 -0.008
                                              (0.024)      (0.008)     (0.005)                   (0.018)     (0.023)                (0.013)
             Housing Price Index               -0.623       -0.098      0.109                   1.022***       0.416                 -0.035
                                              (0.424)      (0.167)     (0.088)                   (0.234)     (0.504)                (0.390)
             N                                146,933      102,154     122,594                  146,933      102,154                122,594
             Mean of Dep. Var.                  0.304       0.057       0.027                     0.766        0.813                  0.877
             Estimation Framework             D-in-D       D-in-D      D-in-D                    D-in-D      D-in-D                 D-in-D




52
             Sample                         Under $7.50 $7.50-$8.49 $8.50-$9.99                Under $7.50 $7.50-$8.49            $8.50-$9.99
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t)
     corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. In columns 1-3, the dependent
     variable is an indicator for whether an individual’s hourly wage is $5.15 and $7.25. In columns 4-6, the dependent variable is an indicator for
     whether an individual is employed. In Columns 1 and 4, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages
     when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less than $7.50. In Columns 2 and 5, the sample consists of individuals whose
     average baseline wages are between $7.50 and $8.50. In Columns 3 and 6, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages
     are between $8.50 and $10.00. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                         Table 3: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Employment

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
      Dependent Variable                                                               Employed
      Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                       -0.043*         -0.029          -0.051*       -0.041*        -0.042*             -0.049*         -0.042*
                                           (0.018)        (0.021)          (0.020)       (0.018)        (0.020)             (0.020)         (0.019)
      Bound x Post 2                      -0.063**        -0.042*         -0.072**      -0.061***      -0.061**            -0.067**        -0.059**
                                           (0.018)        (0.019)          (0.025)       (0.016)        (0.017)             (0.021)         (0.018)
      N                                   146,933         146,933         146,933        146,933       121,365             128,728         143,973
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.766           0.766           0.766         0.766          0.769               0.765           0.764
      Estimation Framework                D-in-D          D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D        D-in-D              D-in-D          D-in-D


      Panel B:                                                                Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target               -0.032         -0.018           -0.032          -0.033         -0.027           -0.040          -0.033
                                           (0.022)        (0.025)          (0.022)         (0.023)        (0.024)          (0.024)         (0.023)
      Bound x Post 2 x Target             -0.059**        -0.038+         -0.058**        -0.064**        -0.051*         -0.059**        -0.053**
                                           (0.019)        (0.021)          (0.019)         (0.020)        (0.023)          (0.021)         (0.019)




53
      N                                   269,527         269,527         269,527          269,527       223,148          238,727         263,782
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.817          0.817            0.817           0.817          0.820            0.817           0.816
      Estimation Framework              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D             D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D
      Macro Covariates                        Yes            No               Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes             Yes
      State Trends                            No             No               Yes             No             No               No              No
      Trends In Demographics                  No             No               No              Yes            No               No              No
      Minimum Sample Inclusion               3 yrs          3 yrs            3 yrs           3 yrs        3.5 yrs            3 yrs           3 yrs
      Excluded States                       None           None             None            None           None         N.B.<$7.00       B.>$6.55
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on an indicator for whether or not an individual is employed. More specifically, the estimates
     in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and
     extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with
     the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from
     equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages
     less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as a
     within-state control group. The columns explore our baseline results’ (column 1) robustness to a variety of specification changes, which are
     further described in the main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                   Table 4: Effects on Employment Status, Income, and Poverty Status

                                            (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)                         (6)
         Dependent Variable               Employed       Unpaid Work No Earnings Ind. Income Fam. Income                             Below FPL
         Panel A:                                                  Difference-in-Differences Specifications
         Bound x Post 1                     -0.043*         0.015           0.057**       -96.996*        -131.955                      0.008
                                            (0.018)        (0.010)          (0.019)       (37.581)        (85.091)                     (0.015)
         Bound x Post 2                    -0.063**         0.019*         0.081***      -152.976**      -285.200*                      0.020
                                            (0.018)        (0.009)          (0.022)       (44.511)       (119.009)                     (0.022)
         N                                 146,933         146,933          146,933       146,933         146,933                      146,933
         Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.766          0.187            0.421        747.633        4,194.831                      0.458



         Panel B:                                                          Triple Difference Specifications




54
         Bound x Post 1 x Target            -0.032            0.015              0.047*       -112.728+              -120.412           -0.000
                                            (0.022)          (0.014)            (0.023)        (56.538)             (105.210)          (0.023)
         Bound x Post 2 x Target           -0.059**          0.021+             0.080**       -184.768*             -303.234*           0.027
                                            (0.019)          (0.013)            (0.023)        (74.359)             (127.642)          (0.035)
         N                                 269,527           269,527            269,527        269,527               269,527           269,527
         Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.817            0.141              0.324         995.022              4,252.687            0.399
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous
     estimates of β p(t) from equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with
     average baseline wages less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between
     $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state control group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                     Table 5: Heterogeneity of Effects on Employment and Unpaid Work by Education Group

                                          (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)                        (6)
      Dependent Variable                Employed          Employed Unpaid Work Unpaid Work No Earnings                               No Earnings
      Panel A:                                                     Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                        -0.046         -0.041*          0.001          0.022+          0.048+                        0.063**
                                           (0.030)         (0.020)         (0.015)         (0.013)         (0.024)                       (0.021)
      Bound x Post 2                      -0.069**         -0.057*         -0.005          0.033**          0.065*                       0.090**
                                           (0.025)         (0.024)         (0.015)         (0.012)         (0.027)                       (0.028)
      N                                    60,282          86,651          60,282          86,651           60,282                       86,651
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.772           0.762           0.180           0.191            0.408                        0.429


      Panel B:                                                             Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target            -0.060+            -0.020              -0.007          0.026       0.053+                      0.045
                                         (0.031)           (0.028)             (0.019)         (0.016)      (0.027)                    (0.030)




55
      Bound x Post 2 x Target           -0.102***           -0.037              -0.010         0.040**      0.092**                     0.077*
                                         (0.028)           (0.025)             (0.019)         (0.015)      (0.029)                    (0.030)
      N                                  111,292           158,235            111,292         158,235       111,292                    158,235
      Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.824              0.811               0.132          0.147        0.308                      0.336
      Sample                           H.S. or Less      Some Coll.+        H.S. or Less    Some Coll.+ H.S. or Less                 Some Coll.+
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous
     estimates of β p(t) from equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with
     average baseline wages less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between
     $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state control group. In columns 1, 3, and 5 the samples consist of individuals with a high school degree or less,
     while in columns 2, 4, and 6 the samples consist of those with at least some college education. Additional details are provided in the main
     text and within the table itself. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                 Table 6: Effects on the Probability of Reaching Lower Middle or Middle Class Earnings Levels

                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
              Dependent Variable                              Earn $1,500+                               Earn $3,000+
              Panel A:                                                 Difference-in-Differences Specifications
              Bound x Post 1                     -0.016          -0.022          -0.012       -0.004       -0.006      -0.002
                                                (0.011)         (0.015)         (0.013)      (0.007)      (0.008)     (0.009)
              Bound x Post 2                   -0.049***       -0.049**         -0.044*      -0.018+       -0.010      -0.021
                                                (0.013)         (0.015)         (0.017)      (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.013)
              N                                 146,933         60,282           86,651      146,933      60,282      86,651
              Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.206          0.153            0.237       0.068        0.032       0.090


              Panel B:                                                  Triple Difference Specifications
              Bound x Post 1 x Target           -0.002          -0.035         0.019       -0.013     -0.021+                    -0.008




56
                                               (0.018)         (0.027)        (0.024)     (0.011)      (0.012)                  (0.014)
              Bound x Post 2 x Target          -0.054*        -0.082**        -0.035       -0.017       -0.010                   -0.022
                                               (0.024)         (0.030)        (0.030)     (0.015)      (0.015)                  (0.019)
              N                                269,527        111,292        158,235      269,527     111,292                   158,235
              Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.206           0.153          0.237       0.068         0.032                   0.090
              Sample                             Full       H.S. or Less Some Coll.+        Full    H.S. or Less              Some Coll.+
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous
     estimates of β p(t) from equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with
     average baseline wages less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between
     $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state control group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
Appendix (Intended For Online Publication Only)




                      57
                                                      Medium Run Changes in Wage Distribution
                                                      Panel A: Food Industries                                                                                                            Panel B: Teenagers




                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4




                   .2
                                                                                                                                                 .2


                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3




                            .1
                                                                                                                                                          .1




                   0
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1




           D−in−D Coefficients
                                                                                                                                         D−in−D Coefficients




           −.1
                                                                                                                                         −.1

                                                                                                              Number of Obs. (1,000’s)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Number of Obs. (1,000’s)




                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                   −.2
                                                                                                                                                 −.2
                                                              $6 $7                                                                                                                         $6 $7
                                 $0.00              $5.00       .5 .2
                                                                  5 5   $10.00        $15.00           $20.00                                                  $0.00              $5.00       .5 .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                5 5   $10.00          $15.00           $20.00
                                                                Hourly Wage Cutoffs                                                                                                             Hourly Wage Cutoffs

                                         D−in−D Coefficient               95% CI               Num. of Obs.                                                            D−in−D Coefficient                95% CI                Num. of Obs.

                                                Panel C: Manufacturing Industries




                                                                                                              4




                   .2
                                                                                                                                 3




                            .1




58
                   0
                                                                                                                1       2




           D−in−D Coefficients
           −.1
                                                                                                              Number of Obs. (1,000’s)
                                                                                                              0




                   −.2
                                                              $6 $7
                                 $0.00              $5.00       .5 .2
                                                                  5 5   $10.00        $15.00           $20.00
                                                                Hourly Wage Cutoffs

                                         D−in−D Coefficient               95% CI               Num. of Obs.




     Figure A.1: Estimated Effects of the Minimum Wage on Hourly Wage Distributions: The figure reports estimates of binding minimum
     wage increase’s medium run effects on the wage distributions of three groups of low-skilled earners. More specifically, each dot is an estimate
     of the coefficient β p (t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase
                                                                                                                                                                                            j
     in the federal minimum wage. The dependent variables in each specification take the form Yi,s,t = 1{W j−1 < Hourly Wagei,s,t < W j }. These
     Yi,s,t are indicators equal to 1 if an individual’s hourly wage is in the band between W j−1 and W j , where each band is a 50 cent interval. The
     results can thus be described as estimates of the minimum wage’s effect on the wage distribution’s probability mass function. In Panel A, the
     sample consists of individuals whose modal industry of employment over the baseline was food service. In Panel B, the sample consists of
     individuals who were teenagers at the beginning of the sample period. In Panel C, the sample consists of individuals whose modal industry
     of employment over the baseline was manufacturing. In the background of each panel is a histogram characterizing the frequency distribution
     of hourly wages during the sample’s baseline period.
                              Table A.1: Cross-Sample Comparison of Effects on Wages and Employment

                                               (1)          (2)           (3)                        (4)               (5)               (6)
            Dependent Variable                 Wage between $5.15 and $7.25                                      Employed
            Bound x Post 1                  -0.161***    -0.082***      -0.005                   -0.043*             -0.020             0.003
                                             (0.022)      (0.014)      (0.004)                   (0.018)            (0.013)           (0.010)
            Bound x Post 2                  -0.164***    -0.090***      -0.006                  -0.063**           -0.039**             0.008
                                             (0.024)      (0.016)      (0.004)                   (0.018)            (0.013)           (0.013)
            N                                146,933      275,042      166,555                  146,933            275,042            166,555
            Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.304        0.104         0.015                    0.766               0.557             0.934
            Estimation Framework             D-in-D       D-in-D       D-in-D                    D-in-D            D-in-D             D-in-D
            Sample                         Under $7.50 Food Service Manufac-                   Under $7.50       Food Service        Manufac-




59
                                                        and Teens      turing                                     and Teens            turing
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t)
     corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. In columns 1-3, the dependent
     variable is an indicator for whether an individual’s hourly wage is $5.15 and $7.25. In columns 4-6, the dependent variable is an indicator
     for whether an individual employed. In Columns 1 and 4, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages
     when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less than $7.50. In Columns 2 and 5, the sample consists of individuals who were
     teenagers or whose modal industry was food service when employed at baseline. In Columns 3 and 6, the sample consists of individuals
     whose modal industry was manufacturing when employed at baseline. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
            Table A.2: Cross-Sample Comparison of Effects on Wages and the Probability of Working Without Pay

                                               (1)          (2)           (3)                        (4)        (5)                      (6)
            Dependent Variable                 Wage between $5.15 and $7.25                               Unpaid Work
            Bound x Post 1                  -0.161***    -0.082***      -0.005                    0.015        0.005                    0.001
                                             (0.022)      (0.014)      (0.004)                   (0.010)      (0.005)                 (0.004)
            Bound x Post 2                  -0.164***    -0.090***      -0.006                   0.019*        0.007                   -0.003
                                             (0.024)      (0.016)      (0.004)                   (0.009)      (0.006)                 (0.005)
            N                                146,933      275,042      166,555                  146,933      275,042                  166,555
            Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.304        0.104         0.015                    0.187        0.082                    0.042
            Estimation Framework             D-in-D       D-in-D       D-in-D                    D-in-D      D-in-D                   D-in-D
            Sample                         Under $7.50 Food Service Manufac-                   Under $7.50 Food Service              Manufac-




60
                                                        and Teens      turing                               and Teens                  turing
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t)
     corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. In columns 1-3, the dependent
     variable is an indicator for whether an individual’s hourly wage is $5.15 and $7.25. In columns 4-6, the dependent variable is an indicator for
     whether an individual worked with no pay. In Columns 1 and 4, the sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning
     wages when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less than $7.50. In Columns 2 and 5, the sample consists of individuals who
     were teenagers or whose modal industry was food service when employed at baseline. In Columns 3 and 6, the sample consists of individuals
     whose modal industry was manufacturing when employed at baseline. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
          Table A.3: Cross-Sample Comparison of Effects on Wages and the Probability of Having Positive Earnings

                                               (1)          (2)           (3)                        (4)         (5)                     (6)
            Dependent Variable                 Wage between $5.15 and $7.25                                No Earnings
            Bound x Post 1                  -0.161***    -0.082***      -0.005                   0.057**       0.025*                  -0.002
                                             (0.022)      (0.014)      (0.004)                   (0.019)      (0.012)                 (0.010)
            Bound x Post 2                  -0.164***    -0.090***      -0.006                  0.081***      0.046***                 -0.010
                                             (0.024)      (0.016)      (0.004)                   (0.022)      (0.012)                 (0.012)
            N                                146,933      275,042      166,555                  146,933       275,042                 166,555
            Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.304        0.104         0.015                    0.421        0.525                    0.108
            Estimation Framework             D-in-D       D-in-D       D-in-D                    D-in-D       D-in-D                  D-in-D
            Sample                         Under $7.50 Food Service Manufac-                   Under $7.50 Food Service              Manufac-
                                                        and Teens      turing                                and Teens                 turing




61
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The table reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t)
     corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. In columns 1-3, the dependent
     variable is an indicator for whether an individual’s hourly wage is $5.15 and $7.25. In columns 4-6, the dependent variable is an indicator
     for whether an individual has no earnings, characterized as either being unemployed or employed without pay. In Columns 1 and 4, the
     sample consists of individuals whose average baseline wages (meaning wages when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) are less
     than $7.50. In Columns 2 and 5, the sample consists of individuals who were teenagers or whose modal industry was food service when
     employed at baseline. In Columns 3 and 6, the sample consists of individuals whose modal industry was manufacturing when employed at
     baseline. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                          Table A.4: Effects on Food Service Employment

                                                        (1)        (2)                      (3)
                                                             Food Service
               Bound x Post 1                        -0.000     -0.023*                  0.002+
                                                    (0.001)      (0.011)                 (0.001)
               Bound x Post 2                        -0.001     -0.033*                   0.003*
                                                    (0.002)      (0.013)                 (0.001)
               N                                   1,966,935    146,933                 1,820,002
               Mean of Dep. Var.                      0.047       0.217                   0.033
               Estimation Framework                 D-in-D      D-in-D                   D-in-D
               Weighted                                No          No                       No
               Individual Fixed Effects                Yes         Yes                     Yes
               Sample                             Full Sample Under $7.50               All Other
Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. The
table reports estimates of the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the relevant dependent
variables, which are named in the heading of each column. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are
of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from
equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009
increase in the federal minimum wage. In column 1, the sample contains all individuals aged 16 to 64 for
whom the relevant earnings and employment data were available for at least 36 months between August
2008 and July 2012. In column 2, the sample consists of individuals from the sample in column 1 whose
average baseline wages (meaning wages when employed between August 2008 and July 2009) were less
than $7.50. The sample in column 3 is the complement of the sample in column 2. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level.




                                                         62
                                       Table A.5: First Stage and Employment Effects for All Adults

                                                          (1)                (2)          (3)           (4)                       (5)
                  Panel A:                                              Dependent Variable: Affected Wage
                  Bound x Post 1                        0.001             -0.161***    -0.036***     -0.008*                    -0.000
                                                       (0.001)             (0.022)      (0.010)      (0.004)                   (0.001)
                  Bound x Post 2                        0.001             -0.164***    -0.042***      -0.007                    -0.000
                                                       (0.001)             (0.024)      (0.008)      (0.005)                   (0.001)
                  N                                    520,074             146,933      102,154      122,594                  1,075,180
                  Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.000               0.304        0.057         0.027                    0.004
                  Estimation Framework                 D-in-D              D-in-D       D-in-D       D-in-D                    D-in-D


                  Panel B:                                               Dependent Variable: Employment
                  Bound x Post 1                      -0.004               -0.043*        0.020     -0.011                      0.005
                                                     (0.004)               (0.018)      (0.022)    (0.011)                     (0.005)




63
                  Bound x Post 2                      -0.013              -0.063**       -0.011     -0.008                      0.000
                                                     (0.009)               (0.018)      (0.023)    (0.013)                     (0.007)
                  N                                  520,074               146,933     102,154     122,594                    1,075,180
                  Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.000                0.766         0.813     0.877                       0.946
                  Estimation Framework               D-in-D                D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D                      D-in-D
                  Sample                          Unemp. at Base         Under $7.50 $7.50-$8.49 $8.50-$9.99                 Over $10.00
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. In panel A the dependent variable in
     this panel is an indicator equal to 1 if an individual reports a wage between $5.15 and $7.25 in the relevant month. In panel B the dependent
     variable is an indicator equal to 1 if an individual is employed. In both panels, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation
     (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in July 2009 and extending through July 2010. The samples used across
     columns 1 through 5 fully partition the set of all individuals aged 16 to 64 for whom the relevant earnings and employment data were
     available for at least 36 months between August 2008 and July 2012. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1),
     where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level.
                                   Table A.6: Further Robustness of the Estimate Employment Effects

                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                 Dependent Variable                                                       Employed
                 Bound x Post 1                         -0.043*      -0.029      -0.031     -0.032      -0.042*     -0.050*    -0.049*
                                                        (0.018)     (0.021)     (0.020)    (0.023)      (0.019)     (0.020)    (0.022)
                 Bound x Post 2                        -0.063**     -0.042*     -0.048*    -0.049*     -0.061**    -0.071**    -0.070*
                                                        (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.018)    (0.022)      (0.019)     (0.025)    (0.026)
                 Housing Price Index                   1.022***                                         0.965**      1.787*    1.827**
                                                        (0.234)                                         (0.298)     (0.712)    (0.610)
                 State Employment Rate                                          1.242+       1.207       0.794                  1.107
                                                                                (0.740)    (0.745)      (0.734)                (0.790)
                 State Inc. Per Cap. (1000s)                                     0.005       0.005       0.002                  0.004
                                                                                (0.004)    (0.004)      (0.003)                (0.004)
                 Stimulus Per Cap. (1000s)                                                   0.015       0.016                  0.051
                                                                                           (0.048)      (0.049)                (0.046)
                 Predicted State Income                                                      0.088       -0.311                 -1.052
                                                                                           (0.474)      (0.478)                (1.250)




64
                 Predicted State Employment                                                 -0.201       -0.442                 -0.850
                                                                                           (0.696)      (0.683)                (0.826)
                 N                                     146,933     146,933     146,933     146,933     146,933     145,749     145,749
                 Mean of Dep. Var.                      0.766       0.766       0.766       0.766        0.766      0.769       0.769
                 Estimation Framework                  D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D      D-in-D
                 State Trends                            No          No          No           No           No        Yes         Yes
                 Trends In Demographics                  No          No          No           No           No        Yes         Yes
                 Trends In Baseline Ind.                 No          No          No           No           No        Yes         Yes
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Each column reports estimates of
     the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on employment. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t)
     from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The
     estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after
     the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. The stimulus spending variable was taken from Chodorow-Reich, Feiveson, Liscow,
     and Woolston (2012). “Predict State Income” is a projection of state-specific changes in aggregate output that are predictable on the basis
     of each state’s historical relationship with the national business cycle. “Predicted State Employment” is a projected change in employment
     based on each states’ baseline industrial composition and subsequent industry-specific employment growth at the national level (Bartik, 1991;
     Blanchard and Katz, 1992). Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                  Table A.7: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Working Without Pay

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
      Dependent Variable                                                              Unpaid Work
      Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                       0.015          0.019+           0.018          0.013         0.017+              0.017           0.014
                                          (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.012)        (0.010)        (0.009)            (0.012)         (0.010)
      Bound x Post 2                       0.019*          0.025*          0.023          0.013         0.020*             0.019+          0.019+
                                          (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.015)        (0.010)        (0.008)            (0.010)         (0.009)
      N                                   146,933         146,933         146,933        146,933       121,365             128,728         143,973
      Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.187           0.187           0.187          0.187          0.187              0.186           0.187
      Estimation Framework                D-in-D          D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D        D-in-D              D-in-D          D-in-D


      Panel B:                                                                Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target               0.015           0.015           0.015           0.013          0.017           0.015            0.014
                                          (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.014)          (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.016)         (0.014)
      Bound x Post 2 x Target              0.021+          0.022+          0.021+           0.016          0.020           0.020           0.023+
                                          (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.013)          (0.013)        (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.013)




65
      N                                   269,527         269,527         269,527          269,527       223,148          238,727         263,782
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.141           0.141           0.141           0.141          0.140           0.140            0.141
      Estimation Framework              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D             D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D
      Macro Covariates                       Yes             No              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
      State Trends                           No              No              Yes             No             No              No               No
      Trends In Demographics                 No              No              No              Yes            No              No               No
      Minimum Sample Inclusion              3 yrs           3 yrs           3 yrs           3 yrs         3.5 yrs          3 yrs            3 yrs
      Excluded States                      None            None            None             None           None         N.B.<$7.00       B.>$6.55
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the probability that an individual works without pay. More specifically, the estimates
     in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and
     extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with
     the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from
     equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages
     less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as a
     within-state control group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                   Table A.8: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Having No Earnings

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
      Dependent Variable                                                              No Earnings
      Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                      0.057**          0.047*         0.069***       0.054**        0.059**            0.066**         0.055**
                                           (0.019)        (0.021)          (0.019)       (0.019)        (0.020)            (0.019)         (0.019)
      Bound x Post 2                      0.081***        0.067**         0.094***       0.074**       0.081***            0.086**         0.077***
                                           (0.022)        (0.021)          (0.025)       (0.021)        (0.018)            (0.026)         (0.022)
      N                                   146,933         146,933         146,933        146,933       121,365             128,728         143,973
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     0.421          0.421            0.421         0.421          0.418              0.421           0.422
      Estimation Framework                D-in-D          D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D        D-in-D              D-in-D          D-in-D


      Panel B:                                                                Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target              0.047*          0.033           0.046+          0.046+         0.044+           0.055*          0.048*
                                          (0.023)         (0.026)         (0.023)          (0.024)        (0.024)         (0.024)         (0.023)
      Bound x Post 2 x Target             0.080**          0.060*         0.080**          0.080**       0.072**          0.080**         0.076**
                                          (0.023)         (0.025)         (0.023)          (0.025)        (0.023)         (0.025)         (0.023)




66
      N                                   269,527         269,527         269,527          269,527       223,148          238,727         263,782
      Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.324           0.324            0.324           0.324          0.320           0.323           0.326
      Estimation Framework              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D             D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D
      Macro Covariates                      Yes              No              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      State Trends                           No              No              Yes             No             No               No              No
      Trends In Demographics                 No              No              No              Yes            No               No              No
      Minimum Sample Inclusion             3 yrs           3 yrs            3 yrs           3 yrs         3.5 yrs          3 yrs           3 yrs
      Excluded States                      None            None            None             None           None         N.B.<$7.00       B.>$6.55
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the probability that an individual has no earnings. More specifically, the estimates in row
     1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending
     through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period
     beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from equation (3),
     namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages less than
     $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state
     control group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                                      Table A.9: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Average Income

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)
      Dependent Variable                                                        Average Individual Income
      Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                      -96.996*        -87.599*         -84.541       -87.660*       -96.980*          -124.336**      -93.847*
                                          (37.581)        (36.696)        (53.457)       (38.776)       (38.372)           (43.543)       (38.195)
      Bound x Post 2                     -152.976**      -139.535**       -106.873      -123.230**    -158.234***        -185.557***     -144.592**
                                          (44.511)        (42.081)        (83.908)       (45.438)       (36.943)           (51.477)       (45.290)
      N                                   146,933         146,933         146,933        146,933        121,365            128,728        143,973
      Mean of Dep. Var.                   747.633         747.633         747.633        747.633        753.252            753.153        743.266
      Estimation Framework                 D-in-D          D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D         D-in-D             D-in-D         D-in-D


      Panel B:                                                               Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target            -112.728+        -92.376        -113.532+      -115.456+      -119.105*         -114.755+       -122.473*
                                          (56.538)        (56.956)        (56.811)        (57.693)      (57.780)          (65.054)        (57.033)
      Bound x Post 2 x Target            -184.768*       -155.007*       -185.196*       -186.519*     -200.613*         -198.313*       -186.548*
                                          (74.359)        (70.847)        (74.983)        (74.020)      (75.638)          (86.382)        (76.135)




67
      N                                   269,527         269,527         269,527         269,527       223,148           238,727         263,782
      Mean of Dep. Var.                   995.022         995.022         995.022         995.022      1,001.254         1,000.081        991.508
      Estimation Framework              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D             D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D
      Macro Covariates                       Yes             No              Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes             Yes
      State Trends                           No              No              Yes             No            No                No              No
      Trends In Demographics                 No              No              No              Yes           No                No              No
      Minimum Sample Inclusion              3 yrs           3 yrs           3 yrs           3 yrs        3.5 yrs            3 yrs           3 yrs
      Excluded States                      None            None            None            None          None           N.B.<$7.00       B.>$6.55
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on monthly income. More specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from
     equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates
     in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July
     2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from equation (3), namely our triple-difference
     specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample
     is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state control group. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level.
                  Table A.10: Robustness of Estimated Effects on Transitions into Lower Middle Class Earnings

                                             (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                (6)             (7)
      Dependent Variable                                                      Probability of Earning $1500+
      Panel A:                                                           Difference-in-Differences Specifications
      Bound x Post 1                        -0.016           -0.014        -0.007          -0.015        -0.011              -0.019          -0.017
                                           (0.011)          (0.011)       (0.018)         (0.011)       (0.013)             (0.013)         (0.011)
      Bound x Post 2                      -0.049***        -0.046**        -0.021        -0.043**      -0.053***           -0.056***       -0.048***
                                           (0.013)          (0.013)       (0.025)         (0.013)       (0.014)             (0.014)         (0.013)
      N                                    146,933         146,933        146,933        146,933        121,365             128,728         143,973
      Mean of Dep. Var.                      0.206           0.206         0.206           0.206         0.203               0.220           0.206
      Estimation Framework                 D-in-D          D-in-D         D-in-D          D-in-D        D-in-D              D-in-D          D-in-D


      Panel B:                                                               Triple Difference Specifications
      Bound x Post 1 x Target              -0.002          0.001           -0.002          -0.005         -0.017            0.002           -0.008
                                          (0.018)         (0.016)         (0.018)         (0.018)        (0.022)           (0.020)         (0.018)
      Bound x Post 2 x Target             -0.054*         -0.049*         -0.053*         -0.059*       -0.075**           -0.050+         -0.058*
                                          (0.024)         (0.022)         (0.024)         (0.023)        (0.027)           (0.028)         (0.024)




68
      N                                   269,527         269,527         269,527         269,527       223,148            238,727         263,782
      Mean of Dep. Var.                    0.283           0.283           0.283           0.283          0.284             0.293           0.283
      Estimation Framework              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D D-in-D-in-D              D-in-D-in-D     D-in-D-in-D
      Macro Covariates                       Yes            No               Yes             Yes           Yes               Yes              Yes
      State Trends                           No             No               Yes             No             No               No               No
      Trends In Demographics                 No             No               No              Yes            No               No               No
      Minimum Sample Inclusion              3 yrs          3 yrs            3 yrs           3 yrs        3.5 yrs            3 yrs            3 yrs
      Excluded States                      None            None            None            None           None           N.B.<$7.00       B.>$6.55
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of
     the minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the probability that an individual has earnings greater than $1500 in a month. More
     specifically, the estimates in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning
     in August 2009 and extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant
     p(t) corresponds with the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous
     estimates of β p(t) from equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with
     average baseline wages less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between
     $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-state control group. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
                     Table A.11: Heterogeneity of Employment Effects by Age, Family Structure, and Gender

                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)                (6)
                     Dependent Variable                                               Employed
                     Panel A:                                        Difference-in-Differences Specifications
                     Bound x Post 1                     -0.041      -0.040+        -0.034     -0.056*     -0.036             -0.057*
                                                       (0.026)       (0.020)      (0.023)     (0.028)    (0.021)             (0.025)
                     Bound x Post 2                   -0.068**      -0.055**     -0.064**     -0.061*    -0.052*            -0.082**
                                                       (0.024)       (0.020)      (0.023)     (0.028)    (0.022)             (0.029)
                     N                                 82,224        64,709       89,963       56,970    91,257              55,676
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                   0.738        0.800        0.739        0.808      0.779              0.745


                     Panel B:                                             Triple Difference Specifications
                     Bound x Post 1 x Target           -0.025         -0.027        -0.041      -0.031      -0.038           -0.022
                                                      (0.034)        (0.025)       (0.029)     (0.028)     (0.026)          (0.037)




69
                     Bound x Post 2 x Target          -0.057+       -0.051+       -0.096**      -0.020     -0.059*          -0.063+
                                                      (0.030)        (0.027)       (0.028)     (0.031)     (0.023)          (0.037)
                     N                                141,035       128,492       154,353     115,174 164,419               105,108
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                  0.785         0.851          0.792       0.850       0.827            0.800
                     Sample                          Under 35       Age 35+ Kids in HH Childless Female                       Male
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on the probability that an individual is employed. More specifically, the estimates in row 1
     are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and extending
     through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period
     beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from equation (3),
     namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages less than
     $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as a within-
     state control group. Columns 1 and 2 split the baseline sample on the basis of age, columns 3 and 4 on the basis of household structure,
     and columns 5 and 6 on the basis of gender. Additional details are provided in the main text and within the table itself. Standard errors are
     clustered at the state level.
                  Table A.12: Heterogeneity of Paid Employment Effects by Age, Family Structure, and Gender

                                                         (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)                (6)
                     Dependent Variable                                            No Earnings
                     Panel A:                                        Difference-in-Differences Specifications
                     Bound x Post 1                   0.079**         0.027       0.057*      0.058*     0.046+             0.076**
                                                       (0.026)       (0.019)     (0.024)      (0.025)    (0.023)            (0.025)
                     Bound x Post 2                   0.109***       0.046+      0.091**      0.066*     0.071**            0.098**
                                                       (0.026)       (0.024)     (0.026)      (0.026)    (0.024)            (0.032)
                     N                                 82,224        64,709      89,963       56,970      91,257            55,676
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                  0.427         0.413       0.443        0.386       0.409             0.440


                     Panel B:                                             Triple Difference Specifications
                     Bound x Post 1 x Target          0.063+          0.017        0.064*       0.031      0.051+            0.037
                                                      (0.034)        (0.026)      (0.030)      (0.028)     (0.029)          (0.034)




70
                     Bound x Post 2 x Target          0.096**        0.054+       0.121***      0.034      0.085**           0.071
                                                      (0.035)        (0.030)      (0.030)      (0.026)     (0.024)          (0.043)
                     N                                141,035       128,492       154,353     115,174 164,419               105,108
                     Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.354          0.293        0.353        0.286       0.312            0.344
                     Sample                          Under 35       Age 35+ Kids in HH Childless Female                      Male
     Note: +, *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001 levels respectively. Panel A reports estimates of the
     minimum wage’s short and medium run effects on on the probability that an individual has no earnings. More specifically, the estimates
     in row 1 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with the period beginning in August 2009 and
     extending through July 2010. The estimates in row 2 are of the coefficient β p(t) from equation (1), where the relevant p(t) corresponds with
     the period beginning one year after the July 2009 increase in the federal minimum wage. Panel B reports analogous estimates of β p(t) from
     equation (3), namely our triple-difference specification. In Panel A the sample consists exclusively of individuals with average baseline wages
     less than $7.50. In Panel B the sample is augmented to include individuals whose average baseline wages are between $8.50 and $10.00 as
     a within-state control group. Columns 1 and 2 split the baseline sample on the basis of age, columns 3 and 4 on the basis of household
     structure, and columns 5 and 6 on the basis of gender. Additional details are provided in the main text and within the table itself. Standard
     errors are clustered at the state level.
