                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INVENTING IN THE SHADOW OF THE PATENT SYSTEM:
EVIDENCE FROM 19TH-CENTURY PATENTS AND PRIZES FOR TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATIONS

                                                B. Zorina Khan

                                            Working Paper 20731
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w20731


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        December 2014




    Lee Branstetter, Colleen Chien, Claude Diebolt, Rochelle Dreyfuss, Naomi Lamoreaux, Petra Moser,
    Adam Mossoff, Tom Nicholas, Alessandro Nuvolari, Patricio Saíz, and Ted Sichelman provided valuable
    comments. Thanks for outstanding research assistance are due to Brian Amagai, Nathaniel Herz, Brittney
    Langevin, Storey Morrison, Birgitta Polson, Sherry Richardson, Christine Rutan, Peter Smith, and
    Anne Tolsma. This research project is in part funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation,
    and I am also grateful to the Engelberg Center on Innovation Law and Policy at NYU Law School
    for generous support. Liability for errors is limited to the author. The views expressed herein are those
    of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2014 by B. Zorina Khan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
    may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
    the source.
Inventing in the Shadow of the Patent System: Evidence from 19th-Century Patents and Prizes
for Technological Innovations
B. Zorina Khan
NBER Working Paper No. 20731
December 2014
JEL No. K11,N11,O31,O34

                                                ABSTRACT

Such institutions as patent systems cannot be well understood without an assessment of technological
creativity in other contexts. Some have argued that prizes might offer superior alternatives to the award
of property rights in inventions. Accordingly, this paper offers an empirical comparison of patents
in relation to the award of prizes for technological innovation. The data set comprises a sample of
patents, as well as exhibits and prizes at annual industrial fairs in Massachusetts over the course of
the nineteenth century. The patterns shed light on the factors that influenced how specific inventions
and inventors attempted to appropriate returns. Prizes in general provided valuable prospects for advertisements
and commercialization, rather than inventive activity per se. Prize winners typically belonged to more
privileged classes than the general population of patentees, as gauged by their wealth and occupational
status. Moreover, the award of prizes tended to largely unpredictable, and was unrelated to such proxies
for the productivity of the innovation as inventive capital or the commercial success of the invention.
Prize-oriented institutions thus appear to be less systematic and not as market-oriented as patent systems.
If inventors respond to expected returns, prizes may be less effective at inducing technological creativity.


B. Zorina Khan
9700 College Station
Bowdoin College
Brunswick, ME 04011
and NBER
bkhan@bowdoin.edu
                                   “The further consideration of whether prizes are wisely given or not is
                                   one we prefer to leave to our successors.”
                                                                      --      MMA Exhibition Report (1874)

During the past two centuries technological change has made a significant contribution to advances

in human welfare. However, the nature of inventive activity and the processes through which

individual creativity are transmuted into outward shifts in the production possibility frontier are still

not well understood. Part of the reason lies in the difficulty of obtaining objective measures of

inventive activity and innovation that are comparable across time and region. To date, the most

extensive empirical studies of the economic history of technological change have relied on patents

to gauge progress in the ‘useful arts’.

        The evidence from examination of the nineteenth-century patent system in the United States

suggest that the specific design of this institution played a substantial role in influencing the rate and

direction of inventive activity.1 It may well be that the nineteenth century comprised the age of

patented invention in the United States: contemporary Swiss observers noted that in the United

States “every good thing deserving a patent was patented.”2 Moreover, the ability to protect their

ideas through strongly-enforced property rights induced relatively ordinary individuals to reorient

their efforts to exploiting market opportunities.3 An extensive network of assignments and licenses

characterized a flourishing market in inventive property rights and inventions, and this enabled


1
  Contemporaries thought the logic was self-evident: “It is in this country, where patents are numerous and easily
obtained, that improved machines and processes are most rapidly introduced, as in textile manufactures, in watch-
making, and shoe-making; and not in Switzerland, where until recently no patents have been granted, or in England and
Germany, where patents have been hard to get.” James Richardson, Our Patent System and What We Owe to It,
SCRIBNER’S MONTHLY, Nov. 1878, at 99, 104.
2
  EDWARD BALLY, INDUSTRY AND MANUFACTURES IN THE UNITED STATES: LOOK OUT FOR YOURSELVES! 33 (1878)
(quoting Sir William Thompson, President of the Mathematical and Physical Section of the British Association).
Prominent Swiss manufacturers like Bally, a Swiss Commissioner to the Philadelphia Exhibition, studied the state of
technological innovation across countries and recommended “the institution of patents as the first and indispensable
measure” for becoming competitive with American industry (p. 23).
3
  Kenneth Sokoloff’s pioneering research (1988) showed that improvements in market access led to a greater
proportionate patenting response among rural residents who were new to invention. Khan and Sokoloff (1990) traced the
occupations of such patentees and identified an increasing tendency for inventive activity to originate among creative
individuals who did not possess much in the way of human capital or financial resources.
financially disadvantaged inventors to specialize at invention, and garner benefits from their creative

efforts through the market (Lamoreaux and Sokoloff 2001, Khan and Sokoloff 2004). The vast

majority of great inventors in the United States, who were responsible for technologically and

significant inventions such as the telegraph and telephone, were prompt to obtain patent protection

for their inventions (Khan 2005).4

         Nevertheless, patents have well-known problems as measures of inventive activity (Griliches

1990). Most significantly, some inventions are not patentable, not all inventors apply for patents

and not all patent applications are granted, the propensity to patent differs across industries and

individuals, and patented inventions vary in terms of value. Moser’s innovative 2005 study

examined the exhibits at the international Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851 as a way of assessing

invention outside the patent system. She found that only a small fraction of these inventions were

covered by patents at the time they were exhibited and was pessimistic about the overall

effectiveness of patent institutions. This result is interesting and important, but it is difficult to

extrapolate from such data to make general statements about the propensity to patent, or even about

the relative degree of inventiveness in any specific country. International exhibitions may not be

representative of the inventive capital in individual countries, since the selection of items likely

introduced biases that are uncorrelated with technological capability. For instance, the size and

content of the exhibition for any country may be determined by distance and political expedience

rather than by random draws from the underlying population of inventions in the nation. Moreover,

without a time-limited test of novelty, exhibits in many instances comprise a stock rather than a flow

measure, which increases the difficulty of comparisons across institutions.5 A further consideration


4
  Their contributions exhibited similar patterns to those of less eminent inventors, refuting the notion that patents merely
represented ‘microinventions’ or incremental and minor discoveries (Mokyr 2000).
5
  Thus, at the 1851 Crystal Palace event, Britain and its dependents accounted for 7,381 exhibitors (53 percent) but there
were only twelve delegates from the entire continent of South America. At the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1855, by
is that exhibitions might conceivably represent efforts at advertisement and commercialization rather

than inventive activity.6

         Despite these flaws, data on prizes offer a valuable addition to the stock of information about

technological creativity. For instance, Brunt et al. (2008) conducted an empirical analysis of prizes

at the Royal Agricultural Society of England, and concluded that these mechanisms proved to be

effective in inducing competitive entry into targeted areas, and in encouraging innovation. Such

studies are timely because scepticism has increased of late about whether state grants of property

rights in patents and in copyright protection comprise the most effective incentives for increasing

creativity. A growing number of economists have been persuaded by theoretical models of prizes

and subsidies and have begun to lobby for these nonmarket-oriented policies as complements or

superior alternatives to intellectual property rights.7           In a reprise of debates from the nineteenth

century, extremists today refer to patent systems as “an unnecessary evil,” creating “costly and

way of contrast, France and its dependents comprised 50.1 percent of all 21,779 exhibitors, whereas Britain and its
colonies were now a mere 15 percent. Even if the “home court advantage” is accounted for, there were significant
differences in participation within and across countries that were uncorrelated with technological capability. The rules
and fees differed in each of the international fairs in ways that affected participation and outcomes. The funding for the
exhibitions, as well as for travel and other expenses influenced the number and composition of the displays, because
financing of some exhibitions derived from private initiative and others were funded by state and national governments.
For instance, the United States was in the middle of a war at the time of the Paris Universal Exhibition of 1862, and
Congress did not allot the funds requested, so only 128 Americans participated among the total of 26,348 exhibitors.
6
  According to the 1874 Report of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association: “there is no doubt that they
[awards at the exhibitions] are an incentive and stimulus to the best effort, and that they are of incalculable advertising
advantage to those who receive them.”
7
  In the absence of asymmetries in information regarding costs and benefits, theoretical models suggest that prizes,
public funding or payment on delivery might be preferable to the temporary monopoly associated with intellectual
property rights (Maurer and Scotchmer 2004). Wright (1983) found that prizes are optimal if the success probability is
moderately high, if the supply elasticity of inventions is low, and where awards can be adjusted ex post. Shavell and van
Ypersele (1998) argued that subsidies were likely the most effective means of calibrating rewards for innovations
according to social value. Some versions of this subsidy mechanism center on discounting the price to consumers who
value the patented product above its marginal cost. Kremer (1998) suggested an ingenious hybrid that transforms the
patent into a prize that is auctioned to the highest bidder in a process that reveals the underlying value of the invention;
the government could then engage in patent buyouts of high-valued discoveries and turn them over to the public domain.
Taylor (1995) offered a model where contestants compete for a pre-specified prize, by creating an invention that offers
the highest value to the sponsor of the tournament. The theoretical and practical problems with prizes are well
recognized, however, and they include challenges in assessing the value of the invention (such as those that arise from
asymmetric information, delays in the determination of value, and the difficulty of aggregating benefits which might
accrue from sequential innovations). Even if these potentially intractable issues were resolved, the credibility or
efficiency of bureaucrats in holding to contracted promises might be questioned, leading to a diminution in the expected
return from a prize.
dangerous” intellectual monopolies that should be eliminated (Boldrin and Levine 2008). Such

theoretical arguments cannot be fairly evaluated in light of the limited amount of actual evidence

regarding the functioning and consequences of prize systems.

       My project contributes to this ongoing debate by analyzing the record of patenting and prizes

for technological innovation in the United States from an historical perspective. I have assembled an

extensive panel data set of innovations that competed for annual prizes in the same location within

the United States during the course of the nineteenth century. These entries were submitted for prizes

in the fairs of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association of Boston, the San Francisco

Mechanics’ Institute, the American Institute of New York, the Ohio Mechanics’ Institute, as well as

the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia. By controlling for location, the analysis avoids the biases

introduced by variation in distances. The samples of approximately 17,000 innovations have been

matched in the manuscript censuses to obtain information on characteristics of the inventors,

including age, wealth and occupations. The inventions and inventors were further traced in patent

records, so it is possible to identify key features of inventors and inventions within and beyond the

patent system, and to gauge the extent to which patent institutions overlapped with other incentive

mechanisms.

       The current paper presents an assessment of the industrial fairs of the Massachusetts

Charitable Mechanic Association, from the first exhibition in 1837 through the twelfth in 1874. The

first section discusses the summary statistics, and the characteristics of the exhibitors and

innovations, including the patterns of inventive activity across industrial and sectoral categories.

The results from these exhibitions are compared to the patterns for patenting activity. The second

section examines data on the wealth and occupation of inventors at the exhibition in order to shed

further light on the relationship between patent systems and “the democratization of invention,”
relative to the alternative institution of prizes. The final section estimates the factors that influenced

the award of premiums for specific inventions, and compares these findings to the determinants of

patented inventions and those that were patentable. I conclude that premiums provide a useful way

of tracing innovation and commercialization that occurred outside the patent system. However, the

process through which they are awarded is more idiosyncratic than is true of patent institutions,

which has implications for their efficacy. This analysis of the design of prize mechanisms and their

effects suggests the need for caution before adopting policy recommendations to employ prizes to

promote the useful arts.


I. THE EXHIBITIONS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS CHARITABLE MECHANIC
ASSOCIATION

The innovations that were displayed at the triennial exhibitions of the Massachusetts Charitable

Mechanic Association (MMA) allow us to assess the patterns of technological innovation that

occurred outside the patent system during early industrialization. The MMA was founded in 1795

under the auspices of Paul Revere, to “promote the mechanic arts” and “encourage the ingenious” as

well as to offer charitable aid, pensions and death benefits to its members. Early on, in addition to

forming a “Committee of patentees and proprietors of patents,” the association received private

donations for the dedicated purpose of offering cash premiums for specific innovations, such as

improvements in barrel-making. Several of the members of the association strongly lobbied to

replace these ad hoc efforts with more extensive rewards for individual enterprise. They proposed

an annual exhibition where deserving inventors would be honoured, information about discoveries

would be diffused, and the public would be educated as well as entertained. Encouraged by success

of the exhibitions organized by the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, and the American Institute of

New York, the MMA held its first major exhibition in the fall of 1837.
          According to its organizers, the exhibits at the MMA industrial fairs were noted for offering

“the best specimens of American ingenuity and skill, in every branch of mechanics, rare and

valuable productions natural and artificial, labor-saving machines, implements of husbandry, and

models of machinery in all their variety, and for superior workmanship in all useful and ornamental

branches of the arts, including the beautiful and delicate handiwork of females in every department

of industry.”8 Gold medals were granted “only for very valuable and meritorious inventions or

improvements” and silver medals for “articles of superior workmanship, new applications of

material, and improvements in construction.”9 In addition, bronze medals were awarded for

“articles of superior workmanship, but of less importance or utility,” while diplomas were bestowed

on “all other articles deserving a favorable-mention testimonial.”10 Although the primary objective

was to showcase domestic enterprise and technological innovation, as in the case of most

expositions, it was also expected that the Association would recoup its outlays on the exhibition

from the admission fees that the public paid to view the convention. This dual objective necessarily

had implications for the selection of exhibits and their evaluation by the admission committees and

juries.

          The 1837 exhibition proved to be enormously popular and, what is more, profitable,

encouraging the organizers to hold them on a regular – roughly triennial -- basis.11 Figure 1 itemizes


8
   Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, p. 6, The Exhibition and Fair in the City of Boston, September 18,
1837. Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, 1837.
9
  This emphasis on the quality of workmanship rather than novelty was also a feature of international expositions such as
the Crystal Palace Exhibition of 1851 and the Paris Exhibition of 1867. Robert Palmieri (ed) Piano, an Encyclopedia (p.
131) notes that at the Paris Exhibition “jury members and visitors alike seem to have been more interested in the quality
of construction than novelty of invention.”
10
   Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, p. 6, The Exhibition and Fair in the City of Boson, September 18,
1837. Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, 1837. Judges comprised “gentlemen of character and standing, and as far as is
practicable of thorough technical knowledge of their respective subjects … who will in no case be competitors for
premiums.”
11
    Sample size in each exhibition year with percentage of total sample:
                                                 Year    #Obs Percent
                                                  1837       259     5.02
                                                  1839       283     5.49
the total receipts, expenditures and profits for each exhibition through 1890. The early exhibitions

were held in Faneuil and Quincy Halls in Boston, but by the end of the century the MMA had its

own dedicated hall on Huntington Avenue, conveniently close to major transportation arteries. At

the second exhibition in 1839, the two-week event attracted some 70,000 visitors, at a time when the

population of Boston was approximately 93,000 residents. This fair included 1196 exhibits, which

were awarded 25 gold medals, 133 silver medals, and 254 diplomas. By 1890, the halls displayed

the efforts of 1300 exhibitors, and the medals included 55 of gold, 175 of silver, and 144 of bronze,

along with 235 diplomas.12 The 1890 fair ran for two months, and total attendance was estimated at

500,000, about the same as the population of the town. At the conclusion of each fair, some of the

exhibits were sold to the public, but the organizers discouraged itinerant traders who specialized in

selling their wares through conventions like these, and attempted to ensure that the exhibition

represented the “latest and best in our industrial life, and not a bazaar for the sale of merchandise."13

        Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics from the first twelve exhibitions for the sample of

5158 exhibits that could be regarded as potentially possessing a minimal degree of technological

innovation. That is, the data exclude such entries as fine art paintings, busts, botanical specimens,

displays of published books, artistic or decorative designs, confectionery and simple baked goods.

Even with such filtering, the catalogued submissions were characterized by enormous variance in

                                                  1841     287      5.56
                                                  1844     315      6.11
                                                  1847     386      7.48
                                                  1850     376      7.29
                                                  1853     367      7.11
                                                 1856      546     10.58
                                                 1860      524     10.16
                                                 1865      561     10.87
                                                 1869      558     10.82
                                                 1874     697      13.5
12
   “Who has been ? or mayhap the question may be more properly put, Who has not been ? during the past month, to the
Exhibition of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association. When the number of visitors has grown to near a
score of thousand in a day, it may well leave us wondering who of the multitudes have been omitted.” The Repository,
vol 51, 1874, p.396.
13
    Annual Report, MMA, 1892, p. 11.
subject matter, substance, and technological input. One way of ensuring at least a modicum of

consistency in these dimensions is to limit the universe of items using a minimal criterion of

inventiveness or innovative input. Bronze medals and diplomas were cheap and plentiful, given for

exhibits that were relatively undistinguished, and rarely mentioned in subsequent records when

itemizing accolades that an inventor or invention had earned. Accordingly, the data set comprises all

exhibits for which medals were awarded, and a random sample of the items that were accorded

diplomas; amounting to 298 gold medals, 1739 silver medals, 1200 bronze medals, and 1916

diplomas.14 Although some of the participants traveled from New York, Philadelphia, and as far

away as Michigan and Ohio, the exhibition was primarily a display of technologies that were created

in Massachusetts and, to a lesser extent, New England. Thus, the population of goods exhibited at

these localized fairs is largely unaffected by the bias that would be created from disparate

transportation costs if variable distances were traveled.15

         The design features of this exposition were common to those of most industrial fairs, whether

national or international. MMA’s stated objective was to showcase the newest products and

mechanisms, and exhibitors were required to highlight improvements that they had made to former

goods, but it was still possible to be credited for inventions that had been created several years

before.16 In many respects, the MMA and other exhibitions were more analogous to European

patent systems based on registration, rather than the American system based on examination for


14
   The percent of items awarded any recognition varied from 34 percent to 50 percent, and increased over time.
However, the assessment of what this implies is not straightforward, because the organizers became more selective and
rejected more items over this period. Such undocumented variation is another reason for being more careful about the
conclusions that can be drawn from exhibition data.
15
   In later work, I will control for heterogeneity across regions by analyzing samples from the fairs of New York, Ohio
and San Francisco, as well as the records of the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia.
16
   These features are common to all exhibitions, including the Crystal Palace: “It has not been made a condition in the
admission of Articles to the Exhibition that they should be new . . . . It appears to the Commissioners that . . . fourteen to
fifteen years . . . would form a limit, beyond which the claims should not be admitted.” REPORTS BY THE JURIES,
OFFICIAL CATALOGUE OF THE GREAT EXHIBITION OF THE WORKS OF INDUSTRY OF ALL NATIONS (2d
corrected & improved ed. 1851, at xxv
novelty and patentable subject matter. First, in the absence of an examination for novelty, it is

difficult to ascertain whether an item comprises an invention (a new creation) or an innovation (first

commercial application). Second, patents were granted only to the “first and true inventor,”

whereas (as in all exhibitions, both national and international) exhibitors were not necessarily the

inventors but, according to the rules, agents and other noninventors were still eligible to receive the

credit for the innovation.17 Third, it is unclear whether annual records consisted of stocks drawn

from former inventions created several years prior to the date, or flows of the latest discoveries. The

way in which patent registration systems and exhibitions blur the line between invention and

innovation is illustrated by the prevalence of business enterprises at the fairs. Approximately one

third of the sample consisted of firms, whose primary objectives clearly included commercialization

and advertisement of merchandise that might have little to do with original or novel inventive

activity. If firms had the intention of showcasing their best new inventions, it might be expected

that they would tend to win a disproportionate amount of the prizes awarded. However, their share

of each category of medal was roughly proportionate to their share of all exhibits.

        It seems plausible that individual exhibitors had more mixed objectives than those of firms,

that likely ranged from the pursuit of financial gain to personal gratification. However, the average

age of the exhibitors (40.5) are a close match to the average age of patentees (38.5) and seem to

suggest the pursuit of more systematic goals than glory. Although the average number of

appearances in the roster of medals and diplomas typically comprised two exhibitions, for most

attendees recognition at the fair was a unique event, since two thirds of these exhibits were entered

by owners who only won a single award. By contrast, an average of 6.3 patents per person were


17
  At the Crystal Palace, “Juries will reward an important Machine without undertaking to pronounce whether the
novelties exhibited in its construction have been originated by the Exhibitor, or have been borrowed or adapted by him
from some one else.” REPORTS BY THE JURIES, OFFICIAL CATALOGUE OF THE GREAT EXHIBITION OF
THE WORKS OF INDUSTRY OF ALL NATIONS 309-14 (2d corrected & improved ed. 1851.
granted to patentees nationwide (sampled in 1860 and 1870) over the course of their career. This

suggests at least in part that the average inventor who patented his discoveries possessed a greater

degree of commitment to technological innovation than those who participated in exhibitions. This

is consistent with the finding that only a few of the exhibitors (such as Jordan Mott, Moses Farmer,

Jonas Chickering, Timothy and Lemuel Gilbert, and sewing machine entrepreneurs Wheeler and

Wilson) possessed technological “brand name recognition,” in comparison to the much larger roster

of relative unknowns.

         These data also bear on the question of whether biases in patent institutions explain the low

participation rates of women in the rosters of patented inventions.18 The organizers of the exhibition

actively encouraged women to submit entries, expecting that their “taste and delicacy” would

conduce to more visually appealing displays. Towards the end of the century special gallery space

was set aside for a “Woman’s Department,” with the intention of encouraging “only those lines of

woman’s industries of intrinsic value and practicable as a means of obtaining a livelihood. The

manufacture of certain classes of fancy articles – notably crazy quilts and elaborate trifles – was not

encouraged.” 19 Still, for the most part, women tended only to exhibit unique works of craft,

clothing, household and domestic enterprise. The category of “needle work, millinery goods,

artificial flowers” was dominated by women participants (including precocious children such as 11-

year old Miss Caroline Harris of Boston). Women accounted for approximately 10 percent of the

sample, a significantly higher proportion than the approximately 1 percent of patentees that were

female (Khan, 2000). The fraction that earned medals, however, was closer to the patenting rates:



18
   For a study of women who participated in the National Industrial Expositions of France, see Khan (2014), “Invisible
Women: Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Family Firms in 19 th Century France.”
19
   See the Report of the Exhibition, 1887, p. 16. “Another notable feature of the Exposition were the inventions of
women. It has been so often reiterated that women are not inventors, that many have fallen into the trap of believing the
statement. To all such, the eye evidence which they received at the Fair, that the inventive genius of women is rapidly
developing, will be a beneficial correction of their misapprehension” (The Repository, vol 51, 1874, p. 396).
only 25 (0.5 percent of the full sample) obtained a gold medal, 157 (3.1 percent) silver medals, and

86 (1.7 percent) received bronze medals. The gold medals to women exhibitors were awarded for

creations with low technological or market value, such as embroidery, wax flowers, decorative

chairs, bonnet trimmings, and shellwork.20 None of the women participants in the sample ever

obtained a patent, and few created items that were patentable. For instance, Mr and Mrs A. Brooks

of South Scituate, Massachusetts presented samples of silk from cocoons that she raised (not

patentable), spun into thread using a machine that he invented (patentable subject matter). Hence,

the sources of the gender-bias of technological innovation seem to have been more broadly-based

and likely did not owe to specific biases in the patent and prize systems.



II. PATENTS AND PATENTABILITY AT THE EXHIBITIONS



Samuel Sidney posed the question in 1862, “Whether . . . manufacturing inventions [can be]

stimulated, by invitations to compete for substantial or honorary awards?”21 A central question for

empirical analyses of technological change is how to gauge the extent to which inventive activity

and innovation occur outside the patent system. The American patent system was internationally

recognized as the most favourable towards inventors, and harmonization of patent laws converged

towards the American model. After 1836, technically trained employees of the Patent Office

conducted an examination of patent applications to ensure that inventions were novel. Patents were

granted only to the first and true inventor, and even employers could not obtain property rights for

20
   The Maryland Institute for the Promotion of Mechanic Arts organized an exhibition in 1850 which rewarded creativity
by gender: they presented men with gold and silver medals, whereas women received butter knives, ladles, teaspoons,
pencils and thimbles.
21
   Samuel Sidney, On the Effect of Prizes on Manufacturers, 10 J. SOC’Y ARTS 374, 374, (1862). Sidney was trained as
a lawyer, and was also an Assistant Commissioner of the Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851. His careful
empirical investigations over ten years led to his concluding that prizes generally tended to be inefficient, and
improvements in market demand and competition offered the most effective inducements for inventive activity. The
prize system merely encouraged “a long list of machines which, for practical purposes, are no better than toys.”
the work that their workers created except through assignment. Patentees were required to fully

disclose their contribution to the art, and to distinguish between their own efforts and those of prior

inventors. Undue delay in applying for a patent could result in the decision that the idea had been

ceded to the public domain. Patentees were not only prompt in applying for protection for ideas they

had reduced to practical use, they even filed caveats notifying the Patent Office of the progress of

their invention. As a result of such doctrines, it was unlikely that an intended patentee would exhibit

his invention at a public exhibition prior to filing the patent; instead, patent applications certainly

would have been submitted beforehand.22

         The matching of exhibits to patents is straightforward for individual inventors whose names

were traceable, but the rule that firms could not obtain patent rights makes it impossible to estimate

their patent portfolios except in cases where the patent was assigned at the time of issue. Thus,

although 845 or 16.4 percent of the exhibits were traced in the patent records, the denominator

should be adjusted to take into account the number of exhibits attributed to firms. When firms are

omitted from the base, a conservative estimate is that at least 24 percent of the exhibits were

patented, and this figure increased over time.23 The ‘exhibitor is patentee’ variable in Table 1

reports the number of exhibits whose exhibitors obtained at least one patent at some point in their

career, even if the specific item at the fair was not patented. Again, the representation of patentees is

higher in the second period, and at least 29.5 percent of the exhibits were credited to patentees (43.4

percent if adjustments are made for firms). These data suggest that a considerable amount of




22
   In the matching of patents and exhibits, exact wording of exhibits and patent descriptions were deemed to be for the
same invention only if the patent had been awarded in the same 12-month period as the exhibition. As a result of delays
between the period of filing and grant, which ranged from a few months to a little over a year, it was possible for an
object for which a patent application had already been filed to be exhibited prior to the official date recorded in the
patent grant.
23
   Firms were more likely to own larger amounts of patents than individual exhibitors, so the omission of firms from the
calculations of the propensity to patent biases estimates downward.
creativity at invention of various sorts was indeed occurring outside the patent system, and it is

interesting to speculate why such items were not patented.

           Rather than indicating a rejection of the patent option, a straightforward explanation is that

many exhibits were not eligible to be considered for a patent, either because the degree of novelty or

improvement was minimal or because the innovation fell outside the subject matter that could be

patented. Although such innovations could have been commercially valuable, and did indeed garner

medals, it is useful to distinguish between exhibits that were eligible for patents and those that were

not. It is impossible to determine the amount of novel inventive capital vested in unpatented

exhibits; but the patentability of each item in terms of subject matter can be identified. For instance,

improvements in rag rugs were not patentable, neither were items that just featured higher quality

workmanship, nor mere changes in appearance or form (decorative flourishes, abnormal size, or

silver plating used in place of wood). A total of 47.2 percent of the sample comprised patentable

subject matter, which indicates that at least 34.7 percent (845 patents out of 2436 patentable

exhibits) of eligible items were covered by patent protection. A closer assessment of the

unpatentable items reveals that a large fraction comprised final or consumer goods, a finding that

supports the conventional view that patents may be a better measure of inputs than of output.

           The exhibits were categorized by sector and industry according to the final use of the

innovation. In the period between 1790 and 1850, 22.3 percent of national patents were in

agriculture, 16.7 percent in construction, 40.1 percent in manufacturing, 12.8 percent in

transportation, and 8 percent in the miscellaneous category.24 The majority of the entries at the

MMA fairs fall into the manufacturing category, unlike the relatively more even sectoral dispersion

of patents. Thus, although the exhibition data reveal higher rates of innovation in the manufacturing

sector than the patent records show, patent protection extended to a wider range of creative activities
24
     Khan (2005), p. 63.
than those at the MMA. However, previous studies of patenting have found that the propensity to

patent and other dimensions of inventive activity vary according to narrower classifications, so the

exhibits were also allocated to twelve more detailed industrial categories.

           Table 2 presents the industrial distribution of the exhibits, their patentability, and those that

were actually patented. The table also includes the distribution by industry of the medals and

diplomas awarded. Heat and power-related innovations (ranges, furnaces, lamps, electrical goods

and the like) accounted for 9.7 percent of the entire sample, but 19.1 percent of the patentable and

18.6 percent of patented entries. By way of contrast, apparel comprised 6.2 percent of all

innovations, but only 1.4 percent of those that were patentable, and still less of those that were

patented. Chi-square tests confirm that the patentable exhibits, as well as those that were patented,

varied significantly across industrial category. However, the shares of the total number of prizes

awarded comprised 5.8 percent of gold medals, 33.8 percent of silver, and 23.3 percent of all bronze

medals, and there is little variation in these allocations across industries. Transportation accounted

for 6 percent of all exhibits, and garnered an equivalent proportion of each category of award. In

other words, the medals in each industry were proportional across all the different industrial lines, a

conclusion that is supported by the finding that statistical tests of independence are not significant.25

This lack of variation across such disparate technologies raises the possibility that the award of

medals was largely unrelated to the quality of inventive input, and may simply have been

apportioned on a quota basis to each class on display.



III. OCCUPATIONS AND WEALTH OF EXHIBITORS

Prior research supports the notion that patent institutions in the United States promoted a process of

market-oriented democratization (Khan and Sokoloff 1990, Khan 2005). In many instances, new
25
     This finding is common to the results for all other expositions that I have examined.
discoveries are difficult to finance because of asymmetries in information and other capital market

imperfections, giving an advantage to wealthier or more well-connected inventors, who might be

better able to fund marketing and production of their discoveries and innovations themselves.

However, talented but impecunious nineteenth-century inventors could specialize in their area of

expertise, and use the market for patents to sell their property and appropriate the benefits from their

endeavours through these means. A system that offers greater accolades to elites has different

implications for economic prospects than one that promises rewards will accrue to the most

productive, so it is worth investigating the extent to which such patterns characterized technological

advances throughout the United States, irrespective of institutional context.

       An assessment of the occupations of patentees was consistent with the notion of open access

and a broad distribution in the population of those who made significant contributions to

productivity growth. During the antebellum period, the majority of patentees comprised artisans

(approximately one third) and manufacturers (21 percent), whereas the elite social class of

merchants, professionals and white collar workers decreased over time. The significance of more

technically-qualified machinists and engineers grew substantially over this period, but such skills

were hardly necessary for even important discoveries, as the work on the great inventors reveals.

The majority of early patentees were quite unspecialized, and the increase in inventive activity that

Sokoloff (1988) identified was generated by an influx of individuals with little prior experience at

technological innovation in the form of patents. The most significant inventions of the time, such as

Thomas Blanchard’s lathe or Cyrus McCormick’s reaper, were typically based on commonly

available information applied to a bottleneck or specific practical problem.

       Although the mandate of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association was to further

the standing of innovative workers, Figure 2 shows that participants in the fairs were drawn from
more prominent occupations than the general population of patentees.26 Indeed, even when the

estimates for the MMA data exclude the category of firms from the analysis, exhibitors were

significantly less likely to be artisans and ordinary labourers (in the ‘other’ category) than were

patentees,. The representation of artisans at the exhibitions also declined over time: among those

who participated at the fairs before 1855, 24.1 percent were artisans, compared to 18.5 percent after

this period. It was, of course, possible that the innovations firms displayed were created by artisans

in their employment. However, the point is that, when appropriating returns on their own account,

inventors without social backing were more likely to turn to the patent system. At the same time, it

is true that occupational class does not directly translate into economic or social status or influence,

as witnessed by the MMA’s founder, Paul Revere. For this, despite the flaws in the census surveys,

we turn to the records on wealth-holding in the federal population censuses of 1850, 1860 and 1870.

        The information on wealth allows us to more directly assess the economic status of exhibitors

relative to patentee in general.27 Lee Soltow estimated that the white male population owned an

average of $2231 and $2141 in real estate in 1860 and 1870 respectively, and an average of $1549

and $966 in personal property over the same period. He found it to be “rather shocking” that 57

percent of white men in 1860 possessed no real estate wealth, and 43 percent owned no personal

estate, a pattern that was maintained in 1870.28 My own estimates indicate that, on the eve of the

outbreak of war, poor patentees were on average rather like the general population. Over a half of

all such inventors held no real estate, and over a third recorded no personal wealth. Poor inventors

26
   The diplomas of the exhibition included “a procession of artisans” who were presenting their inventions as candidates
for prizes (see appendix).
27
   The 1850 census measures real estate wealth, whereas the 1860 and 1870 censuses included information on real estate
wealth, exclusive of “liens or encumbrances,” as well as personal estates comprising all personal property “consist of
what it may.” These entries are not entirely accurate, because of missing values, left-censoring of observations around
values of $100, and “clumping” around popular figures such as round hundreds. However, they do suffice to give a
general sense of the material standing of the two groups.
28
   See Soltow, Lee, Men and Wealth in the United States, 1850-1870, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975, p. 60.
“Patterns [between 1860 and 1870]… were remarkably stable. The most striking finding was that this country harbored
vast proportions of populations with no wealth” (p. 61).
were somewhat more likely to assign their inventions so it is not surprising that, unlike those with

lower human capital in the general population, many of these inventors had acquired assets within

the following decade. Thus, patentees in general experienced greater economic mobility than the

general population between 1860 and 1870. The gains over this period in terms of both personal and

real wealth were especially evident for patentees at the higher end of the wealth distribution.

        The data for the three decades with census information for wealth show that the participants

in the Massachusetts exhibitions were substantially wealthier than the general population. Recall

that these data do not include information on corporations and companies whose owners could not

be identified, which biases the estimates of property-holding downward. Forty six percent of the

exhibitors owned no real estate, and 32 percent had no personal property. Nevertheless, Figure 3

illustrates how the assets of the exhibitors significantly exceeded the holdings of the sample of

general patentees. In 1860 the MMA sample owned average personal property of almost twice that

of patentees in general, and more than double their average real estate holdings. A number of these

individuals were exceptionally wealthy. Edward H. Ashcroft, who possessed $150,000 in real estate

and $20,000 in personal property in 1870, was the inventor of 12 technically and commercially

notable steam engine patents, which are still cited in patents today.29 Iron-founder Amos Chafee

Barstow (1813-1894), whose 1860 portfolio included $288, 500 in real estate and $151, 500 in

personal goods, employed four servants in his home. Barstow was a stove manufacturer and

proprietor of the Barstow Stove Company on Point Street in Providence, Rhode Island, and he was

appointed as mayor of the city in 1852 and Speaker of the House in 1870. A capable inventor who

specialized in cooking appliances, he was the patentee of some eight inventions. The improvement




29
  For further details, see David, Barry Lee, The Antique American Steam Gauge: A Collector's Guide. Mendham, N.J.:
Astragal Press, 2003.
in stoves that he patented in 1873 was awarded the Grand Medal of Merit at the 1873 Vienna

World's fair, but at the MMA of 1874 this innovation only received a bronze medal.



IV. REGRESSIONS: DETERMINANTS OF INVENTION AND INNOVATION

What were the factors that influenced patenting and prizes? Khan (2011) compared the experience

of great inventors in Britain and the United States between 1750 and 1930, in terms of patent grants

and prizes for technological achievement. The award of prizes appeared more susceptible to

misallocation, but the results varied by institutional context. As in the case of its patent institutions,

the award of prizes to British great inventors primarily depended on their socioeconomic background

rather than on their productivity, elite affiliations, and on their proximity to the capital city. The

analysis indicated that the distribution of prizes tended to be less systematic and more random than

that of patents. Thus, if inventors respond to expected benefits, the results for the great inventors

imply that prizes may offer fewer incentives for investments in inventive activity. Nevertheless,

more research is needed to ascertain whether such results owe to British institutions in general, or

whether those features are typical of administered reward systems.

       Table 3 presents regressions of the determinants of exhibits that were patentable and those

that were patented, both of which increased over time as a proportion of total exhibits. The

specifications that control for industry and occupation explain 35 percent of the variation in

patentability, and 25 percent of the variation in the patenting of exhibits. Women’s entries were

significantly less likely to patentable or patented. Multiple exhibitors were responsible for more

patentable exhibits, but there is no difference in their propensity to patent, relative to other

innovators. However, multiple patentees (those with more than two patents over the course of their

career) were more likely to obtain patent protection for their exhibits at the MMA fair. As the
simple statistics suggested, wealthier individuals did not possess any particular advantages in the

realm of patenting. Machinists, who tended to be more technically qualified than other inventors,

were associated with higher levels of patentability and patenting of their exhibits, but other classes of

inventors were relatively similar in terms of their patenting behaviour. Significant differences

existed across industries in terms of the probability that exhibits were patentable or patented,

especially for the heat, power and communications inventions and for manufacturing machines. The

overall conclusion from these results is that the profiles of patentee-exhibitors at the MMA were not

identical to those of patentees in general but, at the same time, they differed even further from the

findings for the population of exhibitors.

       Table 4 examines the factors that influenced whether an exhibit received a gold or silver

medal at the exhibitions of the Massachusetts Mechanic Association. Regressions of gold medals

alone had zero explanatory power, and the regressions reported here indicate that most of the

variation in the silver or gold awards also remains unexplained. Amidst this welter of null results,

two findings stand out. The first is that women are less likely to receive the highest accolades at the

exhibitions. The second is striking: regardless of the specification, exhibitors with greater personal

wealth experience a greater probability of winning gold and silver medals. The size of the

coefficient is rather small, but there is also a lot of noise in the wealth measure which makes it

difficult to gauge the precise magnitude of the effect. Moreover, the regression is consistent with the

simple statistics, and with the biographical information of the participants in the fairs. However, the

mechanism through which wealthier exhibitors gained an edge over their competition is unclear.

The finding could be due to greater expenditures on their presentation at the fairs, or owe to a

noncausal correlation whereby more innovative and deserving entrepreneurs also tended to be richer.
         Such variables as occupation and industrial classification have little influence on the award

of the medals. We might expect that machinists would be responsible for more technologically

advanced discoveries, but in fact they are less likely to receive medals (although the result is not

significant) relative to manufacturers (the excluded occupation). Patent assignments are a close

proxy for commercially successful inventions, but they are similarly unrelated to the likelihood of a

medal. Urbanization is also associated with higher productivity at invention, but adding cities

yields no additional explanatory power. As the summary statistics showed, medals were awarded

uniformly across technology and industry classes. Controlling for industry adds virtually nothing to

the explanatory power of the estimated equation. Since it is quite unlikely that the apparel and

furniture industries were as technologically creative as areas such as heat, power and

communications or transportation, it seems plausible that the award of medals reflected factors other

than inventiveness, productivity or technological innovation.

         Isaac W. Lamb, who obtained his first patent at age 19, contributed several important

patented improvements which are still incorporated in modern knitting machines. At the Paris

World’s Fair of 1867 his invention was awarded the silver medal, and he later established knitting

factories in Europe that employed his internationally patented technology. However, at the 1869

exhibition of the MMA, his knitting machine only received a bronze medal. On the other hand, John

O’ Neil of Xenia Ohio applied for patented protection for a churn in 1852, but the application was

rejected.30 Nevertheless, a diploma was given for the churn he exhibited at the MMA in 1853. The

judges’ report on the New York Safety Steam Power Co.’s vertical engines states “we know of no

distinctive feature in this engine that calls for particular mention,” but they nevertheless awarded the


30
  See the disclaimer in John K. Mickey’s patent grant of February 1861: “I am aware that the paddles in the case have
been arranged obliquely in combination with vertical paddles on theshaft and also that in the case of John O’Neil’s
rejection of June 24, 1852 the stationary and rotating paddles are both made tapering in two directions, and are solid, or
without any perforations and I disclaim any such mode of construction.”
engine a diploma in the 1874 exhibition.31 The lack of systematic patterns in the regressions, in

tandem with numerous such examples, raises questions about how, and by whom, prizes were

awarded.

        Judges of the exhibits included “gentlemen of character and standing, and as far as is

practicable of thorough technical knowledge of their respective subjects … who will in no case be

competitors for premiums.”32 Although they did not compete in the particular exhibition for which

they were appointed as judges, many of the judges and trustees of the MMA did participate in

exhibitions in other years, so there was a repeated-game element that had the potential for

unconscious or explicit bias in the awards. But quite apart from such concerns, there is reason to

doubt that medals were an effective measure of technological creativity, because of the heterogeneity

in the criteria for their award. The managers of the 1874 exhibition pointed to “the necessity of an

uniform standard of merit for rewards should prizes continue to be given… In the past, each set of

Judges has fixed its own standard of awards, and as a consequence some have been rigidly exacting

in the qualities of usefulness and originality, while others have been profuse and generous, touched

by sympathy or good-fellowship; others, again, have asked the question whether their Department

was receiving its full share of the higher awards, as though the bestowal, not the merit, was the

consideration influencing them.”33 The regression results presented here are consistent with the

notion that “the bestowal, not the merit,” was indeed the consideration. The committee members

also pointed out that, despite the longstanding practice of offering premiums, it was becoming more

common elsewhere for exhibitions to incorporate “mechanical and inventive results without



31
   Diplomas also went to Charles Wardwell’s Wood Planing Machines and Blind Slat Planer, although “there is nothing
new or novel in their construction,” and to George Cavanagh’s machines which were “neatly made” but “we think it
would be very liable to get out of order.”
32
   Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, p. 6, The Exhibition and Fair in the City of Boson, September 18,
1837. Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, 1837.
33
   Report of the MMA Exhibition, 1874, p. vii.
awards.” Such criticisms were still being offered later on, in addition to repeated calls for “a

methodical, systematic, and intelligent basis,” for the awards.34



CONCLUSIONS

The question of the appropriate institutions to promote technological change and economic progress

has always generated a great deal of controversy. In the nineteenth century, calls for the repeal of

patent systems intensified, and its proponents influenced the Netherlands to abolish patents in 1869.

The European leaders such as Britain and France employed prizes and alternative policies to induce

and reward inventive activity, but such mechanisms were never popular in the United States at the

national level. The United States was the universally-acknowledged global leader in setting rules

and standards that favoured patentees, and in lobbying for other nations to increase their patent

protection. U. S. patent rights were affordable, their scope of protection extended over the entire

country, procedures for the application and grant of patents were so straight-forward that inventors

had no need for the assistance of professional attorneys to navigate the process, and such property

rights were well-enforced by the legal system. The American patent system was market-oriented,

and offered all classes of inventors the opportunity to benefit from their technological creativity.

         By contrast, the regular award of prizes occurred at the local level, as private associations

mobilized inventors and innovators in industrial fairs in different cities. The major annual

exhibitions in the Northeast were those organized by the American Institute of New York City, the

Franklin Institute of Philadelphia, and the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association of



34
  Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, Annals of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association,
1795-1892, Boston: Rockwell and Churchill, 1892, p. 327: “If any radical change is needed in connection with our
exhibitions, I think it should be in the method of bestowing the medals. Each committee is now almost the sole judges of
awards. They establish their own standard of excellence for goods, and bestow medals accordingly. Some are
conservative in their estimate of merit, while others are found to be generous. The result is a great disparity in the
significance of the award.”
Boston. The organizers and participants at these conventions would have been appalled at the claim

that the patent system should be abolished, and they proudly advertised patented items. However,

the MMA exhibits illustrate that some degree of invention was indeed occurring outside the patent

system, and these industrial fairs were certainly significant for the commercialization of new

technologies, both patented and unpatented.

        The executives at all industrial fairs argued that their endeavours provided incentives for

ingenious individuals to turn their attention to invention. Whether the prizes that such institutions

awarded were indeed effective in encouraging future creativity and inventive activity is difficult, if

not impossible, to determine. Many of the items were entered into competition at multiple

exhibitions, both here and abroad, so the effect of any one event is debatable. More important,

procedures through which the prizes were determined seem to have been idiosyncratic and difficult

to predict. The random nature of judging is a theme that recurs in numerous contexts both within

and beyond the MMA expositions.35 Competitors who were financially better off may have had an

advantage in gaining the attention of the judges, regardless of the technological merits of their

contributions. Decentralized judging encouraged a lack of uniformity in standards, and also led to

the award of premiums that did not necessarily reflect the same degree of inventive capital across

technology classes. By contrast, the centralization and consistency of patent grants in the United

States were derived from their administration at the federal level, and from an examination system

that was based on predetermined standards that were applied by technically trained professional

examiners. If potential inventors responded rationally to net expected benefits, then prize systems



35
   For a contemporary assessment, see “Awards at Exhibitions” in the Electrical Review of August 22, 1885, p. 172:
“The cynic will say that medals, like kissing, go pretty much by favour…. Gold medals are limited in number; and while
two hundred firms may deserve them, two hundred cannot receive them. .. while a gold medal indicates the reputation of
a firm, the lack of a gold medal does not necessarily indicate an inferior reputation… The majority of gold medals call
for no comment, but when we come to the silver medals the process of selection seems more invidious. It is very
difficult to see why certain names should be selected as being more worthy than some of those in the “bronze” class.”
such as the MMA’s were arguably less successful in achieving the Constitution’s mandate to

“promote the progress of science and useful arts.”
                                 Figure 1




         Mass. Mechanic Association Exhibition Income, 1837-1890
120000

100000

80000

60000

40000

20000

    0
       ar
      37
      39
      41
      44
      47
      50
      53
      56
      60
      65
      69
      74
      78
      81
      84
      87
    ye
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18
    18


-20000

                      Revenues        Expenses        Profits




Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, Annals of the Massachusetts
Charitable Mechanics Association, 1795-1892, Boston: Rockwell and Churchill,
1892.
Figure 2: Occupational Distributions of Patentees and MMA Participants, 1835-1875



                Occupations for Patentees and Exhibitors at MMA,
                               Percent, 1835-1850
35

30

25

20
15
10

 5
 0
      machinist       merchant         artisan          mfr            other

                                  Patentees      MMA




                Occupations for Patentees and Exhibitors at MMA,
                               Percent, 1855-1875
35

30
25

20
15

10
5

0
      machinist       merchant         artisan          mfr            other

                           Patentees 55-75       MMA 55-75
                                       Figure 3




          Real and Personal Wealth of Patentees and MMA
                     Exhibitors, 1860 and 1870
         10000

           8000

           6000

           4000

           2000

               0
                                1860                              1870
Real-Pat                        4158                               5710
Real-MMA                        7926                               7190
Personal-Pat                    1948                               4316
Personal-MMA                    5787                               7335




Notes and Sources:

The MMA sample was matched with the manuscript census that was closest to the date of
the exhibition. This resulted in 404 matches for 1860 and 329 matches for 1870, over which
these averages for real estate and personal wealth were estimated. Missing values are treated as zero.
Wealth is expressed in terms of real $1860 dollars. The sample of ordinary patentees in 1860 and
1870 is described in Khan, “Creative Destruction.:
    TABLE 1: Summary Statistics for Sample of Exhibits at Massachusetts Mechanics Association Fair, 1837-1874

                                             BEFORE 1855                AFTER 1855                  TOTAL

                                             N        %                 N         %                 N        %
AWARDS
Gold Medal                                   146      6.4               152       5.3               298      5.8
Silver Medal                                 940      41.4              799       27.7              1739     33.8
Bronze Medal                                 213      9.4               986       34.2              1200     23.3
Diplomas                                     973      42.8              943       32.7              1916     33.2
Total Awards                                 2273     100               2880      100               5153     100

LOCATION
Massachusetts                                1950     85.8              2592      89.8              4542     88.0
Other New England                            157      6.9               154       5.3               311      6.0
Mid-Atlantic                                 150      6.6               124       4.3               274      5.3
Other                                        16       0.7               16        0.6               32       0.5

EXHIBITORS
Women                                        281      12.4              214       7.4               495      9.6
Companies                                    572      25.1              1082      37.5              1654     32.1
Age, mean and (s.d.)                         37.1     (10.3)            42.7      (11.3)            40.5     (11.3)
Participation in fairs, mean and (s.d.)      2.0      (2.1)             1.9       (2.2)             2.0      (2.1)

OCCUPATION of individual (nonfirm) exhibitors (1635 matches with ms. Census)
Artisan                                156       24.1            183     18.5                       339      20.7
Machinist/ engineer/Inventor           42        6.5             139     14.1                       181      11.1
Manufacturer                           200       30.9            301     30.5                       501      30.6
Merchant/professional/wh.collar        197       30.4            295     29.9                       492      30.1
Other                                  53        8.2             69      7.0                        122      7.5

PATENTING
Patentable subject matter                    801      35.3              1635      56.7              2436     47.2
Exhibitor is patentee                        456      20.0              1065      36.9              1521     29.5
Patent obtained for exhibit                  212      9.3               633       21.9              845      16.4
Career patents, mean and (s.d.)              1.4      (16.2)            3.1       (13.0)            2.4      (14.5)

SECTORS
Agriculture                                  62       2.7               117       4.1               179      3.5
Construction                                 115      5.1               214       7.4               329      6.4
Manufacturing                                1681     74.0              1948      67.5              3629     70.4
Transportation                               187      8.2               404       14.0              591      11.5
Other                                        227      10.0              203       7.0               430      8.3


Notes and Sources: Reports of Exhibitions of MMA, 1837-1874; U.S. Patent Records 1790-2009; Manuscript censuses
(federal), 1850-1880. Patentable subject matter: exhibits that fall into classes that could be patented, as gauged from a
subject search of the patent records; it does not imply that the invention would have qualified for the grant of a patent,
which would require additional scrutiny for novelty. Exhibitor is a patentee refers to those who had ever attained a
patent. Career patents: total patents that the patentee obtained over his lifetime.
TABLE 2: Industry distribution of Exhibits at Massachusetts Mechanics Association Fair, 1837-1874
_____________________________________________________________________________________________

INDUSTRY                  Total      Patentable     Patents        Gold           Silver   Bronze
                                                                   Medal          Medal    Medal

Agriculture (n)           358        200            73             20             129               81
Col %                     6.9        8.2            8.6            6.7            7.4               6.8
Row %                                55.6           20.4           5.6            36.1              22.7

Apparel (n)               319        33             6              18             95                66
Col %                     6.2        1.4            0.7            6.0            5.5               7.3
Row %                                10.3           1.9            5.7            29.9              20.8

Arts (n)                  609        167            40             39             95                66
Col %                     11.8       6.9            4.7            13.1           12.4              11.3
Row %                                27.4           6.7            6.4            35.5              22.2

Construction (n)          329        185            79             19             113               79
Col %                     6.4        7.6            9.4            6.4            6.5               6.6
Row %                                56.2           23.9           5.8            34.2              23.9

Furniture (n)             305        75             38             11             95                73
Col %                     5.9        3.1            4.5            3.7            5.5               6.1
Row %                                24.6           12.5           3.6            31.2              23.9

Heat & Power (n)          499        464            157            33             150               143
Col %                     9.7        19.1           18.6           11.1           8.6               11.9
Row %                                93.0           31.5           6.6            30.1              28.7

Manf. Machines (n)        493        441            125            36             161               133
Col %                     9.6        18.1           14.8           12.1           9.3               11.1
Row %                                89.5           25.4           7.3            32.8              27.1

Manf. Goods (n)           898        350            144            52             307               179
Col %                     17.4       14.4           17.0           17.5           17.7              14.9
Row %                                39.0           16.0           5.8            34.2              19.9

Printing & Publish. (n)   295        71             22             12             100               69
Col %                     5.7        2.9            2.6            4.0            5.8               5.8
Row %                                24.1           7.5            4.1            33.9              23.4

Scientific (n)            132        51             17             9              41                26
Col %                     2.6        2.1            2.0            3.0            2.4               2.2
Row %                                38.6           12.9           6.9            31.3              19.9

Textiles (n)              620        185            71             31             226               140
Col %                     12.0       7.6            8.4            10.4           13.0              11.7
Row %                                29.8           11.5           5.0            36.5              22.6

Transportation (n)        300        214            73             18             106               76
Col %                     5.8        8.8            8.6            6.0            6.1               6.3
Row %                                71.3           24.3           6.0            35.3              25.3
Total   (n)               5157             2436              1521             298               1739
        1200
%                           100                47.2           29.5              5.8               33.8            23.3
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
Notes and Sources: See Table 1. The percentages in the table include the undisplayed calculations for 1915 diplomas,
given to 37 percent of the exhibits in the dataset.
                                                 Table 3
                     OLS Regressions: Determinants of Patenting of Exhibits at the MMA
_____________________________________________________________________________________


                             Pr that Exhibit is Patentable   Pr that Exhibit is Patented
                             (1)                (2)          (3)                (4)


Intercept                    0.47              0.79          0.17              0.25
                             (15.87)         (18.68)         (6.68)            (6.33)
TIME DUMMIES
1850s                         0.14              0.01          0.06              0.06
                             (0.40)            (0.26)        (2.20)            (2.05)
1860s                         0.25              0.15          0.15              0.12
                             (7.99)            (5.31)        (5.77)            (4.34)
1870s                         0.16              0.10          0.16              0.18
                             (3.98)            (2.77)        (4.74)            (4.16)
GENDER                       -0.53             -0.24         -0.23             -0.15
                             (8.59)            (4.02)        (4.45)            (2.68)

BOSTON                       -0.16             -0.09         -0.10             -0.07
                             (6.84)            (4.08)        (5.02)            (3.64)
MULTIPLE EXHIBITOR           0.04              0.03          0.00              0.00
                             (3.83)            (3.08)        (0.08)            (0.42)
REAL WEALTH                  -0.00             -0.00          0.00             -0.00
                             (0.09)            (0.50)        (1.55)            (0.97)
PERSONAL WEALTH              0.00              0.00          -0.002            -0.001
                             (0.66)            (0.72)        (3.06)            (2.16)
CAREER PATENTS                                               0.03              0.02
                                                             (16.33)           (13.77)
OCCUPATION
Artisan                                        -0.01                           -0.00
                                               (0.25)                          (0.11)
Machinist                                      0.21                             0.13
                                               (5.89)                          (3.58)
Other                                          -0.03                            0.01
                                               (0.61)                          (0.23)
Merchant                                       -0.02                           0.01
                                               (0.72)                          (0.38)

INDUSTRY
Agriculture                                    -0.21                           -0.04
                                               (4.38)                          (0.83)
Apparel                                        -0.60                           -0.16
                                               (10.38)                         (2.95)
Arts                                           -0.69                           -0.00
                                               (14.55)                         (0.11)
Construction                                   -0.21                           -0.01
                                               (4.49)                          (0.23)
Furniture                                      -0.48                           -0.01
                                               (9.47)                          (1.72)
                                            Table 3 (Cont’d)
                     OLS Regressions: Determinants of Patenting of Exhibits at the MMA
_____________________________________________________________________________________

                                   (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)

Heat, Power                                       0.01                              -0.03
& Communicns                                      (0.25)                            (0.61)
Manuf. Products                                   -0.38                             -0.11
                                                  (9.61)                            (2.87)
Printing                                          -0.64                             -0.25
                                                  (12.34)                           (5.08)
Science & Medicine                                -0.45                             -0.22
                                                  (7.25)                            (3.73)
Textiles                                          -0.44                             -0.15
                                                  (9.44)                            (3.41)
Transportation                                    -0.12                             -0.01
                                                  (2.34)                            (0.21)
Other                                             -0.10                             -0.15
                                                  (1.46)                            (2.17)


                         N=1640                   N=1640           N=1640           N=1640
                         R2=0.12                  R2=0.35          R2=0.21          R2=0.25
                         F=27.31                  F=36.74          F=46.74          F=21.4



______________________________________________________________________________________

Notes and Sources:

The excluded variables are the 1840s, manufacturers, and machinery in the manufacturing sector. All exhibits
are allocated to industry of final use. The dummy variable for Boston represents city of residence, multiple
exhibitors submitted in more than one exhibition, and gender has a value of 1 if female. Patents and
assignments refer to the patenting of the specific invention at the exhibition, and the assignment at issue of the
patent for that exhibit. Occupations and wealth were determined from the federal manuscript censuses.
                                                 Table 4
                    OLS Regressions: Determinants of probability of a gold or silver medal
_____________________________________________________________________________________

                              (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)


Intercept                     0.52           0.52            0.52           0.50
                              (41.0)         (16.88)         (14.35)        (9.83)
TIME DUMMIES
1850s                         -0.14          -0.19           -0.20          -0.20
                              (7.54)         (5.74)          (5.75)         (5.77)
1860s                         -0.20          -0.22           -0.22          -0.21
                              (11.68)        (6.76)          (6.68)         (6.37)
1870s                         -0.16          -0.19           -0.19          -0.18
                              (7.34)         (4.62)          (4.57)         (4.45)
GENDER                        -0.06          -0.10           -0.10          -0.06
                              (2.43)         (1.63)          (1.46)         (0.81)
PATENT FOR EXHIBIT                           0.01            0.02           0.02
                                             (0.39)          (0.18)         (0.64)

ASSIGNED PATENT                              0.04            0.05           0.04
                                             (0.72)          (0.75)         (0.68)
BOSTON                                       0.02            0.02           0.03
                                             (0.90)          (0.80)         (1.07)
MULTIPLE EXHIBITOR                           0.00            0.00           0.00
                                             (0.21)          (0.18)         (0.31)
REAL WEALTH                                  -0.00           -0.00          -0.00
                                             (1.21)          (1.19)         (1.41)
PERSONAL WEALTH                              0.001           0.001          0.002
                                             (2.36)          (2.30)         (2.64)
OCCUPATION
Artisan                                                      0.01           0.01
                                                             (0.19)         (0.15)
Machinist                                                    -0.05          -0.04
                                                             (1.07)         (0.87)
Other                                                        -0.01          -0.02
                                                             (0.26)         (0.35)
Merchant                                                     0.01           0.01
                                                             (0.22)         (0.35)
INDUSTRY
Agriculture                                                                 0.07
                                                                            (1.19)
Apparel                                                                     -0.07
                                                                            (1.01)
Arts                                                                        0.02
                                                                            (0.41)
Construction                                                                0.05
                                                                            (0.93)
Furniture                                                                   0.01
                                                                            (0.22)
Heat, Power                                                                 -0.10
& Communicns                                                                (1.93)
Manuf. Products                                                             0.07
                                                                            (1.41)
                                            Table 4 (Cont’d)
                    OLS Regressions: Determinants of probability of a gold or silver medal
_____________________________________________________________________________________

                                                (1)             (2)             (3)

Printing                                                                        -0.02
                                                                                (0.31)
Science & Medicine                                                              0.03
                                                                                (0.33)
Textiles                                                                        0.04
                                                                                (0.66)
Transportation                                                                  0.06
                                                                                (1.10)
Other                                                                           0.00
                                                                                (0.00)


                        N=1640                  N=1640          N=1640          N=1640
                        R2=0.03                 R2=0.04         R2=0.04         R2=0.047
                        F=37.11                 F=5.95          F=4.38          F=3.08



______________________________________________________________________________________

Notes and Sources:

The excluded variables are the 1840s, manufacturers, and machinery in the manufacturing sector. All exhibits
are allocated to industry of final use. The dummy variable for Boston represents city of residence, multiple
exhibitors submitted in more than one exhibition, and gender has a value of 1 if female. Patents and
assignments refer to the specific invention at the exhibition, and the assignment at issue of that exhibit.
Occupations were determined from the manuscript census.
                                           Bibliography


Buckingham, Joseph T (compiler), Annals of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association,
Boston: Crocker and Brewster, 1853.

Boldrin, Michele and D. K. Levine, Against Intellectual Monopoly, Cambridge University Press,
2008.

Brunt, Liam, Josh Lerner and Tom Nicholas, “Inducement Prizes and Innovation,” working paper,
Centre for Economic Policy Research, Discussion Paper Series, No. 6917, 2008.

Crosland, Maurice and Galvez, Antonio. 1989. “The Emergence of Research Grants within the Prize
System of the French Academy of Sciences, 1795-1914,” Social Studies of Science 19 (1): 71-100.

Fox, Robert, “The John Scott Medal,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol.
112, No. 6. (Dec. 9, 1968), pp.416-430.

Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey." Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. XXVIII (Dec) 1990: 1661-1707.

Khan, B. Zorina, The Democratization of Invention: Patents and Copyrights in American Economic
Development, 1790-1920. New York: Cambridge University Press and NBER, 2005.

B. Zorina Khan, “Invisible Women: Entrepreneurship, Innovation and Family Firms in 19th Century
France.” Working Paper, 2014.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Technological Innovation During
Early Economic Growth: Evidence from the Great Inventors of the United States, 1790-1930,” in
Institutions and Economic Growth, (eds) Theo Eicher and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, MIT Press
(2006):123-158.

Khan, B. Zorina and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Institutions and Democratic Invention in 19th Century
America,” American Economic Review, vol. 94 (May) 2004: 395-401.

B. Zorina Khan, "`Not for Ornament': Patenting Activity by Women Inventors," Journal of
Interdisciplinary History, vol. 33 (2) Fall 2000: 159-195.

Khan, B. Zorina , “Creative Destruction: Technological Change and Resource Reallocation during
the Civil War,” Working Paper, 2014.

B. Zorina Khan, “Premium Inventions: Patents and Prizes as Incentive Mechanisms in Britain and
the United States, 1750-1930” in Dora Costa and Naomi Lamoreaux (eds), Understanding the
Sources of Long Run Economic Growth, NBER and University of Chicago (2011).
Kremer, Michael. 1998. “Patent Buyouts: A Mechanism for Encouraging Innovation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113 (4): 1137-1167.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 1996. “Long-Term Change in the Organization of
Inventive Activity,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 93 (Nov): 12686-92.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Market Trade in Patents and the Rise of
a Class of Specialized Inventors in the Nineteenth-Century United States,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 91 (May 2001), pp. 39-44

Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, The Exhibition and Fair in the City of Boston.
Boston: Dutton and Wentworth, various years.

Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association, Annals of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics
Association, 1795-1892, Boston: Rockwell and Churchill, 1892.

Maurer, Stephen M. and Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Procuring Knowledge,” in Libecap, G., ed.,
Intellectual Property and Entrepreneurship: Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation
and Growth v. 15 (2004): 1-31.

Mokyr, Joel, The Lever of Riches, New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Moser, Petra, “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth-Century
World's Fairs,” American Economic Review, vol. 95 (4) 2005: 1214-1236.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1991. “The Allocation of Talent:
Implications for Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2): 503-530.

Palmieri, Robert (ed), Piano, an Encyclopedia, Routledge, 2003.

Shavell, Steven and Tanguy van Ypersele. 2001. “Rewards versus Intellectual Property Rights,”
Journal of Law and Economics, 44 (2): 525-547.

Sobel, Dava, Longitude: the True Story of a Lone Genius Who Solved the Greatest Scientific
Problem of His Time, New York: Penguin Books., 1995

Sokoloff, Kenneth, "Inventive Activity in Early Industrial America: Evidence from Patent Records,
1790-1846." Journal of Economic History 48 (4) 1988: 813-50.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and B. Zorina Khan, "The Democratization of Invention during Early
Industrialization: Evidence from the United States," Journal of Economic History, vol. 50 (2) 1990:
363-78.

Soltow, Lee, Men and Wealth in the United States, 1850-1870, New Haven: Yale University Press,
1975,
Taylor, Curtis R.. 1995. “Digging for Golden Carrots: An Analysis of Research Tournaments,”
American Economic Review 85 (4): 872-890.

Wright, Brian D. 1983. “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and Research
Contracts,”American Economic Review 73 (4): 691-707.




                           Appendix: Awards of the MMA Exhibition
