NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REVISITING THE CLASSICAL VIEW OF BENEFIT-BASED TAXATION
Matthew Weinzierl
Working Paper 20735
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20735

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

Thanks to Alan Auerbach, Rafael Di Tella, Roger Gordon, Louis Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk,
Ilyana Kuziemko, Benjamin B. Lockwood, Greg Mankiw, David Moss, Kristi Olson, Andreas
Peichl, Florian Scheuer, Daniel Shaviro, Pierre Yared, Glen Weyl, and participants at the 2013
NTA conference, NYU Law School Tax Policy Colloquium, Columbia University, and the
University of Chicago's Becker Friedman Instituteís inaugural Normative Ethics and Welfare
Economics conference. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Matthew Weinzierl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Revisiting the Classical View of Benefit-Based Taxation
Matthew Weinzierl
NBER Working Paper No. 20735
December 2014, Revised March 2016
JEL No. D63,H21,H41
ABSTRACT
This paper explores how the persistently popular "classical" logic of benefit-based taxation, in
which an individual's benefit from public goods is tied to his or her income-earning ability, can
be incorporated into modern optimal tax theory. If Lindahl's methods are applied to that view of
benefits, first-best optimal policy can be characterized analytically as depending on a few
potentially estimable statistics, in particular the coefficient of complementarity between public
goods and innate talent. Constrained optimal policy with a Pareto-efficient objective that strikes a
balance–controlled by a single parameter–between this principle and the familiar utilitarian
criterion can be simulated using conventional constraints and methods. A wide range of optimal
policy outcomes can result, including those that match well several features of existing policies.
To the extent that such an objective reflects the mixed normative reasoning behind prevailing
policies, this model may offer a useful approach to a positive optimal tax theory.

Matthew Weinzierl
Harvard Business School
277 Morgan
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mweinzierl@hbs.edu

Revisiting the Classical View of Bene…t-Based Taxation
Matthew Weinzierl
January 29, 2016

Abstract
This paper explores how the persistently popular "classical" logic of bene…t based taxation,
in which an individual’s bene…t from public goods is tied to his or her income-earning ability,
can be incorporated into modern optimal tax theory. If Lindahl’s methods are applied to that
view of bene…ts, …rst-best optimal policy can be characterized analytically as depending on
a few potentially estimable statistics, in particular the coe¢ cient of complementarity between
public goods and endowed ability. Constrained optimal policy with a Pareto-e¢ cient objective
that strikes a balance–controlled by a single parameter–between this principle and the familiar
utilitarian criterion can be simulated using conventional constraints and methods. A wide range
of optimal policy outcomes can result, including those that match well several features of existing
policies. To the extent that such an objective re‡ects the mixed normative reasoning behind
prevailing policies, this model may o¤er a useful approach to a positive optimal tax theory.

Introduction
"These [urban] centers and their wealthy residents have cause for satisfaction and
thanksgiving that their incomes are so bountiful and that the country has provided
them with such great opportunities, rather than occasion for criticising the requirement
of a moderate contribution to the nation which has rendered such incomes possible."
Roy Blakey, American Economic Review, 1913
In February, 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was passed, allowing for
the direct taxation of incomes. One month later, the nascent American Economic Review included
a paper by Roy Blakey (1913), a noted tax expert and University of Minnesota professor, that gave
the preceding argument for the propriety of taxing large (mainly urban) incomes.
In 1935, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt sought to substantially increase the progressivity of taxes. He argued as follows.
"With the enactment of the Income Tax Law of 1913, the Federal Government
began to apply e¤ectively the widely accepted principle that taxes should be levied in
proportion to ability to pay and in proportion to the bene…ts received. Income was
Harvard Business School and NBER, mweinzierl@hbs.edu. Thanks to the editor, Frederic Vermeulen, the referees,
and Alan Auerbach, Rafael Di Tella, Roger Gordon, Louis Kaplow, Wojciech Kopczuk, Ilyana Kuziemko, Benjamin
B. Lockwood, Greg Mankiw, David Moss, Kristi Olson, Andreas Peichl, Florian Scheuer, Daniel Shaviro, Pierre
Yared, Glen Weyl, and participants at the 2013 NTA conference, NYU Law School Tax Policy Colloquium, Columbia
University, and the University of Chicago’s Becker Friedman Institute’s inaugural Normative Ethics and Welfare
Economics conference.

1

wisely chosen as the measure of bene…ts and of ability to pay. This was, and still is, a
wholesome guide for national policy. It should be retained as the governing principle of
Federal taxation...."
In 2011, U.S. President Barack Obama also sought to increase top marginal income tax rates.
He applied this reasoning:
"As a country that values fairness, wealthier individuals have traditionally borne a
greater share of this [tax] burden than the middle class or those less fortunate. Everybody pays, but the wealthier have borne a little more. This is not because we begrudge
those who’ve done well — we rightly celebrate their success. Instead, it’s a basic re‡ection of our belief that those who’ve bene…ted most from our way of life can a¤ord to
give back a little bit more."
Modern tax theorists will …nd the normative arguments underlying these quotations both familiar and strange. All three refer to the logic of "bene…t-based taxation," under which people ought
to pay taxes that depend on how much they bene…t from public goods. All three quotes also refer
to the logic of "ability-based taxation," under which people ought to pay taxes that depend on how
much they are hurt by having to earn the money to pay. Introductory public …nance textbooks
describe these two ideas as the classic principles of optimal tax design. But they are usually considered alternatives, not complements. To modern tax theorists working in the tradition of James
Mirrlees (1971), stranger still is the use of these principles at all, as modern tax theory has largely
moved away from them in favor of an approach emphasizing social welfare maximization.
Two hundred years ago, however, the normative principle underlying these statements would
have been recognized immediately as Adam Smith’s (1776) …rst maxim of taxation:
"The subjects of every state ought to contribute toward the support of the government, as near as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities; that is in proportion
to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state."
Like those quoted above, Smith argues that one’s income–as a measure of one’s ability to pay–is a
measure of one’s bene…t from the state. Because he supports bene…t-based taxation more
generally, Smith believes ability to pay is therefore an appropriate basis for taxation.1 Simply put,
Smith endorses bene…t-as-ability-based taxation. Richard Musgrave (1959) labeled this logic the
"classical" view of bene…t-based taxation, a label I adopt in this paper.
This classical view of bene…t-based taxation was highly in‡uential in the late 18th and early 19th
centuries but waned as John Stuart Mill’s (1871) purely ability-based reasoning gained favor and the
canonical contributions of Erik Lindahl (1919) shifted the focus of bene…t-based tax research.2 The
idea of bene…t-as-ability was not further explored, while bene…t-based and ability-based reasoning
were developed as separate ideas. Bene…t-based reasoning was assigned a subsidiary role in tax
theory, namely as a means by which to value and assign the costs of public expenditures while,
crucially, taking the distribution of income as given.3 (Note that the classic view has endogeneity of
1

Smith argued that the preferred way of paying for public goods was to have them privately or locally managed,
with user fees mechanically tying the funding for these institutions to individual bene…ts, though he recognized user
fees were infeasible in many cases. See Smith (1776, Book V Article 1)
2
As the remarkable surveys by Edwin Seligman (1908) and Richard Musgrave (1959) make clear, bene…t based
reasoning was a prominent, at times leading, approach among tax theorists through the 19th century. William Petty
(1677) anticipated Smith’s view, and Hobbes, Hume, and Rousseau among others subscribed to it in some form.
3
Lindahl himself viewed his theory as conditional in this way, a view criticized as untenable by Samuelson (1955).

2

the income distribution as its core component). Ability-based reasoning was absorbed into the nowdominant Mirrleesian approach, as Mirrlees (1971) made di¤erences in the ability to earn income
the linchpin of taxation in his theory.4 The classical bene…t-based logic exerted little in‡uence on
the welfarist objective assumed in modern Mirrleesian theory.
In normative terms, the shift from the classical bene…t-based view to the dominant modern
approach, which pursues so-called "endowment taxation," is quite substantial. Under the modern
approach, an individual’s income-earning ability is taken as a given, and as ability makes it easier to
obtain consumption in exchange for leisure, social welfare maximization will tend to imply taxing
those with higher endowments to supplement the resources of others. In contrast, the classical
bene…t-based view treats an individual’s ability as a function of the activities of the state to which
that individual contributes. Any endowments are moot unless individuals cooperate to fund public
goods that set the stage for abilities to develop. Under this approach, taxation is merely the means
by which individuals pay for these public goods cooperatively, each according to how much he or
she values them.
Perhaps due in part to this normative contrast, the modern shift away from using the bene…tbased approach, in any form, as a general principle of taxation appears nearly complete. The
authoritative review of modern tax theory entitled the Mirrlees Review (IFS, 2010) makes no
reference to Lindahl’s (1919) canonical development of a bene…t-based theory or to any of the
relatively few more recent re…nements of it. Anthony Atkinson and Joseph Stiglitz’s (1980) classic
text and Louis Kaplow’s (2008) invaluable modern treatise each devote only a few pages among
hundreds to bene…t-based taxation, the latter largely to point out its weaknesses (as discussed
below). Neither Bernard Salanié (2011), in his essential textbook on the economics of taxation,
nor Robin Boadway (2012), in his excellent survey of optimal tax theory’s implications for policy,
mention Lindahl or bene…t-based taxes.5
The long-standing role for classical bene…t-based logic in public reasoning over taxes stands in
stark contrast to this momentum away from it in modern theory. The purpose of this paper is to
explore whether we might reconcile this disconnect by incorporating the classical view of bene…tbased taxation into the modern framework of optimal tax theory, thereby resuscitating it as part
of how we understand policy design.
The …rst contribution of this paper is the …nding that the classical bene…t-based view can …t
neatly into the Mirrleesian approach once one makes a simple–and arguably needed–change to the
standard setup: that is, allowing individual income-earning ability to be a function of both endowed
ability and public goods. Once public goods matter for ability, the classical bene…t-as-ability view
links seamlessly with the modern model. Thus, both …rst-best and constrained optimal bene…tbased policy can be analyzed within the formal structure of modern tax theory and characterized
using familiar methods.6 Of course, the normative contrast between the classical bene…t-based view
and endowment taxation remains.
In particular, …rst-best policy according to this view of bene…t-based taxation can be characterized in terms of simple and potentially observable elasticity parameters if we apply Lindahl’s
well-known method of measuring bene…t. In this paper, we derive the version of the Samuelson
4

The Mirrleesian approach’s linkage of ability to pay and ability to earn relies on its assumption–Mirrlees (1971)
makes it his second assumption–that tastes are homogenous. See Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015a).
5
As noted, bene…t-based reasoning continues to occupy a prominent but narrow role in studies of public goods
provision that take the income distribution as given. See, for example, Aaron and McGuire (1970) and the large
literature following upon their work, as cited below.
6
One way to interpret this contribution is that it shows how this classical view might–by linking bene…t to ability–
avoid the common critique of bene…t-based reasoning that it "has little more than emotive content" and "leads
nowhere at all," as Henry Simons (1938) put it (quoted in Daniel Shaviro 2013).

3

rule for the optimal extent of public goods under the classical bene…t-based view. We also obtain a
straightforward condition determining the progressivity of optimal average tax rates, which turns
out to depend in an intuitive way on the size of the Hicksian coe¢ cient of complementarity between public goods and endowed ability. These conditions reduce to especially simple relationships
if we assume that the ability production function takes certain forms. As an interesting aside,
assuming those same forms and a familiar form for the individual utility function we …nd that
optimal bene…t-as-ability-based taxation quantitatively resembles Mill’s preferred "equal sacri…ce"
taxation, a possibility hinted at informally nearly forty years ago by Martin Feldstein (1976).
As with the …rst-best policy, we …nd that the classical view’s linkage of bene…t and ability
facilitates the analysis of constrained optimal bene…t-based policy. We need to modify only the
objective, not the constraints, of conventional Mirrleesian analysis to characterize how di¤erent
assumptions about the interaction of public goods and endowed ability a¤ect the progressivity of
constrained optimal bene…t-based policy. To address the limitation that the classical bene…t-based
view does not provide a ranking of allocations other than the …rst-best, we modify the standard
conventional utilitarian objective function to allow the planner to choose the allocation, from the set
of incentive compatible allocations, that deviates least from the …rst-best bene…t-based allocation
while respecting Pareto e¢ ciency.
Why go to the trouble of attempting such a resuscitation?
The statements provided at the start of this paper suggest that the classical view of bene…tbased taxation is included in the criteria used to judge, or at least justify, tax policy in the United
States. If one takes a positive approach to specifying the objective of optimal taxation, that view
therefore ought to be included in our models, as well.7 While conventional optimal tax analysis
uses an objective for policy based on philosophical reasoning, recent work has pursued the idea of
basing that objective on evidence of the normative priorities that prevail in society.8 An important
feature of this "positive optimal tax theory" is its inclusion of multiple normative criteria, as a
wide range of evidence has shown that most persons base their moral judgments on more than one
principle.9
The second contribution of this paper is, therefore, to explore whether an optimal tax model
with a mixed objective function that gives weight to both the classical view of bene…t-based taxation
and the conventional utilitarian criterion has quantitative explanatory power. To implement that
analysis, I take advantage of a convenient feature of the objective function used in the preceding
…rst-best analysis. That objective function di¤ers from the conventional utilitarian criterion for
optimal policy in only one way: it treats gains and losses of utility from a benchmark allocation
asymmetrically, such that the utilitarian criterion is equivalent to restoring symmetry to that
7

Some readers may question the usefulness of popular conceptions of economic justice for normative policy analysis.
The perspective implicit in this paper is that a back-and-forth between introspective reasoning on moral principles
and robust popular reasoning is likely to be productive. See Steven M. She¤rin (2013) for the development of the
related idea of a role for "folk justice" and Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012) for related arguments behind the use of
"empirical social choice" methods.
8
See Weinzierl (2014) and Saez and Stantcheva (2014); also see Zelenak (2006) for a di¤erent, legal theory,
perspective and Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015) for related evidence. Such a positive optimal tax theory di¤ers from
a purely positive theory of taxation, where the political process and self-interest of voters play central roles. Positive
optimal tax theory retains the conventional theory’s focus on an objective that re‡ects the moral reasoning of an
impartial observer.
9
See the discussion of normative diversity in Weinzierl (2014). Not mentioned there, however, is that Adam Smith
appears to have had a similarly mixed perspective. While in his …rst maxim he seems to argue for proportional
taxation, he writes at another point in the same book: "The necessaries of life occasion the great expence of the poor.
They …nd it di¢ cult to get food, and the greater part of their little revenue is spent in getting it. The luxuries and
vanities of life occasion the principal expence of the rich...It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute
to the public expence, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than in that proportion."

4

objective function. Moreover, that asymmetry is controlled by a single parameter that I label
and which provides a simple way to adjust the relative weights given to the classical bene…t-based
criterion and the conventional utilitarian criterion. By varying , we …nd that a wide range of
optimal policy outcomes can result, including those consistent with existing policy. These results
suggest that this model may o¤er a useful approach to a positive optimal tax theory.
Readers familiar with Weinzierl (2014) will …nd these two papers’analyses complementary. In
that paper, I demonstrate public a¢ nity for a di¤erent (but as noted below, related) principle of tax
design: equal sacri…ce. I then show that a role for equal sacri…ce in the optimal tax objective function
yields policy implications that resolve a number of puzzling gaps between conventional theory and
robust features of prevailing tax policy. I leverage a similar, though streamlined, technique in
section 3 of this paper to explore the policy implications of classical bene…t-based taxation, which
not surprisingly resemble those of equal sacri…ce in important ways. Together, these two papers
formalize and characterize the implications of including in the policy objective two long-standing
and popular normative approaches to taxation that depart from the conventional approach in
optimal tax theory. In so doing, these papers can help us understand why actual tax policy looks
the way it does.
Before proceeding, it may be important to highlight a few potentially related things that this
paper is not trying to do.
First, this paper is not intended to defend classical bene…t-based taxation as a normative principle. Other principles, including utilitarianism, may well be preferable from the perspective of
moral and political philosophy. Instead, this paper is intended to capture the view of bene…t-based
taxation that arose in early sophisticated thinking about optimal taxation and that appears to
have retained a prominent role in public reasoning over taxes despite the strong criticisms of more
recent tax theorists.
Second, this paper does not claim to resolve the debate over whether the right approach to
linking taxes to bene…t is Lindahl’s. The proper way to turn the normative intuition behind bene…tbased taxation into individual tax burdens has long been a topic of study (prominent examples
include Aaron and McGuire 1970, 1976; Brennan 1976, 1979; West and Staaf 1979, Moulin 1987,
and Hines 2000).10 Instead, I view Lindahl’s approach as a natural way to formalize the informal
notion–implicit in rhetorical appeals to bene…t-based taxation–that people ought to "pay for what
they get" from public goods just as they do in the market for private goods. The most well-known
example of this metaphor is usually attributed to U.S. Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes, who served on the Court from 1902 through 1932: "I like to pay taxes. With them I
buy civilization."11 In fact, Lindahl entitled the full statement of his approach "Just Taxation –
A Positive Solution," and described it as a model of how "the distribution of the total cost of the
collective goods...is to be solved by free agreement...as a kind of economic exchange."
10
One of many disagreements from that debate is over the justi…ability of using of an individual’s marginal willingness to pay for public goods to measure that individual’s bene…t. The Lindahl answer to that question, as stated by
Aaron and McGuire (1970), criticized by Brennan (1976), and discussed by West and Straaf (1979), is to have two
sets of taxes, one of which may o¤set di¤erences in inframarginal bene…ts (as well as other undesirable inequalities)
and the second of which implements the Lindahl bene…t-based equilibrium. I adopt a version of that approach by
having the objective of the social planner give weight to both the distribution of welfare (in the conventional utilitarian sense) and to the allocation’s proximity to the …rst-best bene…t-based allocation. Note that this paper thereby
aligns with the arguments of Samuelson (1954, foonote 9). An alternative approach would be to tie taxes to the total,
inframarginal bene…ts from public goods, perhaps along the lines of Moulin (1987).
11
Holmes wrote a similar phrase into his decision on a 1927 case before the Court. It is worth recalling that, at
the time, the U.S. income tax was highly concentrated on only the wealthiest Americans, so Holmes was e¤ectively
arguing on behalf of progressive taxation. The wide use of his dictum in popular writings on taxation over the
intervening decades suggests that it has broad appeal.

5

Third, the mixed normative objective utilized in this paper is not meant as an alternative
to the most general forms of modern optimal tax theory. As has been made clear in work by
Stiglitz (1987) and Iván Werning (2007), among others, Mirrleesian optimal tax theory imposes
only the requirement of Pareto e¢ ciency on the set of feasible and incentive compatible allocations.
The objectives I consider satisfy Pareto e¢ ciency as well, so in principle they could be modeled
in alternative ways that are closer–in formal terms–to the standard approach (i.e., following the
technique of Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva, 2015). This paper’s approach chooses among
Pareto-e¢ cient allocations by assigning weights to a small number of normative principles with
apparent empirical relevance.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 formalizes the classical bene…t-based view and analytically characterizes optimal policy under it by applying Lindahl’s methodology to an (otherwise
standard) optimal tax model in which ability depends on public goods as well as endowed ability. Section 2 quantitatively characterizes constrained-optimal (second-best) policy, again using
the conventional modern optimal tax model modi…ed only in its objective, which in this case is
to deviate as little as possible from the allocation preferred by the classical bene…t-based view.
Section 3 extends that constrained-optimal analysis to the case of an objective function that can be
interpreted as giving weight to both utilitarianism and the classical bene…t-based view. Section 4
concludes. The Appendix contains additional examples of public rhetoric drawing on the classical
bene…t-based view as well as the proofs of analytical results.

1

Analytical characterization of classical bene…t-based taxation

In this section I show how a single modi…cation of the standard Mirrleesian optimal tax model
enables us to formalize classical bene…t-based taxation (hereafter, CBBT) and characterize optimal
policy in terms of simple, potentially observable statistics.

1.1

The model

A population of individuals di¤er in their abilities to earn income. In conventional models, these
abilities are interpreted as innate and …xed relative to public goods.12 The innovation in this paper
is that individuals’income-earning abilities are functions of both endowed ability and public goods
funded by tax revenue.13 As mutually exclusive categories, endowed ability and public goods can
be thought of as, respectively, the genetic or other endowments not a¤ected by the size and scope
of the state and the broad set of activities with which the state supports the functioning of an
economy. Note that this paper takes only the …rst, most basic, step toward modeling the e¤ect
of these public goods on individuals’ abilities by leaving unexplored their composition. Future
research may show how the mix, design, and implementation of public goods matter, as well.14
12

Much recent work in the Mirrleesian literature has considered other sources of endogeneity, such as human capital
investment. See Kapicka (2006), Gelber and Weinzierl (2015), Best and Kleven (2013), Stantcheva (2014), among
others.
13
An innovative paper by Matsumoto (2001) is the only other analysis of which I am aware in which public goods
augment individual abilities in an optimal tax model. His focus is on how public goods can thereby relax incentive
constraints.
14
Much of public spending in advanced economies is for social insurance rather than "productive" public goods, a
distinction this paper’s model can accommodate in a number of ways. First, in the static setting of this paper, the
value of social insurance to welfare may be captured by the policymaker’s weight on the utilitarian objective discussed
in section 3, while the ability production function f (a; G) may be speci…ed to re‡ect the e¤ect of public goods on
ability including all forms of government spending (i.e., G may have weaker marginal e¤ects if it is made up largely
of social insurance). Alternatively, in a dynamic model with shocks that may be insured against (perhaps through

6

Formally, income-earning ability wi = f (ai ; G) ; where i 2 I indexes endowed ability types ai ,
G 0 is the level of spending on public goods, and f ( ) : R+ R+ ! R+ is a di¤erentiable ability
production function. The conventional model is a special case in which f (ai ; G) = ai for all i 2 I
and any G:
An individual of type i derives utility according to
U (ci ; li ) = u ci ;

yi
f (ai ; G)

;

where ci is private consumption for individual i and yi is i’s income, so that

(1)
yi
wi

is work e¤ort. Denote

partial derivatives of this utility function with respect to consumption and e¤ort with uc ci ; f (ayii;G)
and ul ci ; f (ayii;G) . Note that this utility function does not assume additive separability between
the utility from consumption and the disutility from e¤ort, a simplifying assumption often made
in optimal tax models.
A social planner chooses a tax system, including an optimal G : Individuals take that system
as given and maximize their own utility, yielding equilibrium consumption and income allocations
fci ; yi gIi=1 and utility levels
yi
Ui = u ci ;
(2)
f (ai ; G )
for all i 2 I: Note that there may be multiple optimal policy equilibria, as discussed below.
At this point, it may be worth noting that the simple change of making income-earning ability
depend on public goods raises a number of questions for conventional Mirrleesian optimal taxation
that could be pursued in future research.

1.2

First-best classical bene…t-based taxes

With the endogenous ability de…ned above, we can now apply Lindahl’s theory to determine optimal
bene…t-based taxes. The core insight of Lindahl’s work starts with the idea of personalized tax
"prices," or shares.15 The planner speci…es this set of shares f i g ; and individual i therefore faces
the budget constraint
yi ci
0;
(3)
i pG
where p is the per-unit cost of public goods relative to private consumption goods and i is the
share of the total cost of public goods paid for by the individuals of type i:16
Lindahl’s approach as stated here is a "…rst-best" one, as it assumes that individual type is
observable; i.e., the tax planner can assign personalized shares i to individuals. This unrealistic
assumption has long been a target for criticism of bene…t-based taxation in the Lindahl tradition.
In the next section, I show how the classical logic for bene…t-based taxes–due to its treatment of
ability as bene…t–allows us to accommodate incentive compatibility within the Lindahl approach
just as the Mirrlees model does.
government activities), social insurance spending may …t into a bene…t-based framework more directly, though not
through its e¤ects on ability, so that the model would distinguish between the types of G and how they generate
bene…t.
15
I assume the public goods are entirely nonexcludable. Taxing the bene…ts from excludable public goods raises
additional possibilities: see for example Hellwig (2005).
16
I am restricting attention to what Kaneko (1977a, 1977b) calls the "ratio equilibria," a subset of the full class of
Lindahl equilibria. Ratio equilibria are those in which each individual’s tax payment is equal to a personalized scalar
(here denoted i for individual i) multiplied by the total cost of public goods, such that all individuals maximize
utility and agree on the optimal level of public goods. I thank a referee for prompting this note.

7

In this section, I will follow Lindahl and focus on …rst-best bene…t-based policies. This is not
merely for analytical tractability, though that is a side bene…t. Rather, …rst-best policies are the
most direct guide to a normative principle’s e¤ects on policy, as evidenced by the analytical results
below and how they compare to …rst-best policies under a conventional utilitarian criterion (which
is fully egalitarian). More concretely, …rst-best policies are essential ingredients in the calculation
of constrained (second-best) optimal policies in the positive optimal tax model that I will analyze
numerically in the next section.
Lindahl’s approach then has us consider a hypothetical scenario in which each individual i
is allowed to choose her own consumption, work e¤ort, and, importantly, level of public goods
provision that maximize her utility subject to her personal budget constraint, taking the tax share
denote the multiplier on the budget
i as given. Denote this individually-optimal level Gi and let
constraint (3) : The individual …rst order conditions are as follows:
yi
f (ai ; G)
yi
ci ;
f (ai ; G)
yi
ci ;
f (ai ; G)

uc ci ;
1
ul
f (ai ; Gi )
yi fG (ai ; Gi )
1
ul
f (ai ; Gi ) f (ai ; Gi )

=
=
=

;

(4)
;

ip

(5)
:

(6)

Lindahl de…ned optimal policy as that in which two conditions are satis…ed: …rst, the personalized shares cause each type to prefer the same quantity of public goods; second, the cost of the
public goods is fully covered by tax payments. These requirements can be stated formally.
FB
De…nition 1 A First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium: The policy
; GF B is a First-Best Lini
i
dahl Equilibrium if and only if individuals maximize utility and the following conditions hold:

Gi = GF B 8i;
X
FB
= 1:
i
i2I

Note that this de…nition describes ’a’ First Best Lindahl Equilibrium, so uniqueness is not
FB
implied. With a general form for the ability production function, multiple policies
; GF B
i
i
may satisfy the conditions of De…nition 1, and the analytical results below apply to any FirstBest Lindahl Equilibrium. For example, if public goods spending initially bene…ts all individuals
proportionally but, at higher levels, bene…ts high-ability individuals more than proportionally, there
may exist an optimum with small G and ‡at tax shares and another optimum with large G and
progressive tax shares. Further study of this possibility, including empirical work, is an important
next step in the theory and application of CBBT.
Next, I turn to characterizing optimal policy with conditions on its components, GF B and
FB
that depend on only (at least potentially) estimable statistics. All proofs of the following
i
i
results are collected in the printed appendix at the end of this paper.
1.2.1

First-best level of public goods spending (Samuelson rule)

First, we can derive the version of the Samuelson rule (1955) that determines the optimal level of
public spending in this model. This version turns out to depend on an elasticity that may be a
fruitful target for empirical research, de…ned as follows:
8

De…nition 2 De…ne the elasticity of individual i’s income-earning ability with respect to public
goods, "G
i (G), as:
fG (ai ; G)
"G
G:
i (G) =
f (ai ; G)
Using this elasticity, we can state the following result.
FB
Proposition 1 Samuelson Rule: If the policy
; GF B is a First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium,
i
i
then the following condition is satis…ed:
X
FB
"G
yi = pGF B :
(7)
i G
i2I

Equivalently, the sum of individuals’ marginal rates of substitution of private consumption for
public goods is equal to the marginal rate of transformation between them, when individuals choose
according to (4), (5) ; and (6).
This result simpli…es further when the ability production function takes the familiar multiplicative or Cobb-Douglas forms. The key to these simpli…cations is that the elasticity de…ned above
becomes constant across individuals. In particular,
Lemma 1 If the ability production function is multiplicative, such that f (ai ; G) = h (ai ) g (G) for
some di¤ erentiable functions h (ai ) ; g (G), both R+ ! R+ ; then at a given G the elasticity of
individual i’s income-earning ability with respect to public goods, "G
i (G), satis…es:
"G
i (G)

0

g (G) G
=
= "G
j (G)
g (G)

Furthermore, if g (G) = G for some

"G (G) 8 i; j:

> 0,
"G (G) =

8G:

With these results, we have the following corollary of Proposition 1.
FB
Corollary 1 If the policy
; GF B is a First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium, and if the abili
i
ity production function is multiplicative, such that f (ai ; G) = h (ai ) g (G) for some di¤ erentiable
functions h (ai ) ; g (G), both R+ ! R+ ; then GF B satis…es:
X
"G G F B
yi = pGF B :
(8)
i2I

Furthermore, if g (G) = g for some

> 0, then spending on GF B is a share
X
yi = pGF B :

of total output:

i2I

In words, Corollary 1 says that in the case of a multiplicative ability production function society
ought to devote a fraction of its output equal to the (uniform) elasticity of income-earning ability
with respect to public goods, "G GF B ; toward funding the public goods that magnify endowed
abilities. If income-earning ability is log-linear in public goods with coe¢ cient –such as the familiar
Cobb-Douglas form–that fraction is simply :
9

This corollary provides a neat illustration of how taxes in the Lindahl equilibrium enable private
market e¢ ciency in the public sector. Suppose that at the e¢ cient outcome the provider of public
goods is paid
Xa price for its output equal to the marginal product of public goods. That marginal
product is
fG (ai ; G) li , where li = yi =f (ai ; G) is the (held …xed) labor e¤ort for individual
X
i. The total payments to public goods would then be G
fG (ai ; G) yi =f (ai ; G). Now impose
X
Cobb-Douglas and this becomes
yi , so that the total payments to public goods equals the
share of total income, just as for a factor of production in a competitive equilibrium.
1.2.2

First-best average tax rates

Next, we turn to characterizing the taxes paid by each individual in the …rst-best allocation. As with
the optimal level of public goods spending, our results can be expressed in terms of a potentially
estimable elasticity.
De…nition 3 De…ne the Hicksian partial elasticity of complementarity between public goods and
endowed ability, G;a
i , as:
fG;a (ai ; G) f (ai ; G)
G;a
=
;
(9)
i
fG (ai ; G) fa (ai ; G)
at a given G.
The Hicksian partial elasticity of complementarity has received attention in recent optimal tax
analyses that include human capital (see Bovenberg and Jacobs 2011, Stantcheva 2014, and the
citations therein). In this paper’s context, it captures the degree to which public goods and endowed
ability magnify each other in determining income-earning ability. If G;a
0; endowed ability and
i
public goods are not complements in the production of income-earning ability. If G;a
2 (0; 1) the
i
elasticity of income-earning ability with respect to the level of public goods spending is positive but
decreasing in endowed ability; if G;a
> 1, the elasticity of income-earning ability with respect to
i
the level of public goods spending is increasing in endowed ability. We can then state the following
result.
Proposition 2 Assume public goods and endowed ability have positive partial e¤ ects on incomeFB
earning ability: i.e., fG (ai ; G) > 0 and fa (ai ; G) > 0 for all i. If
; GF B is a First-Best
i
i
F
B
Lindahl Equilibrium, with corresponding incomes yi
then the optimal average tax rate on
i
individual i increases (decreases) with endowed ability i¤ the Hicksian partial elasticity of complementarity between public goods and endowed ability is greater than (less than) one. Formally, de…ne
the optimal average tax rate for individual i as AT RiF B = Fi B pGF B =yiF B . Then,
@AT RiF B
> (<) 0 ,
@ai

G;a
i

GF B > (<) 1:

The intuition for Proposition 2 is as follows. Public goods are assumed to magnify all abilities.17
If the e¤ect of public goods on ability has a greater elasticity to endowed ability than does ability
itself, that means that there is a complementarity between public goods and ability.18 Thus, public
17
In principle, this need not be the case, though if we restrict attention to modern developed economies it is di¢ cult
to imagine that any individual’s income-earning ability is lowered, in an absolute sense, by the existence of the state.
18
One can de…ne the elasticity of individual i’s income-earning ability with respect to endowed ability as "ai (G) =
fa (ai ;G)
a and the elasticity of the e¤ect of public goods on individual {’s income-earning ability with respect to
f (ai ;G) i

endowed ability as: "G;a
(G) =
i
latter to the former.

fG;a (ai ;G)
ai :
fG (ai ;G)

The Hicksian partial elasticity of complementarity is the ratio of the

10

goods spending is a source of greater bene…t for those with greater endowed ability, and optimal
bene…t-based taxation adjusts their taxes up accordingly. Again, note that if the ability production
function takes a form in which the e¤ect of G varies in a complicated way with a, multiple equilibria
with di¤erent degrees of tax progressivity (as well as levels of G) could satisfy the conditions for a
First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium.
As with Proposition 1, we can simplify this result if we assume a multiplicative form for the
ability production function:
Lemma 2 If the ability production function is multiplicative, such that f (ai ; G) = h (ai ) g (G) for
some di¤ erentiable functions h (ai ) ; g (G), both R+ ! R+ , then G;a
= 1:
i
The intuition for this lemma is that the multiplicative production function means the elasticity
of income-earning ability with respect to the level of public goods spending is the same no matter
the level of endowed ability. With these results and Lemma 1, we have the following corollary of
Proposition 2.
FB
Corollary 2 If
; GF B is a First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium, and if the ability production
i
i
function is multiplicative, such that f (ai ; G) = h (ai ) g (G) for some di¤ erentiable functions h (ai ) ;
g (G), both R+ ! R+ ; then the optimal tax policy is a uniform average tax rate for all i 2 I:

AT RiF B = "G GF B
Furthermore, if g (G) = g for some

8 i:

(10)

> 0; then the optimal tax policy is a uniform tax rate of
AT RiF B =

8 i:

:

(11)

Of course, this corollary and Corollary 1 are linked, in that total spending on public goods as
a share of output equals this ‡at average tax rate.

1.3

Relation to sacri…ce theories

John Stuart Mill’s (1871) principle of equal sacri…ce was the theory of optimal taxation that displaced Smith’s CBBT in the intellectual history of optimal tax theory. Under equal sacri…ce, tax
burdens are to be distributed so that each taxpayer feels the same sacri…ce from contributing to
public goods.
A relationship between bene…t-based taxation and Equal Sacri…ce has long been intuited. For
example, in an early critique of the Mirrleesian approach Martin Feldstein (1976) wrote: "Nozick
(1974) has recently presented an extensive criticism of the use of utilitarian principles to justify
the redistribution of income and wealth...In this context, the principle of bene…t taxation or of tax
schedules that impose equal utility sacri…ce have an appeal that is clearly lacking in the utilitarian
framework."
Using the model above, and assuming some speci…c but familiar functional forms, we can show
a quantitative connection that is consistent with this intuition.
To link these principles requires de…ning "sacri…ce." To do so, we consider a hypothetical state
in which public goods are provided at their optimal level, GF B , for no cost. Sacri…ce for individual
i is then de…ned as the decrease in utility of moving from an undistorted optimal position in that
hypothetical state to the planner’s chosen allocation.

11

In the hypothetical, free-public-goods state, the individual sets:
uc cH
i ;

yiH
f (ai ; GF B )

=

1
yiH
H
u
c
;
l
i
f (ai ; GF B )
f (ai ; GF B )

;

where GF B satis…es Proposition 1, ci = yi (there are no taxes), and the H superscript denotes the
"hypothetical" free public goods scenario.
To calculate utility levels, we need to specify the utility functional form. We assume the following
familiar speci…cation (which is consistent with Mill’s 1871 discussion of marginal utility above a
minimum income).
yi
1
U (ci ; li ) = ln (ci )
;
(12)
f (ai ; G)
so the individual’s optimality condition in the hypothetical state is simply:
H
FB
cH
;
i = yi = f a i ; G

and utility levels in the hypothetical free public goods state are:
1

H
U cH
= ln cH
i ; li
i

yiH
f (ai ; GF B )

:

(13)

Finally, sacri…ce for individual i at the First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium allocation cFi B ; yiF B ; GF B
is:
H
SiF B = U cH
U cFi B ; liF B :
(14)
i ; li
With these, we can show the following result.
FB
Proposition 3 If
; GF B is a First-Best Lindahl Equilibrium, the utility function takes
i
i
the form in (12), and the ability production function is log-linear in public goods, that is, of the form
f (ai ; G) = h (ai ) G for some di¤ erentiable function h (ai ) ; R+ ! R+ and > 0, then SiF B = SjF B
for all types i; j: that is, the policy generates equal sacri…ce for all individuals.

It is important to note that this exact equivalence result holds only under a special set of
functional form assumptions. Nevertheless, because those assumptions are familiar and arguably
plausible, the connection in Proposition 3 hints at more than a super…cial relationship. In particular, it suggests that two of the most prominent alternatives to the conventional social welfare
maximization criterion–the CBBT logic of Smith (1776) and the equal sacri…ce logic of Mill (1871)–
push optimal policy in a similar direction away from the conventionally-optimal design. Consistent
with this …nding is the observation that Mill, who rejected bene…t-based taxation in favor of equal
sacri…ce taxation, nevertheless endorsed a similar tax schedule as Smith and invoked Smith as inspiration for his reasoning.19 Therefore, to the extent that either of these principles presents a plausible
alternative–from either a positive or a normative perspective–to the conventional approach, this
connection may strengthen the claims of the other.
19

Both endorsed proportional taxation above a minimum level of income.

12

2

Quantitative characterization of constrained–optimal (secondbest) classical bene…t-based taxes

A persistent critique of Lindahlian bene…t-based reasoning (e.g., Mill 1871 and Samuelson 1954), is
that individuals’bene…ts are unobservable. How to pursue bene…t-based policy when constrained
by this unobservability has been a topic of intense study for decades (e.g., Foley 1970). When one
uses the classical view of bene…t-based taxation, however, the problem of unobservable bene…t is
converted to the problem of unobservable ability–exactly the constraint at the heart of modern
Mirrleesian tax theory. In this section, we take advantage of that feature of CBBT and use familiar
methods to study constrained optimal bene…t-based taxation. In particular, the purpose of this
section is to understand how constrained-optimal bene…t-based taxation responds quantitatively to
the way in which public goods and endowed ability interact to produce income-earning ability. We
consider illustrative cases of that interaction to show the wide variety of tax policies that may be
consistent with classical bene…t-based reasoning.

2.1

Specifying the constrained planner’s problem

Like many alternatives to the standard welfarist objectives in modern optimal tax theory, the
classical bene…t-based principle does not rank allocations other than its most-preferred. As incentive
constraints will force the policy away from its …rst-best optimum, we need to be able to complete
this ranking to identify the second-best policy. The approach taken here applies a simpli…ed version
of the technique developed in Weinzierl (2014); see that paper for a more general approach.
To rank the set of feasible and incentive compatible allocations according to the classical bene…tbased view, I specify an objective function that penalizes symmetric deviations from that principle’s
…rst-best allocation.20 I specify a simple version of such an objective function that nevertheless
satis…es the Pareto criterion that allocations yielding greater utilities for some and no less utility
for all are (at least weakly) preferred, thus avoiding the concerns of Kaplow and Shavell (2001). In
particular, the objective function has a kink at its most-preferred allocation, so that the welfare
loss due to a deviation below that allocation is greater than the welfare gain due to a similar-sized
deviation above it.
Formally, recall the optimal feasible allocation that we derived and characterized in the previous
section cFi B ; yiF B ; GF B i . The objective function, denoted W, is de…ned as follows.21
W fci ; yi ; Ggi ; cFi B ; yiF B ; GF B

i

=

where

I
X

V

U

i=1

V Ui ; UiF B =

for scalar

ci ;

yi
f (ai ; G)

;U

cFi B ;

Ui UiF B if UiF B < Ui
,
Ui UiF B if UiF B Ui
: 0

20

yiF B
f (ai ; GF B )

;

(15)

(16)

1:

As far as I am aware, no previous work has studied how to obtain a complete ranking of allocations based on
classical bene…t-based reasoning (i.e., where bene…ts are linked to income-earning abilities). My approach is, therefore,
by necessity somewhat speculative and future research may, of course, discover preferable alternative speci…cations.
21
Readers familiar with Weinzierl (2014) will notice a strong similarity between the treatment of bene…ts-based
taxation in this paper and Equal Sacri…ce taxation in that paper. Though Section 1.3 showed that these criteria may
yield quantitatively similar results in some cases, the similarity of treatment is not due to this connection but rather
to the requirement of an objective function that punishes deviations from an optimal allocation but respects Pareto
e¢ ciency.

13

The objective function in expressions (15) and (16) applies weight , where 0
1, to
F
B
F
B
F
B
deviations of individual utility above the allocation ci ; yi ; G
: The asymmetric punishment
i
of downward deviations from the benchmark allocation implied by (the strict case of)
1 rejects
the utilitarian idea that the distribution of utility across individuals is irrelevant. The assumption
that
0 respects a weak form of Pareto E¢ ciency ( > 0 would respect a strong form). Though
the nondi¤erentiability caused by < 1 is technically inconvenient, it respects the classical bene…tbased criterion’s priorities. In contrast, a smooth loss function would imply local indi¤erence to
symmetric deviations from the most-preferred allocation, violating the principle that individuals
who bene…t equally from the activities of the state ought to pay equal taxes.
With this objective function, we can now state a planner’s problem that closely mimics that of
the conventional optimal tax model:
Problem 1 Classical bene…t-based planner’s problem:
max

fci ;yi ;GgIi=1 2fF\ICg

W fci ; yi ; Ggi ; cFi B ; yiF B ; GF B

where W is de…ned in expressions (15) and (16) ;
F denotes the set of feasible allocations for the economy:
(
I
X
I
F = fci ; yi ; Ggi=1 :
(yi
i=1

ci )

i

;

)

G ;

and IC denotes the set of incentive compatible allocations:
n
o
IC = fci ; yi ; GgIi=1 : U (ci ; yi =f (ai ; G)) U (cj ; yj =f (ai ; G)) for all i; j 2 f1; 2; :::; Ig :

2.2

(17)

(18)

(19)

Parameterization of the model, including the ability production function

I assume a familiar form for the individual utility function, modi…ed to include the e¤ect of public
goods on ability:
1
1
yi
U (ci ; yi =f (ai ; G)) =
(ci )1
:
1
f (ai ; G)
For this utility function, I assume = 1:5 and = 3.
The novel speci…cation required in this paper is how income-earning abilities are generated,
that is, the form of the function f (ai ; G). It is important to be clear that this paper does not base
on direct empirical evidence its assumptions on the form of f (ai ; G), though estimating such a
relationship may be important for optimal tax analysis (both in this context and more generally).
Instead, I will consider a ‡exible speci…cation for f (ai ; G) in order to illustrate the potential
implications of the model. As will be clear, even a relatively simple but ‡exible speci…cation
is capable of yielding optimal policies that span a wide range of policy patterns (i.e., in terms
of progressivity and the role of government). Those numerical …ndings are consistent with the
perpetual uncertainty in bene…t-based thinking over whether the rich or poor bene…t more from
public goods. One way to interpret a contribution of this paper is to put that debate into formal
terms, clarifying the implicit conditions that resolve that uncertainty and making clear the empirical
evidence required to resolve it.
Specifying f (ai ; G) poses a number of challenges: it ought to produce plausible distributions of
ability given a realistic value of G; it ought to allow endowed ability to be related to income-earning
14

ability in a range of ways; and it ought to be as analytically simple and empirically applicable as
possible.
To address these challenges, I map individuals’endowed types to …xed percentile positions in an
ability distribution that is endogenous to the level of G.22 Speci…cally, I will assume that incomeearning ability is lognormally distributed and that the parameters of that distribution depend on
the level of G.23 Then, for any value of G, individual i will have income-earning ability equal to
the inverse cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the resulting income-earning distribution at
i’s …xed percentile position. Formally, we can write:
P (ai ) =

ln f (ai ; G)
(G)

(G)

;

where
is the standard normal cdf, P (ai ) is the percentile for type ai , and where the mean
(G) and standard deviation (G) of the lognormal income-earning distribution depend on G.
Income-earning ability can then be derived using the inverse cumulative distribution function and
its parameters, so that for type i,
ln f (ai ; G) =

1

(G)

[P (ai )] + (G) ;

Note that this structure assumes that public goods do not a¤ect the ordering of individuals in the
ability distribution. While relaxing that assumption may be of interest, it is left for future work.
One reason to assume that f (ai ; G) is order-preserving, at least in the context of a positive optimal
tax analysis, is that it may be di¢ cult to convince most people of a speci…c alternative.
Lacking evidence on the forms of (G) and (G), I assume the following simple forms:

(G) =
(G) =

G
+

+ ln G

1G

+

2G

(20)
2

;

where ; , , and are constants.
Though simple, the forms assumed in (20) have a few appealing features.
First, this speci…cation implies that all income-earning abilities approach zero as the state
disappears (i.e., limG!0 (G) = 1 because of the term
=G). A degenerate ability distribution
at zero is a natural starting point for analysis, as it addresses the classic critique of (non-classical)
bene…t-based theory: namely, that without a state income-earning abilities would be negligible (see
Murphy and Nagel, 2003, p. 17).
Second, the speci…cation lends itself to estimation with (time-series, cross-country, or panel)
data on (per capita) government expenditure and the distributional parameters of empirical ability
distributions. As the empirical viability of bene…t-based taxation has always been considered an
obstacle, speci…cations that might conceivably be taken to the data may be important.
Third, expression (20) implies that, for 1 = 2 = 0, the ability production function approaches
a familiar form as becomes small. That is,
lim f (ai ; G) = (ai ) G ;
!0

22

(21)

The equality of opportunity literature, for instance Roemer (1998), has used a similar …xed-positions technique.
Though the lognormal distribution is relatively simple, and therefore has the advantage of making clear the impact
of G on the distribution of abilities, income distributions are better described by so-called double-Pareto-lognormal
(DPLN) distributions. Future research may fruitfully extend this analysis to that case.
23

15

1 (P (a )) +
where (ai ) = exp
is constant with respect to G. Expression (21) is the simple
i
multiplicative form for which Corollaries 1 and 2 were derived in the previous section. In fact, this
expression is log-linear in G, for which we derived the especially clean results that spending on
public goods as a share of total output and the ‡at average tax rate are equal to . It may be
interesting, and reassuring, to note the (informal) intuition of Smith (1776) was that a classical
bene…t-based logic would lead to just such a proportional tax.24
To demonstrate the range of potential optimal policies under CBBT, I construct three sets
of parameter values that are consistent with the empirical status quo but that have dramatically
di¤erent optimal policy implications. Speci…cally, I choose three sets of values of , , , , 1 , and
2 so that the simulated economy in each case–assuming the status quo tax policy–will be a close
match to the overall share of spending on public goods in total income and the mean and variance
of a lognormal distribution …tted to the U.S. wage distribution.25 For status quo tax policy, I use
an approximation of the current U.S. tax system with a ‡at tax rate of 40 percent and a lumpsum
grant equal to the excess of tax revenue over government spending. To roughly calibrate the target
ability distribution, I use data on reported annual earnings and hours (as well as sample weights)
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1996 survey to calculate the distribution of wages,
a standard (though imperfect) empirical proxy for ability. The lognormal distribution that provides
the best …t to these calculated wages has a mean of 2:5 and a standard deviation of 0:7. Finally,
U.S. national accounts show government spending to be approximately 7.6 percent of GDP.
Table 1 shows these three sets of parameter values. The …rst column shows what I call the
"baseline" speci…cation, where 1 = 2 = 0 and thus f (ai ; G) satis…es expression (21). The
remaining columns of Table 1 show variations on the baseline scenario in bold. The second column
of Table 1 shows an "Expansive State" speci…cation in which the baseline value of is decreased to
allow for a larger . In this scenario, public goods have greater power to magnify endowed ability.
In the third column, I return to the baseline values of , choose an intermediate value of ; and
relax the baseline assumption that 1 and 2 are zero, instead considering a case in which increases
in G are relatively more bene…cial for workers with high endowed ability. Formally, to the extent
that increases in G raise (G), those higher in the endowed ability distribution will bene…t more
from public goods. I label this scenario the "Progressive" case, where 1 > 0 is partially o¤set by
is smaller.
2 < 0; so that a …nite (and reasonable) value for G is chosen, and
24
Note that Smith does endorse progressive taxation more generally, largely out of concern for the very poor. This
mixed perspective is exactly that generated by the positive optimal tax analysis in this paper, where a conventional
utilitarian logic motivates redistribution but a classical bene…ts-based logic limits the extent of that redistribution
and its associated progressivity. See also the earlier footnote on Smith’s mixed normative reasoning.
25
The simulation has a distribution of individuals (indexed by their percentile position in the endowed ability
distribution) choose labor e¤ort to maximize utility, taking into account the ability production function, ‡at tax rate,
and share of G in output.

16

Table 1: Parameterizations of the ability production function
Parameter 1 (Baseline) 2 (Expansive State) 3 (Progressive)
2:36
2:20
2:36
0:01
0:01
0:01
0:076
0:152
0:114
0:70
0:70
0:30
0:00
0:00
0:06
1
0:00
0:00
0:001
2
Empirical targets under Status Quo tax policy
(G) = 2:5
2:5
2:5
(G)X
= 0:7
0:7
0:7
G=
yi
0:076
0:076

2:6
0:7
0:076

i

While all three sets of parameter values are consistent with the same size of government and
shape of the ability distribution under an approximation of the status quo U.S. tax policy, they imply quite di¤erent constrained-optimal policies. To obtain those policies, we simulate the planner’s
problem in expressions (17) ; (18), and (19) with = 0, corresponding to a strict version of CBBT:
In Figure 1, we plot average tax rates along the ability distribution in the second-best optimal
bene…t-based policy for the three scenarios.

0.3
Baseline
Expansive State
Progressive

0.25

Average tax rate

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Percentile of ability distribution

0.8

1

Figure 1: Average tax rates in the constrained-optimal policy under
three sets of parameters from Table 1.
The message from these simulations is that optimal bene…t-based taxation in its classical form
can support a variety of sizes for government activity and a range of degrees of progressivity. That
is, the shares of G in total income in these three optimal policies are 7.6 percent, 15.2 percent, and
17

11.8 percent, and the last of the three exhibits substantial progressivity. Bene…t-based taxation is
not necessarily "libertarian" in the sense of a minimal state; nor is it inconsistent with progressive
taxation.26
This ‡exibility is arguably behind CBBT’s long-standing and apparently widespread appeal. As
I show in a companion paper (Weinzierl 2015), support for CBBT among the public appears to be
widespread and to cut across political and demographic categories. Rather than a niche principle
to which a small group of iconoclasts subscribe, CBBT is a unifying idea that can be consistent
with a range of views on both the impact of public goods spending on the ability distribution and,
therefore, optimal government tax and expenditure policy more generally.27
That said, Figure 1 also shows that CBBT has sharp enough implications to inform the debate
over optimal policy. First, disagreement over the incidence of bene…ts has a long history at the heart
of the analysis of bene…t-based taxation. The formalization of CBBT in this paper provides a way
to discipline that debate and describe one’s position in a more transparent, testable form. Second,
optimal taxes under CBBT include negative average tax rates only if individuals are harmed by
the activities of the state, an unlikely situation in modern developed economies. As a consequence,
supporters of greater redistribution are less likely to support CBBT, and this feature of CBBT
makes it easier for voters and policy makers to understand the positions they defend. As discussed at
length in section 3, evidence suggests that a mixture of a non-redistributive principle such as CBBT
with a redistributive principle such as utilitarianism is likely to provide the best description of the
overall criterion that prevails in public judgments of tax policy. Understanding the implications of
CBBT, both in general and given a speci…c ability production function, can help individuals decide
what weight they put on the components of that mixture.
We can connect the results shown in Figure 1 to the analysis of …rst-best policy from Section
2 by calculating the realized values of the Hicksian partial elasticity of complementarity between
public goods and endowed ability, G;a
as de…ned in expression (9). In Table 2 we show these values
i
for the three cases plotted in Figure 1:
Table 2: Hicksian partial elasticities of complementarity G;a
i
Percentile of
1 (Baseline) 2 (Expansive State) 3 (Progressive)
ability distrib.
10
1:00
1:00
5:91
30
1:00
1:00
1:82
50
1:00
1:00
1:55
70
1:00
1:00
1:43
90
1:00
1:00
1:40
As expected, the multiplicative form for the ability production function in the …rst two cases
yields G;a
= 1:00 for all types, while case 3 shows that the progressivity of taxes is connected
i
to the strong complementarity assumed between public goods and endowed ability in that case.
To the extent that the Hicksian partial elasticity is a potential object of empirical study, it may
therefore provide an important target for calibration exercises using this model.
26

Both of these features are, in fact, consistent with Smith’s view of taxation. Smith (1776) writes, "The third
and last duty of the sovereign or commonwealth is that of erecting and maintaining those public institutions and
those public works...necessary for the defence of the society, and for the administration of justice,...for facilitating
the commerce of the society, and those for promoting the instruction of the people." Also see the earlier footnote on
Smith’s endorsement of progressivity.
27
To take a speci…c example, both Barack Obama and Mitt Romney–who as shown in the Appendix express quite
di¤erent views of the role of the state and optimal progressivity–invoked CBBT as justi…cation for their positions in
the 2012 U.S. presidential election.

18

3

Quantitative results under a mix of the classical bene…t-based
and utilitarian criteria for optimal taxes

While the bene…t-based criterion plays a prominent role in public rhetoric over taxation, it is
unlikely to be the only principle that guides the design of taxes. In particular, the utilitarian
criterion that dominates quantitative work in the optimal tax literature almost certainly plays a
role–perhaps a very large role–in policy evaluation. The ubiquity of redistribution in advanced
economies requires, given that bene…t-based taxation is unlikely to recommend negative average
tax rates on any individual, that some other principle exerts in‡uence on policy; utilitarianism is a
natural candidate for that alternative. In fact, the utilitarian logic is consistent with non-bene…tbased arguments with which American politicians and analysts justify tax policy preferences, for
instance when stressing the importance of helping the "needy" or those who are "struggling" to
make necessary purchases.28
In this context it may be of interest that Richard Musgrave (in Buchanan and Musgrave, 1999),
toward the end of an illustrious career as a scholar of taxation and the role of the state, wrote:
"Moreover, observers such as myself who tend to be egalitarian should not rule out the norm of
Lockean entitlement to earnings (Locke [1690]; 1960; Nozick 1974) as an alternative criterion that
deserves consideration. Most people, I suggest, would wish to assign some weight to both norms...I
also think that entitlement to earnings, the Lockean and Adam Smith tradition, has its merit. I
would give it, say, one-quarter weight with three-quarters to the Rawlsian concept."
In this section, I demonstrate that an objective for taxation that incorporates both the classical
bene…t-based and utilitarian criteria can, as this discussion suggests, yield optimal policies consistent with important features of existing policy. The …rst step in that demonstration is to show how
such a mixed objective can be formalized.

3.1

Formalizing a mixed objective function

To combine CBBT and utilitarianism into one objective, I take advantage of a convenient feature of
the formalization of the classical bene…t-based planner’s problem in expressions (17) ; (18), and (19).
Recall that, in that problem, the planner’s desire to stay near the …rst-best bene…t-based allocation
is constrained not only by feasibility and incentive compatibility but also by Pareto e¢ ciency. As
discussed earlier, the Pareto e¢ ciency requirement is included by having the planner’s objective
not only punish deviations of individuals’utilities below their benchmark levels but also reward (at
least weakly) deviations of individuals’utilities above those levels. Formally, in expression (16), we
assume that
0.
The extreme values for imply an objective based on only one principle. In the previous section, for example, we simulated constrained-optimal bene…t-based taxation by assuming = 0,
implying a strict commitment on the part of the planner to the classical bene…t-based criterion.
At the other extreme, when = 1, the planner’s objective is equivalent to the conventional utilitarian objective to maximize the unweighted sum of individual utilities. To see this, impose
= 1 on expression (16) to obtain V PUiF B ; Ui = UiF B Ui , so that the objective function in
expression (15) simpli…es to W ( ) =
Ui UiF B ; and the planner’s objective (17) becomes
28

At the same time, redistribution–a key source of welfare gains in the standard approach–is often explicitly rejected
as a justi…cation for tax policy, even by policymakers who might be expected to support it. For example, the statement
by President Obama given in the Introduction includes the claim that "everybody pays." Also consider a statement
he made in 2012: "So when we have debates now about our tax policy, when we have debates now about the Bu¤ett
rule that we’ve been talking about, where we say if you make a million dollars a year or more you shouldn’t pay a
lower tax rate than your secretary, that is not an argument about redistribution. That is an argument about growth."

19

P

maxfci ;yi ;GgI

i=1 2fF\ICg
fci ; yi ; GgIi=1 ,

UiF B . Because the allocations UiF B do not depend on the chosen
P
this objective is equivalent to: maxfci ;yi ;GgI 2fF\ICg Ui ; the utilitarian
Ui

allocation
i=1
planner’s objective.
Intermediate values of the parameter provide, therefore, a simple way to form an objective
function that lies between–in a formal sense–the classical bene…t-based and utilitarian principles.

3.2

Features of optimal policy under a mixed objective

We now show, brie‡y, how varying can yield a wide range of optimal policy results. Most
important, we show that optimal policy computed with certain values for can match several
arguably important features of existing policy that are di¢ cult to reconcile in the conventional
model (where = 1).
Progressivity First, I consider optimal average tax rate schedules for a calibrated U.S. ability
distribution. I discretize (into 50 types) the ability distribution obtained as the "baseline" case from
Table 1 for the values of , , , , 1 , and 2 : this was the set of parameters that yielded a small
government with a ‡at average tax rate as constrained-optimal in the previous section. Figure 2
shows the average tax rate results for four values of :

1

0.5

Average tax rate

0

-0.5

-1

Benefit-based (0.0)
Case 2 (0.2)
Case 3 (0.4)
Utilitarian (1.0)

-1.5

-2

0

0.5

1
1.5
2
Gross income (earnings)

2.5

3
x 10

5

Figure 2: Average tax rates for four values of (in parentheses), assuming
the baseline ability production function.

As this …gure shows, the extent of progressivity in the optimal policy is reduced when the classical bene…t-based criterion receives greater weight in the objective function (under the baseline
speci…cation of the ability production function).
The average tax rate paid by high earners in the conventional utilitarian policy shown in Figure
2 is 46 percent, while the Congressional Budget O¢ ce reports that the average federal tax rate
20

(including all federal taxes) averaged 30 percent from 2000 through 2010. Though the gap between
those …gures has many possible explanations, note that the average tax rates assessed under the
mixed cases (2 and 3) in Figure 2 are 31 and 39 percent, substantially closer to what prevails in
current U.S. policy.
As for low earners, the CBBT and utilitarian criteria yield sharply con‡icting recommendations,
with negative average tax rates implied for 0, 31, 47, and 57 percent of the population in the four
cases shown in Figure 2. The average tax rates at the 10th percentile of the simulated distribution
are approximately 7, -40, -80, and -140 percent, while in reality the CBO reports that in 2011
the lowest earning quintile of Americans received net income (after taxes and transfers) 55 percent
greater than their market income (before taxes and transfers). As with the comparison of taxes on
high earners, these rough comparisons suggest that the mixed cases (2 and 3) in Figure 2 provide
a relatively good …t with existing U.S. tax policy.
Rank reversals in utility Second, I consider the distribution of utility levels under the
optimal policy in a …rst-best setting. As has been known since Mirrlees (1971), the …rst-best
utilitarian tax policy recommends that income-earning ability be inversely related to utility levels.
That is, consumption is equalized across types, but those with higher income-earning ability are
required to exert more labor e¤ort. While the second-best optimal policy cannot achieve such "rank
reversals," many commentators have argued that prevailing norms about economic justice would
reject the idea that an unconstrained optimal policy would include them (see, for example, King
1983 and Saez and Stantcheva 2015).
The concern over rank reversals relates directly to the "endowment taxation" nature of the
conventional modern approach to optimal taxation. Philosophers and legal scholars have extensively
analyzed this issue (for instances of the latter, see Hasen (2007), Markovits (2003), Rakowski (2000),
Shaviro (2002), Stark (2005), Sugin (2011), and Zelenak (2006)). Rawls (2001) himself worried that
an endowment tax "would force the more able into those occupations in which earnings were high
enough for them to pay o¤ the tax in the required period of time; it would interfere with their liberty
to conduct their life within the scope of the principles of justice."29 The wide-ranging a¢ nity for
this critique is apparent when Rawls’warning is coupled with Robert Nozick’s (1974) claim that
"taxation of earnings from labor is on a par with forced labor" because "it is like forcing the person
to work n hours for another’s purpose."30
To examine the e¤ect of using a mixed objective on the appeal of rank reversals, Figure 3 shows
the utility levels achieved by all ability types under the …rst-best policies in the same four cases as
were used to produce Figure 2.
29

Also see Richard Arneson (2000), who writes: "It is better to regard Rawls as making the point that ...it is a ‡aw
that utilitarianism would have the decision about what should be done vary only with the utility total that di¤erent
acts could achieve."
30
Stark (2005) o¤ers a detailed argument that the concerns of Rawls and Nozick are closely connected.

21

2
1.8
1.6
1.4

U

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

Benefit-based (0.0)
Case 2 (0.2)
Case 3 (0.4)
Utilitarian (1.0)

0.2
0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
Percentile of ability distribution

0.8

1

Figure 3: Utility levels by ability type in the …rst-best (full information)
optimal allocations for four values of (shown in parentheses), assuming
the baseline ability production function

As this …gure shows, the pure utilitarian objective puts in place substantial rank reversals, while
the strict bene…t-based case has utility positively related to ability in the …rst-best. Intermediate
cases temper the rank reversals of the utilitarian approach.
Tagging Finally, I consider the implications of a mixed criterion for the taxation of personal
characteristics, otherwise known as tagging (following Akerlof 1978). In Mankiw and Weinzierl
(2009) and Weinzierl (2014), it is shown that a conventional utilitarian optimal policy would levy
substantially greater tax rates on some demographic groups in the United States relative to others.
In fact, in the modern theory of optimal taxation, tagging is a free lunch, and a wide variety of
candidate tags exist. Any observable and largely inelastic characteristic across which the distribution of abilities di¤ers ought to a¤ect tax schedules. These conclusions stand in stark contrast
to the limited extent of tagging in actual policy. The few examples of existing tagging bear little
resemblance to the broad and nuanced application recommended by modern optimal tax theory.
In Weinzierl (2014), a mixed normative criterion that blends utilitarianism with some (empiricallygrounded) weight on Mill’s principle of Equal Sacri…ce is shown to diminish optimal tagging of these
characteristics dramatically and–crucially–much more than it diminishes optimal redistribution.
In this subsection, I …nd a similar result when the objective function blends utilitarianism with
the principle of bene…t-based taxation and the e¤ects of public goods on ability are assumed to
be independent of the tagged characteristics. The commonality of results across this paper and
Weinzierl (2014) is related to the connection shown between CBBT and Equal Sacri…ce above.
To show this result, I assume that three tagged groups have di¤erent values for the parameters
(G) and (G) in the ability production function (20). The ability distributions for these three

22

groups are shown in Figure 4.

0.4
Low tagged group
Middle tagged group
High tagged group

0.35

Population proportion

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0

10

20
30
40
50
60
Ability level under constrained benefit-based policy

70

80

Figure 4: Ability distributions for three tagged groups.

Based on the distributions in Figure 4, a utilitarian criterion will recommend tagging: e.g., taxing
a member of the "High" group more than a member of the "Low" group who has the same incomeearning ability. On the other hand, CBBT will not endorse tagging, because individuals with the
same ability levels have all bene…ted equally from the activities of the state, regardless of their
tagged group (by assumption).
By varying the value of , we can compare the extent of tagging pursued by planners with
di¤erent weights on the classical bene…t-based criterion relative to conventional utilitarianism. I
measure the extent of tagging by calculating the total extra taxes paid (or transfers received) by a
tagged group, as a share of that group’s total income, when a planner initially not allowed to tag
is given the power to do so (i.e., to make a person’s tax payments depend on which tagged group
they belong to). Table 3 shows these tagging results for the same set of values of in expression
(16) as were used to generate Figures 2 and 3. It also shows the maximum average tax rate assessed
in each simulation.
Table 3: Extent of Tagging (Extra tax or transfer rate, in percent)
Tagged group
Low
Middle
High
Max ATR
Bene…t-based
0
0.1
0.0
-0.1
8.2
Case 2
0:20
-0.2
0.0
0.2
33.2
Case 3
0:40
-2.5
0.4
0.6
42.6
Utilitarian
1:00
-9.8
-2.0
7.8
54.3
As this table shows, the extent of tagging falls dramatically in Case 3 and especially Case 2
relative to the utilitarian benchmark (Case 4), while the progressivity of the tax schedule diminishes
much less. In words, these results show that an objective for optimal policy that gives weight to
23

the classical bene…t-based criterion as well as utilitarianism can reconcile prevailing policy’s limited
use of tagging and substantial progressivity.
It is important to clarify that the opposition to tagging under the classical bene…t-based criterion depends on the assumption that the e¤ects of public goods are independent of the tagged
characteristic. If they are not–for example if some groups are advantaged more than others by
biased public goods provision–then classical bene…t-based taxation would recommend taxing based
on those characteristics (i.e., tagging). This subtlety is consistent with policies–such as A¢ rmative
Action in the United States–that are designed to o¤set the disparities in how endowed ability is
translated into income-earning ability across demographic groups.

4

Conclusion

In this paper, I have explored whether we might incorporate into modern tax theory a logic for
tax design that appears to play a role in public reasoning but that has been largely set aside by
theorists. The idea that an individual ought to pay taxes based on the bene…t he or she derives from
the public goods the government produces has been, for many centuries, an intuitively compelling
one. I marry that intuition to two ideas: …rst, Adam Smith’s "classical" view that the best measure
of that bene…t is a person’s income-earning ability; and second, the plausible assumption that an
individual’s income-earning ability is a function of both endowed ability and public goods.
As a result, classical bene…t-based taxation turns out to …t seamlessly into a generalized version
of the standard Mirrleesian model. I apply Lindahl’s approach to assigning taxes based on marginal
bene…t in that model, and show that we can use familiar modern methods to characterize …rstbest policy analytically and second-best policy quantitatively. Moreover, the required components
of the model are, at least in principle, amenable to empirical analysis using standard data and
straightforward elasticities.
Simulations of optimal policy in this model, using an objective function that gives weight to both
the conventional utilitarian criterion and the classical bene…t-based view, can yield policies that
match well several features of existing policy that are di¢ cult to reconcile under the conventional
objective. To the extent that such a mixed criterion is a good approximation of prevailing objectives
for tax policy, this model may o¤er a useful approach to positive optimal tax theory.

24

5

Appendix

5.1

Classical bene…t-based reasoning in American political rhetoric

This brief section highlights additional instances in which prominent policymakers or policy commentators have relied on the classical logic of bene…t-based taxation in their discussions of tax
policy.
In the 2012 U.S. Presidential election, a …erce debate erupted over the following remarks made
by President Obama.
There are a lot of wealthy, successful Americans who agree with me — because they
want to give something back. They know they didn’t — look, if you’ve been successful,
you didn’t get there on your own....Somebody helped to create this unbelievable American system that we have that allowed you to thrive. Somebody invested in roads and
bridges. If you’ve got a business — you didn’t build that. Somebody else made that
happen.
The Republican nominee for president, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, seized on
the remark and responded:
He [Obama] said this, “If you’ve got a business, you didn’t build that. Somebody
else made that happen.”That somebody else is government, in his view. He goes on to
describe the people who deserve the credit for building this business. And, of course, he
describes people who we care very deeply about, who make a di¤erence in our lives: our
school teachers, …re…ghters, people who build roads. We need those things. We value
school teachers, …re…ghters, people who build roads. You really couldn’t have a business
if you didn’t have those things. But, you know, we pay for those things. Alright? The
taxpayers pay for government. It’s not like government just provides those to all of us
and we say, “Oh, thank you government for doing those things.” No, in fact, we pay
for them and we bene…t from them and we appreciate the work that they do and the
sacri…ces that are done by people who work in government. But they did not build this
business.
The important feature of this exchange, for the purposes of this paper, is that Obama and
Romney agree that public goods are essential for production and that the individuals who bene…t
from them ought to pay for them. Both, in other words, appear to support the classical view of
bene…t-based taxation.31
Examples of a¢ nity for the classical view come not only from politicians and economists. Warren
Bu¤ett is a prominent American investor and policy advisor behind the so-called "Bu¤ett Rule"
that would set a ‡oor on the average tax rate paid by high income earners. For many years, Bu¤ett
has argued for higher taxes on the rich with the metaphor he calls the Ovarian Lottery, as in the
following statement.
31

In fact, the disagreement between the candidates’ positions appears still narrower when one considers that the
Obama campaign later asserted that the President had been referring to roads and bridges, not the business, when
he said “you didn’t build that.” That is, both Obama and Romney appear to grant individuals’some moral claim to
their income. That position is consistent with the classical bene…t based logic but in contrast with the conventional
Mirrleesian model, as the latter is based on a Rawlsian framework in which individuals do not have such a claim–see
Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2006) for more discussion.

25

"Imagine there are two identical twins in the womb, both equally bright and energetic. And the genie says to them, ’One of you is going to be born in the United States,
and one of you is going to be born in Bangladesh. And if you wind up in Bangladesh,
you will pay no taxes. What percentage of your income would you bid to be the one
that is born in the United States?’ It says something about the fact that society has
something to do with your fate and not just your innate qualities. The people who say,
’I did it all myself,’and think of themselves as Horatio Alger – believe me, they’d bid
more to be in the United States than in Bangladesh. That’s the Ovarian Lottery."
Bu¤ett’s concept of the ovarian lottery re‡ects an a¢ nity for both the Rawlsian normative view
that lies behind the social welfare maximization approach of Mirrleesian optimal tax theory and
the classical view of bene…t-based taxation. First, the ovarian lottery is a close cousin of Rawls’
veil of ignorance, and in other contexts Bu¤ett directly endorses the idea that combining such a
view with the assumption of diminishing marginal utility of income generates a reason–in fact the
reason in the standard model–for income redistribution.32 The remarkable aspect of Bu¤ett’s
reasoning, for this paper’s purposes, is that it also draws so directly on the bene…t-as-ability logic
for taxation. It seems that Bu¤ett, like most people, has a multifaceted normative perspective on
optimal tax design.

5.2

Proofs of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1

Use the second and third FOCs to set

Use

X
i2I

yi fG (ai ; Gi ) 1
=
f (ai ; Gi ) p
i

i:

(22)

= 1 to obtain
X yi fG (ai ; Gi )
i2I

f (ai ; Gi )

= p:

At the Lindahl optimum, Gi = Gj = G for all types, so that
X yi fG (ai ; G )
= p:
f (ai ; G )
i2I

Now, note that the MRS for individual i when Gi = Gj = G for all types is:
yi fG (ai ;G )
1
f (ai ;G )
f (ai ;Gi ) ul
u0 (ci )

ci ; f (ayii;G)

or, using the …rst and second FOCs, this simpli…es to:
yi fG (ai ; G )
:
f (ai ; G )
Using (22), take the sum across i to obtain the result, imposing that Gi = Gj = G for all types.
To prove the corollary, use the expression
fG (ai ; G ) = ai G

1

in the result from the Proposition and simplify.
32

See, for example, Bu¤ett’s entry at the Giving Pledge: http://cms.givingpledge.org/. While Bu¤ett, there, is
speaking of voluntary redistribution, his advocacy for more progressive taxation suggests he would go beyond that.

26

5.3

Proofs of Proposition 2 and Corollary 2

Using the expression for individual taxes, we can express the average tax rate for individual i as:
AT Ri =

i pG

=

yi

fG (ai ; G )
G :
f (ai ; G )

(23)

Take the derivative with respect to ai to obtain
f (ai ; G ) fG;a (ai ; G ) fG (ai ; G ) fa (ai ; G )
@AT Ri
=
:
@ai
f (ai ; G ) f (ai ; G ) =G

(24)

The denominator is positive, so the sign is determined by the numerator. It is positive i¤:
f (ai ; G ) fG;a (ai ; G ) > fG (ai ; G ) fa (ai ; G )
We assume all (single) partials are positive, so this can be written as
fG;a (ai ; G )
fa (ai ; G )
>
fG (ai ; G )
f (ai ; G )
which gives the …rst condition. Now, the sign is negative i¤
f (ai ; G ) fG;a (ai ; G ) < fG (ai ; G ) fa (ai ; G ) :
Again, assuming all single partials are positive, this yields the second condition:
fG;a (ai ; G )
fa (ai ; G )
<
:
fG (ai ; G )
f (ai ; G )
To prove the corollary, substitute the Cobb-Douglas function into the average tax rate expression
and simplify.

5.4

Proof of Proposition 3

The optimal level of public goods is G =

p

X

yi : In the hypothetical allocation with no taxes,

i2I

the individual sets

ci = yi = h (ai ) (G ) = h (ai )

p

so utility is
U (ci ; li ) = ln h (ai )

p

X
i2I

yi

X

yi

i2I

! !

!
1

,

:

(25)

In the actual optimal allocation, with costly public goods, Corollary 2 showed that AT Ri =
i pG =yi = . Individuals set
1
ci
1
h (ai ) G

yi
h (ai ) G
1
yi
G h (ai ) G
27

=

1

=
=

ip

Combining the second and third,
i pG

yi =
Combining this with the …rst and second,
1
h (ai )

1
=
ci

1

ip

G

(1

) 1

which, into the budget constraint, gives
G=

1

1

h (ai )
ip

1

!11

:

Rearrange to isolate the tax share:
i

1

1

1 h (ai )
=
p G1

:

1

Then use the budget constraint on tax shares to solve for G
1
1=
p G1

1

1

1

X

h (ai ) :

i2I

and thus
G=

1

1
p

1

1

so
i

X

h (ai )

i2I

!11

:

h (ai )
=X
;
h (ai )
i2I

which is a nice side result that the tax share is the share of scaled endowed ability. Now we can
solve for allocations.
! 1
1
1 X
1
1
h
(a
)
ip p
i
1
i2I

yi =

1

ci = (h (ai ))

ip

1

1
p

1

1

B
U (ci ; li ) = ln @h (ai )
0

p

U (ci ; li ) = ln @h (ai )

X

h (ai )

i2I

p

X
i2I

!

1

1

1
1
!

h (ai )

28

!1

1

(1

1

)

(1

)

1

h (ai )

i2I

and utility is
0

X

!1
1
(1

(1
1

)

1
A

)

1

1

C
A

1
1

1

1
1

:

:

(26)

(27)

vs.

0

U (ci ; li ) = ln @h (ai )

p

X

!

1

h (ai )

i2I

1

1
1

1

!1

Sacri…ce is, therefore:
U (ci ; li )

U (ci ; li )

0

= ln @h (ai )
0

B
ln @h (ai )

or

U (ci ; li )

p

X

!

X

1
!

1

1

U (ci ; li ) =

which is constant across types.

29

ln

1

1
1

+

!1
1

1

h (ai )

i2I

1

1

h (ai )

i2I

p

1

1
1

1

A

!1

1
A

(1

1

:

(28)

1
)

1
C
A

(29)

1

1
1

(30)

(31)

References
[1] Aaron, Henry and M. McGuire, (1970). "Public Goods and Income Distribution," Econometrica, 38.
[2] Aaron, Henry and M. McGuire (1976), "Reply to Geo¤rey Brennan," Econometrica, 44.
[3] Arneson, Richard J. (2000). "Rawls versus utilitarianism in the light of political liberalism," The Idea
of a Political Liberalism: Essays on Rawls. Lanham MD: Rowman and Little…eld.

[4] Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph Stiglitz (1980) Lectures in Public Economics, New York: McGraw-Hill.
[5] Best, Michael and Henrik Kleven (2013), "Optimal Income Taxation with Career E¤ects of Work
E¤ort," Working Paper.

[6] Blakey, Roy G. (1914). "The New Income Tax," American Economic Review, 4(1), March.
[7] Boadway, Robin (2012). From Optimal Tax Theory to Tax Policy. Cambridge:MIT Press.
[8] Bovenberg, L. and B. Jacobs, (2011)."Optimal Taxation of Human Capital and the Earnings Function,"
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 13(6).

[9] Brennan, H. G. (1976). ""On the Distributional Implications of Public Goods," Econometrica, 44.
[10] Brennan, H. G. (1976). "A Rejoinder to the Aaron-McGuire Reply," Econometrica, 44.
[11] Buchanan, James and Richard Musgrave (1999). Public Finance and Public Choice: Two Contrasting
Visions of the State, CESifo

[12] Feldstein, Martin (1976). "On the Theory of Tax Reform," Journal of Public Economics, 6, pp. 77-104.
[13] Fleurbaey, Marc and Francois Maniquet (2006). "Fair Income Tax," Review of Economic Studies, 73.
[14] Foley, Duncan (1970). "Lindahl’s Solution and the Core of an Economy with Public Goods," Econometrica, 38.

[15] Gaertner, Wulf and Erik Schokkaert (2012). Empirical Social Choice: Questionnaire-Experimental Studies on Distributive Justice. Cambridge.

[16] Gelber, Alexander and Matthew Weinzierl (2015), "Equalizing Outcomes and Equalizing Opportunities:
Optimal Taxation when Children’s Abilities Depend on Parents’Resources," National Tax Journal.

[17] Hasen, David M. (2007). "Liberalism and Ability Taxation," Texas Law Review 85(5), April.
[18] Hellwig, Martin (2005), "A utilitarian approach to the provision and pricing of excludable public goods,"
Journal of Public Economics, 89(11-12), pp. 1981-2003.

[19] Hines, James R. (2000). "What is bene…t taxation," Journal of Public Economics, 75.
[20] Institute of Fiscal Studies, Mirrlees, J.A., S. Adam, T. Besley, R. Blundell, S. Bon, R. Chote, M.
Gammie, P. Johnson, G. Myles, and J. Poterba (eds.) (2010) Dimensions of Tax Design: The Mirrlees
Review. Oxford University Press.

[21] Kaneko, Mamoru. (1977a) "The Ratio Equilibria and a Voting Game in a Public Goods Economy, "
Journal of Public Economics, 16, pp. 123-136

30

[22] Kaneko, Mamoru. (1977b) "The Ratio Equilibria and the Core of the Voting Game G(N, W) in a Public
Goods Economy, " Econometrica, 45(7), pp. 1589-1594

[23] Kapicka, Marek. 2006. “Optimal Income Taxation with Human Capital Accumulation and Limited
Recordkeeping.” Review of Economic Dynamics 9(4): 612-639.

[24] Kaplow, Louis (2008). The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, Princeton.
[25] Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell (2001). "Any non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment Violates
the Pareto Principle," Journal of Political Economy 109(2).

[26] King, Mervyn A. (1983). "An Index of Inequality: With Applications to Horizontal Equity and Social
Mobility," Econometrica.

[27] Lindahl, Erik (1919). "Just Taxation – A Positive Solution" (E. Henderson, transl.) in Musgrave,
Richard A. and A.T. Peacock, Eds, Classics in the Theory of Public Finance. Macmillan.

[28] Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015a). "De Gustibus non est Taxandum," Journal of Public Economics, 124.
[29] Lockwood and Weinzierl (2015b). "Positive and Normative Judgments Implicit in U.S. Tax Policy, and
the Costs of Unequal Growth and Recessions." Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming).

[30] Mankiw and Weinzierl (2009). "The Optimal Taxation of Height," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2.

[31] Markovits, Daniel (2003), "How Much Redistribution Should There Be?" Yale Faculty Scholarship
Series. Paper 412

[32] Matsumoto, Mutsumi, (2001), "Public Input Provision in an Optimal Income Tax Model," FinanzArchiv.

[33] Mill, John Stuart (1871). Principles of Political Economy. Oxford University Press, 1994. Book V, page
169.

[34] Mirrlees, J.A., (1971). "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of Economic Studies 38, 175-208.

[35] Moulin, Herve (1987). "Egalitarian-Equivalent Cost Sharing of a Public Good," Econometrica, 55.
[36] Murphy, Liam and Thomas Nagel (2002), The Myth of Ownership, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[37] Musgrave, Richard A. (1959). The Theory of Public Finance. McGraw-Hill.
[38] Nozick, Robert (1974). Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
[39] Petty, William (1677). "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions," cited in Musgrave (1959).
[40] Rakowski, Eric (2000). "Can Wealth Taxes be Justi…ed," NYU Tax Law Review, 53.
[41] Rawls, John (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[42] Rawls, John (2001). Justice as Fairness. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[43] Roemer (1998). Equality of Opportunity, Harvard.

31

[44] Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva (2015). "Generalized Social Welfare Weights for Optimal Tax
Theory." American Economic Review.

[45] Salanié, Bernard, (2011). The Economics of Taxation. Cambridge: MIT Press..
[46] Samuelson, Paul A, (1954). "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of Economics and
Statistics.

[47] Samuelson, Paul A, (1955). "Diagrammatic Exposition of a Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 37(4), November.

[48] Seligman, Edwin R. A. (1908), "Progressive Taxation in Theory and Practice," American Economic
Association Quarterly.

[49] Shaviro, Daniel (2002), “Endowment and Inequality,” in Thorndike and Ventry Jr., eds., Tax Justice:
The Ongoing Debate. Urban Institute.

[50] Shaviro, Daniel (2013). "The Forgotten Henry Simons," NYU Law School Working Paper.
[51] She¤rin, Steven M. (2013). Tax fairness and Folk Justice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[52] Simons, Henry (1938). Personal Income Taxation. Chicago: University of Chicago.
[53] Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
[54] Stantcheva, Stefanie, (2014), "Optimal Taxation and Human Capital Policies over the Life Cycle,"
Working paper.

[55] Stark, Kirk J. (2005). "Enslaving the Beachcomber: Some Thoughts on the Liberty Objections to
Endowment Taxation," UCLA Law and Economics Research Series.

[56] Stiglitz, Joseph (1987). "Pareto E¢ cient and Optimal Taxation and the New New Welfare Economics,"
Handbook of Public Economics, Chapter 15.

[57] Sugin, Linda (2011). "A Philosophical Objection to the Optimal Tax Model," NYU Tax Law Review.
[58] Weinzierl, Matthew (2014). "The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity and a
role for Equal Sacri…ce," Journal of Public Economics, 118.

[59] Weinzierl, Matthew (2015). "Popular Acceptance of Morally Arbitrary Luck and Widespread Support
for Classical Bene…t-Based Taxation," working paper.

[60] Werning, Ivan, (2007). "Pareto E¢ cient Income Taxation," Working Paper, MIT, April.
[61] West, E.G. and R.J. Staaf (1979), "The Distributional Implications of Public Goods Revisited," Econometrica, 47.

[62] Zelenak, Lawrence (2006). "Taxing Endowment," Duke Law Journal, 55(6), April.

32

