                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     UNEMPLOYMENT AND HEALTH BEHAVIORS OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE:
                       A LONGITUDINAL VIEW

                                           Gregory Colman
                                            Dhaval Dave

                                        Working Paper 20748
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20748


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




The authors thank Catherine Maclean for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Gregory Colman and Dhaval Dave. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Unemployment and Health Behaviors Over the Business Cycle: a Longitudinal View
Gregory Colman and Dhaval Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 20748
December 2014
JEL No. E32,I12,J22

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the first-order internal effects of unemployment on a range of health behaviors during
the most recent recession using longitudinal data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79). Consistent with prior studies based
on cross-sectional data, we find that becoming unemployed is associated with a small increase in leisure-time
exercise and in body weight, a moderate decrease in smoking, and a substantial decline in total physical
activity. We also find that unemployment is associated with a decline in purchases of fast food. Together,
these results imply that both energy consumption and expenditure decline in the U.S. during recessions,
the net result being a slight increase in body weight. There is generally considerable heterogeneity
in these effects across specific health behaviors, across the intensive and extensive margins, across
the outcome distribution, and across gender.


Gregory Colman
Pace University
Department of Economics
41 Park Row, 11th Floor
New York, NY 10038
and NBER
gcolman@pace.edu

Dhaval Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
I.     Introduction

       Unemployment often imposes a heavy financial burden on households, but whether it

also imposes a health cost is much debated (Jin, Shah, & Svoboda, 1995; Ruhm, 2000; Stevens,

Miller, Page, & Filipski, 2011). Some health effects are direct and uncontroversial, such as an

increase in psychological stress and stress-related illnesses, while others are indirect and more

complex. In particular, some researchers find that unemployment causes persons to behave more

healthily: they smoke and drink less, and exercise and sleep more, changes that if maintained

would improve health (Ruhm, 2003, 2005). Others have found that unemployment does not

improve health behaviors or even makes them worse (Böckerman et al., 2007; Charles &

DeCicca, 2008; Colman & Dave, 2013; Dave & Kelly, 2012). The studies mentioned above

consider the effect of the macroeconomy on health behaviors. A separate and older literature has

looked at the effects on health and health behaviors of a person’s own employment status. These

studies, however, have generally focused on narrow samples of workers (i.e. construction

workers, as in Leino-Arjas, Liira, Mutanen, Malmivaara, and Matikainen, 1999), or they have

focused simply on correlations without attempting to infer causal effects, or sought causal effects

but lacked plausibly exogenous shocks to employment. In this study we use two nationally-

representative longitudinal surveys, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), to examine whether a large exogenous

shock to employment—the Great Recession from 2007 to 2009—affected cigarette smoking,

obesity, recreational exercise, total physical activity, routine medical visits, and several measures

of dietary behavior.

       We address several key gaps in the literature and make a number of contributions. To

begin with, ours is the first study, as far as we know, that analyzes the effect of unemployment



                                                                                                    3
on energy intake, energy expenditure, and the net effect (BMI) among a given sample of persons

over time, that is, using longitudinal data. This is especially valuable in studying BMI. Prior

research on the effects of unemployment on BMI has either found no or small effects of

unemployment. This may reflect that the true effect, if it exists, is simply too small to measure

given the errors in measuring height, weight, and employment status in a sufficiently large

population-based sample. Therefore there is value in determining the effect by joining a

combination of related outcomes. By analyzing both energy intake and expenditure we can

assess if they appear to balance, and thus support a null BMI effect, or if they both imply that

BMI should increase or decrease. In any case, analyzing both energy intake and outflow for the

same persons over time can place the BMI results in context.

         Second, unlike other longitudinal studies of health behaviors and unemployment (e.g.

Ásgeirsdóttir, Corman, Noonan, Ólafsdóttir, & Reichman, 2014; Falba, Teng, Sindelar, & Gallo,

2005; Leino-Arjas et al., 1999; Morris & Cook, 1991; Novo, Hammarström, & Janlert, 2000),

our data sets span two recessions for most of our outcomes, and envelopes the recent recession

for all of them (Ásgeirsdóttir et al., 2014).1 All studies seeking the causal effect of

unemployment rely on exogenous increases or decreases in unemployment. Job loss is much

more likely to be exogenous in a recession, especially one as deep as the most recent one. Also,

job loss in a booming economy is less likely to identify the effects of unemployment than in a

prolonged recession. Recent job losers will change their behavior little if they expect soon to be

re-employed, whereas if they expect joblessness to last, they will adjust to a possibly prolonged

decline in income and increase in non-working time. In addition, compared with prior




1
 Ásgeirsdóttir et al. (2014) study the effects of the Icelandic financial crisis on health behaviors, based on two
waves pre- and post-crisis.

                                                                                                                     4
longitudinal studies, our data contain multiple observations on each participant over a much

longer time span, from 1999 to 2009 in the PSID, and from 1998 to 2010 in the NLSY79.

       Finally, a number of the outcomes we study have been analyzed previously using only

cross-sectional data (e.g. Pharr, Moonie, and Bungum (2011)), essentially comparing the health

behaviors of employed and unemployed persons. Of course, such comparisons cannot reveal

unemployment’s causal effect because of the many unobserved differences between the two

groups, many of which can be controlled for in longitudinal analysis. Some studies have

sidestepped the endogeneity of employment status by looking only at unemployed persons who

lost their jobs because their companies closed down (Deb, Gallo, Ayyagari, Fletcher, & Sindelar,

2011; Salm, 2009). Nonetheless, certain questions can only be addressed with longitudinal data.

For example, prior cross-sectional studies have found that an increase in unemployment is

associated with an increase in light physical activity, though not with an increase in vigorous

physical activity (e.g Ruhm, 2005). These studies have tended to interpret this result as showing

that formerly inactive persons have become moderately active. However, perhaps the higher

unemployment rate has caused vigorous exercisers to become light exercisers. There is no way to

distinguish these possibilities using cross sectional data. With our long-span longitudinal data,

we can parse out the effects for persons who are initially sedentary or active prior to any shift in

their employment status. Similarly, if recessions reduce smoking, cross-sectional data cannot

reveal whether the change reflects light smokers quitting or heavy smokers cutting back. We are

also able to differentiate the effects of short-term versus long-term unemployment, which may

elicit heterogeneous responses across various health behaviors. Another issue, which cannot be

studied with cross-sectional data and that has subsequently been bypassed in the literature,

relates to potential compositional selection bias arising from inter-state migration that is



                                                                                                       5
correlated with job prospects and health. With longitudinal information, we can assess the

sensitivity of the estimates to controlling for this selective migration.

II. Literature Review

       Prior studies on the effect of unemployment on health and health behaviors fall into two

groups (Burgard, Ailshire, & Kalousova, 2013; Colman & Dave, 2013). The first looks at the

effect of a person’s own employment status, the second, on the effect of the unemployment rate

or employment-to-population ratio in a person’s area of residence. The effects found in the two

groups of studies need not be similar, as a rise in the local unemployment rate may affect a

person’s behavior even if she herself remains employed. It may reduce demand for her product,

causing her to work fewer hours, or lead her spouse to become unemployed, affecting the

distribution of activities within the household (Colman & Dave, 2013). It may also cause her to

work harder in fear that her own job is in jeopardy. The effects of the local economy may be

termed the “external” effects of unemployment on health behavior. Naturally a higher local

unemployment rate may cause someone to lose her own job, which in turn will affect her health

behaviors, changes that may be termed the “internal” effects of unemployment. A change in the

local employment situation may affect households through both internal and external channels.

       A number of recent studies have focused on the effect of local-area employment

conditions, with divergent results for most outcomes. Ruhm (2005) finds that obesity decreases

during recessions. Other studies find the reverse (for instance, Böckerman et al., 2007; Charles

& DeCicca, 2008; Latif, 2014), at least among certain segments of the population, and still others

find no effect (Nicholson & Simon, 2010). Most studies (Ruhm, 2005; Xu, 2013) find that an

increase area employment reduces the proportion of persons who exercise regularly. The results

with respect to smoking are less consistent. Ruhm (2005) and (Xu, 2013) find that increased



                                                                                                   6
local-area employment increases smoking participation, while Charles and DeCicca (2008) find

that, among those least likely to be employed, smoking declines. Studies using European data

tend to find that a rise in local-area unemployment raises the probability of smoking and the

amount smoked (Öhlander, Vikström, Lindström, & Sundquist, 2006), though a study of the

recent Icelandic financial crisis finds a decrease in smoking (Ásgeirsdóttir et al., 2014). As noted

by Böckerman et al. (2007) and others, one reason results may differ between the U.S. and other

high-income countries is the more generous unemployment insurance available in those

countries, blunting the income effect of unemployment. Another reason is that the effect of the

recent crisis on the exchange rate, and hence on the price of food and tobacco, was much greater

outside the U.S., for example, in Iceland (Ásgeirsdóttir et al., 2014).

       A distinct, older, and longer strand of the literature considers the effect of a person’s own

unemployment on health behaviors and obesity. Most studies find that unemployment raises

BMI (Leino-Arjas et al., 1999; Marcus, 2014; Virtanen et al., 2008) though some find no

statistically significant effect (Montgomery, Cook, Bartley, & Wadsworth, 1998); others find

that reduced (but still positive) hours of work lower BMI (Berniell, 2012; Courtemanche, 2009).

As in the studies using macro-level unemployment, in general own unemployment is associated

with a higher likelihood of exercise (Berniell, 2012; Leino-Arjas et al., 1999). In contrast to

macro-level studies, however, own unemployment is associated with a higher probability of

smoking (Bolton & Rodriguez, 2009; De Vogli & Santinello, 2005; Henkel, 2011; Marcus, 2014;

Novo et al., 2000) and of relapse (Falba et al., 2005).

       We address several gaps and contribute to the literature along multiple dimensions. First,

we provide the first longitudinal evidence on the effects of unemployment on energy intake,

energy expenditure, and the net effect on BMI. Given the prior conflicting evidence on how



                                                                                                   7
unemployment impacts BMI, examining behavioral pathways that affect bodyweight for the

same set of individuals over time is important towards assessing the plausibility of the BMI

effects. Second, in contrast to other, albeit limited set of longitudinal studies of unemployment

and health behaviors, our data sets span a much longer time period, spanning two recessions for

most of our outcomes and enveloping the recent Great Recession for all of them. The severity of

the Great Recession, in particular, provides an excellent opportunity to study behavioral impacts.

Job losers are more likely to adjust to an extended decline in income and increase in non-work

time, and hence change their behaviors, if they expect joblessness to last. Third, a number of the

important outcomes we study have been analyzed previously using only cross-sectional data,

essentially through comparisons of employed and unemployed persons, which limit a causal

interpretation and also limit a more deeper assessment of the composition of the effects (that is,

if recessions reduce smoking, cross-sectional data cannot reveal whether the change reflects light

smokers quitting or heavy smokers cutting back; effects of long-term vs. short-term job-loss). In

summary, we provide the most comprehensive analysis to date of how unemployment affects

health behaviors, exploiting longitudinal relationships and the large adverse shocks to labor

demand over the recent Great Recession.

III.    Analytical Framework

        The question of how unemployment affects individuals’ health behaviors can be framed

within a human capital model for the demand for health.2 Individuals are assumed to maximize

utility, which is a function of their health and other broad commodities. Health behaviors can

indirectly affect utility through their effects on health, and may also directly affect utility as the

individual may find certain behaviors (for instance, smoking, fast food consumption, or


2
  See Colman and Dave (2013) and Dave and Kelly (2012) for versions of this framework extended to specifically
study exercise and eating habits.

                                                                                                                 8
recreational exercise) inherently pleasurable or distasteful. Maximization occurs subject to a set

of constraints including a health production function, by which individuals produce health

investments by combining the various market and time inputs constituting the health behaviors; a

similar production function for other broad commodities; and constraints imposed by household

income and time endowments. Investments in health reduce time lost to illness and therefore

raise the total available time for other pursuits including work; this is the investment return to

health.

          Unemployment may affect individuals’ health behaviors in this framework through

associated shifts in time and income constraints. These mechanisms affect both health-

promoting as well as health-depreciating behaviors. The decrease in labor supply due to

unemployment, and the subsequent easing of time-endowment constraints, is predicted to

increase behaviors which are relatively more intensive in time inputs, for instance activities such

as recreational exercise. Reduced household income due to job-loss may also raise the demand

for health behaviors which are inferior, such as smoking or fast food consumption, although

constrained budgets may also lead some smokers to reduce their cigarette consumption or quit

smoking altogether. Furthermore, lower household income may also lead to a substitution away

from health behaviors which are relatively more intensive in market inputs such as consuming

food outside the home. Increased stress or depression associated with job-loss (Classen & Dunn,

2012; Mandal, Ayyagari, & Gallo, 2011) may lead to a greater demand for health-depreciating

behaviors such as smoking or fast-food consumption, consistent with a “self-medication”

hypothesis (Dave & Kelly, 2012; Dave & Saffer, 2008). In addition, loss of healthcare coverage

associated with unemployment is predicted to have counteracting effects on health behaviors.

On the one hand, reduced contact with medical care professionals may increase (decrease)



                                                                                                     9
participation in unhealthy (healthy) behaviors, though on the other hand, becoming uninsured

may also induce individuals to engage more in health-promoting behaviors in the context of an

ex-ante moral hazard effect (Dave & Kaestner, 2009) .

        These mechanisms primarily capture the internal effects of unemployment, that is, effects

which are realized through the individual’s own job-loss.3 The upshot of this discussion is that

the net effects of unemployment on health behaviors are a priori indeterminate. Furthermore, we

expect that the effects would be heterogeneous across specific behaviors, partly due to the

various mechanisms at play, and partly due to the differences in the relative strength of the shifts

in time and income constraints interacting with differences in the relative intensity of time versus

market-based inputs across different behaviors.

III.    Methods

        The objective of this study is to assess whether, and to what degree, job-loss has a causal

effect on health behaviors. To that purpose, we estimate the following model for the ith person

observed at time t:

                                                                                                              (1)

where       is a vector of individual characteristics or behaviors that vary over time,               is a vector

of individual characteristics that do not vary over time,            is the period effect,        is an indicator

that reflects the respondent’s employment status, and               includes all time-varying unobserved

influences on the outcome.

        The time varying controls,           , include the respondent’s age, marital status, state or

region of residence, month of interview, and, in some specifications, lagged self-reported health

3
  To the extent that the individual’s job-loss is induced by, and thus also reflective of, the general economic
downturn over our analysis period, secondary external effects from the business cycle may also be at play. For
instance, expectations of prolonged job-loss due to the severity of the recent recession may lead to potentially
stronger shifts in health behaviors, as would any intra-household allocation of resources due to any individual
member’s job-loss.

                                                                                                                   10
status. The observable time-invariant controls,    , include gender, highest grade completed, race,

and ethnicity. In alternate specifications, we further include person-specific fixed effects, which

account for all unobserved time-invariant factors that differ across individuals, for instance life-

cycle investments, family background, ability and aptitude, risk tolerance, and time preference.

        We restrict the PSID sample to persons between the ages of 25 and 55, ages with the

highest labor force participation rates and therefore least likely to suffer from selection bias due

to unobserved factors affecting selection into the labor force instead of schooling and selection

out of the labor force due to retirement. The NLSY79 sample is by its nature restricted to persons

between the ages of 46 and 53 in 2010.

        We use a number of alternate indicators of unemployment. The first simply equals one if

the respondent is unemployed. Of the different measures of unemployment, this variable is most

vulnerable to producing biased estimates. A person’s unemployment status may be correlated

with a number of time-varying unobserved factors that may also influence his health behaviors.

For example, perhaps a person’s health may decline and induce him to look for a different job

closer to home, and also to become less physically active, which is one of our outcomes of

interest.

        Therefore we construct several other indicators of unemployment that are arguably less

likely to be correlated with the respondent’s unobserved characteristics. One is an indicator that

equals one if the respondent was unemployed due to being laid off, that is, let go because there

was insufficient demand for the company’s product or service or for some other reason that was

not the employee’s fault. The NLSY79 distinguishes between respondents who were laid off and

those who were fired. The PSID groups both together. Ideally we would exclude persons who

were fired, but since many more persons are laid off than fired, particularly in the current



                                                                                                    11
recession, grouping them together should not severely bias the results. Being laid off is probably

not entirely exogenous to a worker’s characteristics. When they must lay off workers, companies

are likely first to release the least able. However, ability is constant from one wave of the survey

to the next, and hence would be removed by person fixed-effects.

           Finally, we define an indicator that equals one if the respondent is unemployed because

his firm went out of business. This variable has been used by, among others, Salm (2009) and

Deb et al. (2011) to look at the effect of unemployment on health and certain health behaviors.

This indicator of unemployment is the one most plausibly exogenous to health behaviors since

relatively few respondents can have been the cause of their companies going out of business.

Thus the coefficient on this variable is arguably consistent, even without adding person fixed-

effects.

           In addition, for the NLSY only, we estimate models with different indicators of long-term

unemployment. These indicators equal one if the respondent has been unemployed for 13, 26,

and 52 weeks, respectively. The effect of long- versus short-term unemployment is likely to

matter for some outcomes more than others. For example, a person’s weight is unlikely to

change the very week he becomes unemployed. If unemployment does affect body weight, its

effect is likely to become apparent only for persons who have been unemployed for some time.

Other behavioral outcomes, however, such as going out to dinner, may respond immediately to

the loss of income following the start of unemployment.

           The parameter of interest is , which captures the reduced-form effect of unemployment

on health behaviors operating through any and all competing and reinforcing channels. We first

estimate equation (1) using a random-effects specification as a baseline, which assumes that         is

uncorrelated with       . We test this assumption using a test of overidentifying restrictions



                                                                                                     12
(Wooldridge, 2010). The null hypothesis is that the between-effects estimates of the coefficients

are statistically indistinguishable from the fixed-effects estimates, implying that              are

uncorrelated with       . Since the null hypothesis of this test is commonly rejected as unobserved

person-specific factors are likely to be correlated with the error term, we next estimate equation

(1) using person fixed-effects. This will produce consistent estimates of             under the somewhat

weaker assumption that          is uncorrelated with        , or, less formally, if a person’s labor force

status is unrelated to unobserved characteristics that change over time. One such confounding

variable is health, which may change how much physical activity a person engages in as well as

his labor force status. To control for this possibility, in alternative models we include lagged

measures of the respondent’s health. Further, to control for possible income effects, we include

in some models measures of the per capita income in the county of the respondent’s residence.

We restrict the analysis to respondents whose data are in at least two waves.4 Standard errors are

adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the error term for a given person over time.

IV.     Data

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)

        The Panel Study of Income Dynamics began in 1968 as a nationally-representative

survey of about 4,800 families. It was conducted partly by the Census Bureau and partly by the

Survey Research Center (SRC) at the University of Michigan. Since then, the SRC has re-

interviewed the original participants as well as their offspring when they form their own families,

or, in PSID terminology, “family units”. Re-interviews have been conducted every year through


4
 STATA does not automatically do this when calculating fixed-effects coefficients. If one of the respondents
contributes only one year of data, converting that row to mean-difference form will produce a row of zeros.
Similarly, if a respondent has only two waves of data and his dependent and independent variables actually do not
change from one wave to the next, this will also create a row of zeros in mean-difference form. We view the
second example a legitimate row of zeros and a valid comparison group, whereas the first is not, and so we drop
persons with only one wave of data.

                                                                                                               13
1997 and biennially since then. Response rates were above 95 percent until 1993 and have been

in the low 90s afterwards. As of 2009, the PSID includes about 9,000 families and 24,000

persons.

        In each interview, one person answers all the questions for everyone in the family unit.

Usually, the respondent is the family unit “head”, the male in the family unit who is most

responsible for its financial decisions. His female domestic partner, if he has one, is designated

the “wife”, whether or not they are married. All the data in this study refer to the head or wife of

the family unit. Also, we consider data only from 1999 through 2009, because many of the

health-related variables are available continuously only during that period and because this time

span includes the two most recent recessions.

        The PSID reports height and weight in each wave. From these, we compute the

respondent’s body-mass index (BMI) according to the standard formula.5 In addition to its effect

on mean BMI, we would like to assess the effect of unemployment on the distribution of BMI.

Therefore we create three dummy variables indicating “normal weight” (BMI between 18.5 and

25), “overweight” (BMI 25 and over but less than 30), and “obese” (BMI of 30 and above).

Some prior research, based on cross-sectional evidence, has found that not only does BMI

decline during recessions, but that it declines mainly among the overweight and obese (Ruhm

2005). We exploit the longitudinal information in our datasets and directly test this by estimating

the effect of unemployment on obesity only among persons who were overweight or obese

during the first wave in which they appeared in the sample. The disadvantage is that it creates a

sample based on the dependent variable, which can lead to biased estimates if the selection

depends on unobserved characteristics. Since many unobserved differences are removed by


5                                                           2
 BMI is computed as: (weight in kilograms)/(height in meters) . We exclude observations with calculated BMI
below 15 and above 70 to avoid possible recording errors.

                                                                                                              14
fixed-effects methods, however, we expect to find, if bias is a problem, that fixed-effects and

random-effects models differ significantly, and in which case the fixed-effects estimates would

be more credible.

           Since 1999, the PSID has asked questions on how often the respondent engages in light,

vigorous, or strength-building physical activity in his or her leisure time. The questions are,

respectively, “How often do you do light or moderate activities for at least 10 minutes that cause

only light sweating or slight to moderate increases in breathing or heart rate?”; “How often do

you do vigorous physical activities for at least 10 minutes that cause heavy sweating or large

increases in breathing or heart rate?”; and “How often do you do physical activities specifically

designed to strengthen your muscles such as lifting weights?”. From the responses to these

questions, we construct measures for the number of times per week that the respondent engaged

in the specified type of activity.6 Note that these variables refer to habitual physical activity

rather than physical activity in the past week, in contrast to the unemployment indicator, which

refers to the week of the interview.

           Continuously since 1999, the PSID has asked participants about cigarette use. We

construct three measures based on the responses, an indicator for whether the respondent is a

current smoker, a continuous measure of the number of cigarettes smoked daily among smokers,

and another continuous measure of the number of cigarettes smoked daily among those who

smoked a pack or more of cigarettes per day in their first wave of the PSID since 1999, whom we

term “heavy smokers at entry”. We define this latter measure in order to explore whether

unemployment has a larger effect on smoking among initially heavy smokers than among

average smokers.



6
    We set to missing the few observations whose reported values are greater than seven.

                                                                                                    15
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth – 1979 Cohort (NLSY79)

       The NLSY79 is a nationally representative sample of 12,686 young men and women who

were 14-22 years old when they were first surveyed in 1979. Due to deaths, attrition, and the

dropping of two subsamples, the total number of eligible respondents dropped to approximately

8,400 in 1998 and 7,700 in 2010. Participants were interviewed annually from 1979 to 1994, and

have been interviewed biennially since then.

       Since 2006, the NLSY has not asked respondents their labor force status during the week

prior to the interview. Therefore, we use the information from the weekly labor force status

variables, which are based on retrospective information on the start and stop dates of the

respondents’ jobs and their activities while not working. For those unemployed, the NLSY asks

the reason that the respondent left his previous job. The responses include “fired”, “laid off”, and

“plant closed”, among others. We create an indicator that equals one if the respondent was

unemployed and was laid off from their previous job, and another that equals one if the

respondent was unemployed and his prior employer had gone out of business.

       The NLSY asks questions on physical activity that are quite similar to those in the PSID,

which in turn are similar to those asked in the NHIS. The questions are, “How often do you do

vigorous activities for at least 10 minutes that cause heavy sweating or large increases in

breathing or heart rate?”; “How often do you do light or moderate activities for at least 10

minutes that cause only light sweating or slight to moderate increase in breathing or heart rate?”;

and “How often do you do physical activities specifically designed to strengthen your muscles

such as lifting weights or doing calisthenics?”. The key difference between the first two variables

and those in the PSID is that the NLSY does not restrict the reference to leisure-time activities.

That is, the questions on moderate and on vigorous activities refer to both work-related and



                                                                                                     16
leisure-time physical activity, whereas those in the PSID are only in reference to leisure-time

activity. Given the substitution between work-related physical activity and leisure-time physical

activity associated with job-loss (Colman & Dave, 2013; Saffer, Dave, & Grossman, 2013), we

expect the effects of unemployment to differ on both of these sets of physical activity measures

from the PSID and the NLSY79. The NLSY also asks how many minutes the respondent spent

in each activity. We create variables measuring the number of minutes per week that the

respondent engaged in vigorous, and in light or moderate activities.7 The variable relating to

strength-building activity does refer to leisure time. Thus we expect to find that unemployment

has a similar effect on this measure as it does on the physical activity measures in the PSID.

        The NLSY collects information on weight in every round but on height only in 1981,

1982, 1985, and 2006 onwards. For the years 1998 through 2004 we use the average of the

heights reported in 1985 and 2006. We calculate BMI as in the PSID.8

        Since 2002 the NLSY has asked each respondent, “About how long has it been since your

last general physical exam or routine checkup by a medical doctor or other health professional?

Do not include a visit about a specific problem.” We create a dummy that equals one if the

respondent has not had a physical for over a year, as an indicator of routine, preventive

healthcare utilization.

        For 2008 and 2010, questions have been asked about diet. Specifically, the NLSY asks:

“In the past seven days, how many times did you eat food from a fast food restaurant such as

McDonalds, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Pizza Hut, or Taco Bell?” Parallel questions are asked

about the frequency of snacks, skipping meals, and consuming a soft drink. We create


7
  We set to missing the few values above 3360 minutes (8 hours times 60 minutes times 7 days a week).
8
  In alternate specifications, we adjust reported BMI for potential measurement and reporting errors based on
objectively-measured BMI from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, as described in Cawley
(2004). Reported estimates below are not sensitive to this correction.

                                                                                                                17
continuous measures of the number of times per week that the respondent engages in each of

these activities.

        For both the PSID and the NLSY we construct and control for indicators for educational

attainment (less than high school, high school graduate, some college, college or more), race and

ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, non-Hispanic other, and Hispanic), marital

status (never married, married, divorced, separated, widowed), region or state of residence, and

month (to capture seasonal effects on health behaviors). Age is left as a continuous variable.9

V.      Results

PSID Estimates

        Tables 1 and 2 report means for the PSID sample. Our central results for the PSID are

evident in these tables. Among PSID participants, the unemployment rate rose by two percentage

points from 1999 to 2003, and by 4 percentage points from 2007 to 2009, yet in neither span of

time did leisure-time exercise rise significantly. In fact, the trend in exercise was downward

throughout the period. Similarly, neither BMI nor the percent obese changed appreciably during

recessionary periods, or to put it differently, the strength or weakness of the economy had no

effect on the upward trend in both indicators of body weight. The number of cigarettes smoked

among smokers, however, declined in both recessionary periods, while the share of the sample

that smoked trended downward throughout the sample period.


9
 All means and regressions are unweighted. In regression analysis weights are unnecessary when they are
functions of exogenous variables included in the models. The original PSID oversampled low-income families. We
cannot include income as a covariate because it depends on employment status, our key covariate. Instead, we
control for the factors that have been found to be correlated with income, such as age, education, ethnicity,
experience, and marital status. The NLSY originally included oversamples of persons with low incomes and also
persons serving in the military, but these subsamples were dropped in waves prior to those we use in this study. In
any case, the variables used to construct weights, with the exception of sample attrition, are constant over time,
and thus fall out of our fixed-effects models. For completeness, we compared the coefficients from weighted and
unweighted fixed-effects models, and found no statistically significant differences. Similarly, the weighted and
unweighted coefficients from the maximum likelihood random effects models did not differ significantly.


                                                                                                                18
       Before turning to the regression results we first consider the exogeneity of the different

reasons for unemployment. Some information on this is given in Tables 2 and 5. Ideally, to find

the effect of unemployment on behavior, workers would be out of work completely randomly. If

the world worked this way, the characteristics of the unemployed, laid off, and those who have

lost their job due to a plant closing would be the same, within sampling error. But as Table 2

suggests, this is not so. All three categories of the unemployed contain more persons of color,

high school dropouts, obese, unmarried, and heavy smokers than the population in general. Thus

even though a plant-closing is exogenous with respect to the worker, it does not happen to a

random subsample of the population. Hence plant closings alone will likely not identify the

average treatment effect of unemployment on behavior. This highlights the importance of using

fixed-effects to control for the many unmeasurable differences between the employed and

unemployed, at least differences that are constant over time. Table 5 also shows that during the

current recession, the unemployed became more similar to the general population of workers.

That is, relative to those who are generally unemployed or laid off or affected by a plant closing

in 2005, those in similar categories in 2009 are less likely to be persons of color, high school

dropouts, obese, unmarried, and heavy smokers. This highlights the benefits of data that cover

recessions when the goal is to learn the effect of unemployment.

       Models based on the PSID are presented in Tables 6 (for females) and 7 (for males). The

PSID regressions, shown in Table 6, confirm the correlations evident in the means. We estimate

separate models for men and women because recessions generally, and the current recession

especially, reflect greater contractions in industries, such as construction and durable

manufacturing, in which men constitute a larger share of workers. Most likely for this reason,

unemployment generally has a larger effect among men than women.



                                                                                                    19
        Among women, becoming unemployed generally raises the probability of smoking, by

about 3 to 4 percentage points in the random-effects models, and about 2 percentage points in the

fixed-effects models for being laid-off. The stronger random-effects results probably reflect the

higher share of smokers among the unemployed, rather than a causal effect. Since few persons

start to smoke after age 25, which is the minimum age in our sample, the 2 percentage point

change in the fixed-effects model reflects relapse and/or a reduction in the likelihood of quitting

smoking due to the stress of unemployment. There is some suggestive evidence, based on

women who lost their jobs due to their firm closing, that cigarette consumption among those who

were heavy smokers at baseline may have declined, which may directly income constraints as

well as potential intra-household reallocation of resources from reduced household income.10

We do not find consistent or significant effects on other health behaviors.

        Among men, becoming unemployed has no consistent effect on vigorous leisure time

exercise. This is not surprising since those who exercise vigorously when employed are

committed to exercise, and will likely continue to exercise when unemployed. In fact, becoming

unemployed may reduce vigorous exercise, since such exercisers may be more likely than others

to pay for membership at a gym or health club, which becomes less affordable after a job loss. In

contrast, unemployment slightly increases the amount of light exercise, with the effect consistent

across reasons for unemployment, though the effect is significant only for “Laid off”.

        Becoming unemployed is associated with a consistent but only marginally significant

increase in the BMI of men who were obese at baseline. This contrasts with Ruhm (2005), but

accords with Charles and DeCicca (2008), Nicholson and Simon (2010), and Böckerman et al.

(2007). We discuss the effects on obesity further on when we discuss the results from the NLSY.


10
  Reduced smoking at the intensive margin, among prior heavy smokers, may also reflect increased uncertainty
regarding finding another job and a subsequent downward revision of expected future income.

                                                                                                               20
       The largest effects in the table pertain to cigarettes smoked among smokers.

Unemployment reduces the number of cigarettes smoked among smokers by 5 to 10 percent

among males, though the effect is significant only at the 10 percent level. The effect is twice as

large and consistently significant among those who were heavy smokers in the first wave.

Similar to the effect for women, this is likely an income effect associated with job-loss, since

many workplaces restrict smoking on premises, so being at home rather than at a workplace

would tend to increase the amount smoked. In addition, heavy smokers tend to earn less than

other smokers, and hence would respond more to job loss.



NLSY79 Estimates

       As with the PSID data, the means of the NLSY sample, shown in Tables 3 and 4,

prefigure our regression results. The frequency of strength-building exercise, the only measure of

exercise in the NLSY that specifically refers to leisure-time activity, is unchanged over the

sample period. Total moderate or heavy physical activity, however, drops substantially from

2006 to 2010. Purchases of fast food, soft drinks, consumption of snacks, and the number of

skipped meals decline, but since we have only two years of data on these variables, not much can

be learned just from the means.

       The regression results from the NLSY, in Tables 7 and 8, show no significant or

consistent effect of unemployment on women’s total physical activity, including both work- and

leisure-time, which is expected, since in general their jobs are not as physically demanding as

men’s. In contrast, men’s total physical activity declines substantially. Vigorous activity declines

by about 2 hours per week, and moderate activity, by about an hour to an hour and a half. This is




                                                                                                     21
consistent with the large decline in jobs in construction and manufacturing, which tend to be

physically demanding (Colman & Dave, 2013).

        These results reflect that women are much less likely to have a physically demanding job

than men. Unemployment has a similar effect on strength-building activities in the NLSY as it

does on the leisure-time activities in the PSID, that is, none. Note that strength-building is solely

a leisure-time activity in both the NLSY and the PSID. The effect, however, on total physical

activity, moderate or heavy, which includes both leisure- and work-related exertion, is quite

pronounced. Unemployment reduces moderate or vigorous physical activity by roughly an hour

to an hour and a half per week. This accords with the findings of Colman and Dave (2013) ,

which used the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). While job-loss reduces time constraints,

the freed-up time is generally allocated towards more sedentary activities; hence, the loss of

physical activity from work for those which physically-demanding jobs is not compensated from

the increase in these other activities, causing total physical activity to decline.

        Unemployment reduces the number of fast-food meals respondents eat by about half a

meal per week, which is significant across most models and reasons for unemployment. One

question is whether this reflects mainly the effect of unemployment on time available or on

income. We attempt to parse the income effect using three measures of income, all adjusted for

inflation: the respondent’s own family income, the per capita income in the respondent’s county

residence, and the per capita transfers in the respondent’s county of residence. The latter two

measures, from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, were chosen because they are likely

correlated with the respondent’s own income but arguably not with his or her unmeasured

characteristics that affect fast-food consumption. The inclusion of income as an additional

independent variable had no effect on the coefficient on unemployment, regardless of the



                                                                                                   22
measure of income used. Thus we tentatively infer that the reduced consumption of fast-foods

reflects the greater availability of time for cooking rather than less income available to purchase

the fast-food. This is supported by data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), which

show that the time spent on meal preparation is positively correlated with the unemployment rate

in respondents’ states. In other words, “fast food” is what its name implies, fast, which is

important to workers with little spare time, but it is not actually cheap compared with cooking at

home, a point made in an editorial by a food columnist for the New York Times.11 Some

confirmation of this point is available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which reports that

inflation-adjusted sales of fast-food restaurants fell slightly from 2008 to 2010, though the

decline was much less than that of full-service restaurants. Over the same period, real sales of

food consumed at home rose. These changes are consistent with a shift among consumers

towards preparing more meals at home.

        The estimates in Table 10 and 11 (for females and males, respectively) consider

differential effects based on the duration of unemployment. In addition to actual job-loss, health

behaviors may also respond to expectations about the duration of job-loss and prospects of

finding other work. There may be little behavioral effects if job-losers expect soon to be re-

employed, whereas if they expect joblessness to last, they will adjust to a possibly prolonged

decline in income and increase in non-working time. Thus, the channels discussed above are

expected to become more pronounced with the duration of unemployment.

        For both males and females, there is some evidence of stronger negative effects on

moderate daily physical activity as well as fast-food consumption with longer unemployment.

The results do not show any consistently stronger effects on BMI with prolonged job-loss,


11
  Mark Bittman (see http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/25/opinion/sunday/is-junk-food-really-
cheaper.html?pagewanted=all)

                                                                                                   23
however, which suggests that the null to weak BMI effects are driven by the counteracting

effects of reduced physical activity associated with reduced caloric intake. The results also

indicate that being unemployed for longer periods of time is associated with a greater likelihood

of delaying a physical exam. This suggests that loss of healthcare coverage and the negative

income effect may outweigh any positive effects of reduced time constraints. Additionally, this

may also reflect a displacement effect, wherein individuals are delaying healthcare utilization

until they have a job and healthcare coverage.

        One issue that arises, and which has generally been bypassed in the prior literature as it

cannot be investigated with cross-sectional data, relates to potential compositional selection from

inter-state migration. That is, individuals living in communities facing prolonged contraction of

key industries may relocate to other states with better job prospects. These individuals who face

prolonged job-loss and choose to relocate are not necessarily a random subset of all unemployed

individuals, and hence may differ along unobserved characteristics that would also be correlated

with their health behaviors. Barsky, Kimball, Juster, and Shapiro (1997) found, for instance, that

migrant individuals are likely to be more risk-tolerant. To the extent that risk-tolerance would

also be associated with greater engagement in unhealthy behaviors, such selection would be

expected to provide upward biased effects of unemployment on healthy behaviors.12 On the

other hand, studies have also found some evidence of a healthy-migrant effect within the US and

other countries (for instance, Lu, 2008; Wingate & Alexander, 2006). Such health-based

selection into migration would provide downward biased effects of unemployment on healthy

behaviors. We exploit the longitudinal information from both the PSID and NLSY to assess the

robustness of the above estimates to accounting for inter-state migration. Specifically, we re-


12
  Dave & Saffer (2008), for instance, find that greater risk tolerance raises alcohol consumption among older
adults.

                                                                                                                24
estimate all models for a subset of individuals who did not move across states, and alternately a

subset of individuals who did not move at all over the sample period. The estimates from these

alternate samples, specifically the fixed-effects estimates, were generally robust to those

discussed above, indicating the value of using longitudinal data and suggesting that any

systematic selection into migration across or within states is generally purged by the person-

specific fixed effects.13

VI.        Discussion

           This study provides a comprehensive look at how health behaviors respond due to actual

job-loss over the business cycle, providing some of the first longitudinal evidence on the internal

effects of unemployment for several key behaviors spanning two recessions, including the recent

Great Recession. We also provide the first study of the effect of unemployment on physical

activity (energy expenditure), food consumption (energy intake), and the net effect (BMI) among

the same sample of persons over time. This is particularly valuable in studying BMI, since prior

research on the effects of unemployment on BMI has either found no or small effects. On the one

hand, the true effect on BMI, if it exists, may be too small to measure reliably. On the other

hand, a null or small effect may also imply counteracting effects on caloric intake and

expenditure. Hence, there is value in analyzing a combination of behavioral inputs (physical

activity and food consumption) into BMI, which may respond more readily to job-loss and also

help place prior BMI results in context.

           One interpretation of our joint results of physical activity, fast-food consumption, and

BMI is that both energy intake and expenditure decline after a job loss, leaving BMI unchanged

or only slightly higher (mostly among previously obese individuals), even with prolonged job-

loss. Our findings do not contradict results using data from European countries (e.g. Böckerman
13
     Results are not reported, and available upon request.

                                                                                                      25
et al., 2007), which consistently find that unemployment raises BMI. European countries have

much more generous unemployment insurance programs than the U.S. According to the OECD,

on average U.S. unemployment insurance replaces about 13 percent of gross compensation,

whereas European countries typically replace three times that. Thus the income shock from job-

loss in Europe is much less than here, while the drop in physical activity could well be similar,

causing an increase in BMI in Europe but not in the U.S.

        There is also some suggestive evidence for other health behaviors, particularly smoking

and forgoing a physical. While prior work on the effects of job-loss and area unemployment on

smoking has been mixed, the longitudinal evidence in this study suggests that this may be due to

heterogeneity across various margins as well as across the smoking distribution. Among

females, we find that the smoking effects are somewhat heterogeneous at the intensive and

extensive margins. While job-loss is associated with an increase in the probability of being a

current smoker, consistent with a decline in smoking cessation or a relapse into smoking among

former smokers due to stress, we also find that those who were heavy smokers at baseline tend to

somewhat reduce their cigarette consumption, consistent with an income effects. Among males,

there is generally no significant effect on smoking at the extensive margin, though similar to

females, we find a reduction in cigarettes consumed particularly among heavy smokers.

        We underscore that the effects in this study are reflective of the first-order internal effects

of job-loss, that is effects realized due to actual job-loss, as opposed to the second-order external

effects which are realized even if the individual does not lose their job.14 The weight of the

evidence from these estimates shows that the effects of job-loss on health behaviors are complex

and multi-faceted, and cannot necessarily be reduced to broad generalizations along the form of

14
  Prior studies which have estimated reduced-form specifications linking area unemployment to health outcomes
and behaviors conflate both internal and external effects (for instance, Colman & Dave, 2013; Dave & Kelly, 2012;
Ruhm, 2003).

                                                                                                               26
job-loss leading individuals to engage in more or less healthy lifestyles. As different behaviors

vary in terms of their relative intensity of time versus market-purchased inputs, they would

respond differently to shifts in resource constraints associated with job-loss. Furthermore, stress

due to job-loss and expectations regarding prolonged duration of job-loss would also elicit

different responses with respect to the various behaviors. At the same time, however, prior work

has shown that physical activity can be health-promoting, conditional on a given BMI (Colman

& Dave, 2013; Surgeon General, 1996). Thus, even though unemployment is only weakly

associated with BMI, the lower total physical activity may have adverse effects on health, as may

delaying routine healthcare visits.




                                                                                                    27
References

Ásgeirsdóttir, T. L., Corman, H., Noonan, K., Ólafsdóttir, Þ., & Reichman, N. E. (2014). Was the
        economic crisis of 2008 good for Icelanders? Impact on health behaviors. Economics &
        Human Biology, 13, 1-19.
Barsky, R. B., Kimball, M. S., Juster, F. T., & Shapiro, M. D. (1997). Preference Parameters and
        Behavioral Heterogeneity: an Experimental Approach in The Health and Retirement
        Survey: The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 537-579.
Berniell, M. I. (2012). The Effects of Working Hours on Health Status and Health Behaviors:
        CEMFI Mimeo.
Böckerman, P., Johansson, E., Helakorpi, S., Prättälä, R., Vartiainen, E., & Uutela, A. (2007).
        Does a slump really make you thinner? Finnish micro‐level evidence 1978–2002. Health
        Economics, 16(1), 103-107.
Bolton, K. L., & Rodriguez, E. (2009). Smoking, Drinking and Body Weight After Re-
        Employment: Does Unemployment Experience and Compensation Make a Difference?
        BMC Public Health, 9(1), 77.
Burgard, S. A., Ailshire, J. A., & Kalousova, L. (2013). The Great Recession and Health People,
        Populations, and Disparities. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and
        Social Science, 650(1), 194-213.
Cawley, J. (2004). The Impact of Obesity on Wages. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2), 451-
        474.
Charles, K. K., & DeCicca, P. (2008). Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is There a
        Connection and For Whom? Journal of Health Economics, 27(6), 1532-1550.
Classen, T. J., & Dunn, R. A. (2012). The Effect of Job Loss and Unemployment Duration on
        Suicide Risk in The United States: A New Look Using Mass‐Layoffs and Unemployment
        Duration. Health Economics, 21(3), 338-350.
Colman, G., & Dave, D. (2013). Exercise, Physical Activity, and Exertion Over the Business
        Cycle. Social Science & Medicine, 93, 11-20.
Courtemanche, C. (2009). Longer Hours and Larger Waistlines? The Relationship Between
        Work Hours and Obesity. Forum for Health Economics and Policy, 12(2), Article 2.
Dave, D., & Kaestner, R. (2009). Health insurance and ex ante moral hazard: evidence from
        Medicare. International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 9(4), 367-390.
Dave, D., & Kelly, I. R. (2012). How does the business cycle affect eating habits? Social Science
        & Medicine, 74(2), 254-262.
Dave, D., & Saffer, H. (2008). Alcohol demand and risk preference. Journal of Economic
        Psychology, 29(6), 810-831.
De Vogli, R., & Santinello, M. (2005). Unemployment and Smoking: Does Psychosocial Stress
        Matter? Tobacco Control, 14(6), 389-395.
Deb, P., Gallo, W. T., Ayyagari, P., Fletcher, J. M., & Sindelar, J. L. (2011). The Effect of Job
        Loss on Overweight and Drinking. Journal of Health Economics, 30(2), 317-327.
Falba, T., Teng, H. M., Sindelar, J. L., & Gallo, W. T. (2005). The Effect of Involuntary Job
        Loss on Smoking Intensity and Relapse. Addiction, 100(9), 1330-1339.
Henkel, D. (2011). Unemployment and substance use: a review of the literature (1990-2010).
        Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 4(1), 4-27.
Jin, R. L., Shah, C. P., & Svoboda, T. J. (1995). The impact of unemployment on health: a
        review of the evidence. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal, 153(5), 529.

                                                                                              28
Latif, E. (2014). The Impact of Macroeconomic Conditions on Obesity in Canada. Health
        Economics, 23(6), 751-759.
Leino-Arjas, P., Liira, J., Mutanen, P., Malmivaara, A., & Matikainen, E. (1999). Predictors and
        Consequences of Unemployment Among Construction Workers: Prospective Cohort
        Study. British Medical Journal, 319(7210), 600-605.
Lu, Y. (2008). Test Of The ‘Healthy Migrant Hypothesis’: a Longitudinal Analysis of Health
        Selectivity of Internal Migration in Indonesia. Social Science & Medicine, 67(8), 1331-
        1339.
Mandal, B., Ayyagari, P., & Gallo, W. T. (2011). Job Loss and Depression: the Role of
        Subjective Expectations. Social Science & Medicine, 72(4), 576-583.
Marcus, J. (2014). Does Job Loss Make You Smoke and Gain Weight? Economica, 81(324),
        626-648.
Montgomery, S. M., Cook, D. G., Bartley, M. J., & Wadsworth, M. E. (1998). Unemployment,
        Cigarette Smoking, Alcohol Consumption and Body Weight in Young British Men. The
        European Journal of Public Health, 8(1), 21-27.
Morris, J., & Cook, D. (1991). A Critical Review of The Effect of Factory Closures on Health.
        British Journal of Industrial Medicine, 48(1), 1-8.
Nicholson, S., & Simon, K. (2010). How Did the Recession Affect Health and Related Activities
        of Americans? : unpublished.
Novo, M., Hammarström, A., & Janlert, U. (2000). Smoking Habits—A Question of Trend or
        Unemployment? A Comparison Of Young Men and Women Between Boom and
        Recession. Public Health, 114(6), 460-463.
Öhlander, E., Vikström, M., Lindström, M., & Sundquist, K. (2006). Neighbourhood Non-
        Employment and Daily Smoking: A Population-Based Study of Women and Men in
        Sweden. The European Journal of Public Health, 16(1), 78-84.
Pharr, J. R., Moonie, S., & Bungum, T. J. (2011). The Impact of Unemployment on Mental and
        Physical Health, Access to Health Care and Health Risk Behaviors. International
        Scholarly Research Notices, 2012.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Are Recessions Good For Your Health? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        115(2), 617-650.
Ruhm, C. J. (2003). Good Times Make You Sick. Journal of Health Economics, 22(4), 637-658.
Ruhm, C. J. (2005). Healthy Living in Hard Times. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2), 341-
        363.
Saffer, H., Dave, D. M., & Grossman, M. (2013). Racial, ethnic and gender differences in
        physical activity: Journal of Human Capital 7(31), 378-410
Salm, M. (2009). Does Job Loss Cause Ill Health? Health Economics, 18(9), 1075-1089.
Stevens, A. H., Miller, D. L., Page, M. E., & Filipski, M. (2011). The Best of Times, the Worst
        of Times: Understanding Pro-Cyclical Mortality: National Bureau of Economic Research
        w17657.
United States. Department of Health. (1996). Physical Activity and Health: A Report of the
        Surgeon General: Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
        for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
        Health Promotion.
Virtanen, P., Vahtera, J., Broms, U., Sillanmäki, L., Kivimäki, M., & Koskenvuo, M. (2008).
        Employment Trajectory as Determinant Of Change in Health-Related Lifestyle: The
        Prospective HeSSup Study. The European Journal of Public Health, 18(5), 504-508.

                                                                                              29
Wingate, M. S., & Alexander, G. R. (2006). The Healthy Migrant Theory: Variations in
       Pregnancy Outcomes Among US-Born Migrants. Social Science & Medicine, 62(2), 491-
       498.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data, 2nd Ed: MIT
       press.
Xu, X. (2013). The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors. Social Science & Medicine, 77, 126-
       136.




                                                                                         30
                                               Table 1
                                    Means of PSID sample by Year

Variable                                                    1999   2001   2003   2005   2007        2009

Heavy physical activities per week                          1.9    1.9    1.8     2.3    2.4         2.4
Light physical activities per week                          4.2    4.1    4.2     3.6    3.5         3.5
Strength activities per week                                                      1.2    1.2         1.2
Body mass index                                             26.6   27.0   27.3   27.7   27.9        28.2
Obese BMI >30 (percent)                                     21.0   23.3   25.6   27.5   29.6        31.2
Overweight 25 < BMI <= 30 (percent)                         37.9   38.4   38.1   38.0   37.1        37.2
Normal weight 18.5 < BMI <= 25 (percent)                    39.6   37.0   35.1   33.2   32.1        30.5
Whether smokes (percent)                                    22.4   22.5   23.4   22.4   21.7        20.7
Cigarettes per day among smokers                            15.5   15.0   14.8   13.7   13.2        12.3
BMI among obese at entry                                    34.3   34.2   34.5   34.9   35.4        35.5
Light physical activity per week among sedentary at entry    0.0   2.2     2.9    2.4    2.3         2.6
Cigs/day among heavy smokers at entry                       24.7   22.3   22.1   20.4   20.1        18.3
Unemployed (percent)                                         3.6   4.6     5.8    4.8    5.3         9.3
Laid off or fired (percent)                                  1.3   1.8     2.3    1.6    1.8         4.3
Workplace closed (percent)                                   0.4   0.4     0.3    0.3    0.4         0.5
Number of children in family unit                            1.3   1.2     1.1    1.1    1.1         1.1
Female (percent)                                            47.6   47.7   48.5   49.9   49.8        49.8
Non-Hispanic White (percent)                                61.4   60.9   59.5   57.9   57.9        57.4
Non-Hispanic other (percent)                                 4.3   4.2     3.7    3.5    3.5         3.6
Non-Hispanic Black (percent)                                27.9   28.6   29.6   30.9   30.5        30.3
Hispanic (percent)                                           6.3   6.3     7.1    7.6    8.1         8.7
Married (percent)                                           70.7   70.0   67.7   66.5   65.3        65.6
Cohabiting (percent)                                         4.8   5.0     5.8    6.8    8.0         7.0
Age in years                                                39.0   40.1   40.2   39.9   39.7        40.7
Less than HS (percent)                                      14.6   14.9   13.2   12.9   12.9        12.6
Has HS degree (percent)                                     32.7   32.9   35.0   33.6   32.8        32.0
Some college (percent)                                      26.4   26.2   26.8   27.6   27.8        28.1
College or more (percent)                                   26.3   25.9   25.0   25.9   26.5        27.3

Observations                                                5739   6351   6669   6669   6761        6023




                                                                                               31
                                          Table 2
                Means of PSID sample by Reason for Unemployment, 1999 – 2009

Variable                                           Total   Unemployed   Laid off   Plant closed

Heavy physical activities per week                 2.1        2.0        2.1          2.1
Light physical activities per week                 3.8        3.8        3.8          3.5
Strength activities per week                       1.2        1.2        1.3          1.1
Body mass index                                    27.5       28.1       28.3         29.0
Obese BMI >30 (percent)                            26.4       30.4       32.4         33.3
Overweight 25 < BMI <= 30 (percent)                37.8       35.7       34.8         43.8
Normal weight 18.5 < BMI <= 25 (percent)           34.5       32.8       32.0         21.6
Whether smokes (percent)                           22.2       41.4       39.6         32.0
Cigarettes per day among smokers                   14.1       12.7       13.0         13.6
BMI among obese at entry                           34.8       35.1       35.2         34.9
Light physical activity per week among sedentary   2.1        2.2        2.2          2.2
at entry
Cigs/day among heavy smokers at entry              21.5       19.7       20.1         21.9
Number of children in family unit                  1.2        1.3        1.2          1.2
Female (percent)                                   48.9       52.1       45.7         51.0
Non-Hispanic White (percent)                       59.1       34.5       40.0         37.9
Non-Hispanic Other (percent)                       3.8        3.3        3.6          3.3
Non-Hispanic Black (percent)                       29.7       54.2       49.5         47.7
Hispanic (percent)                                 7.4        7.9        6.8          11.1
Married (percent)                                  67.6       38.5       46.9         54.2
Cohabiting (percent)                               6.3        9.3        9.4          7.8
Age in years                                       39.9       38.8       39.2         41.8
Less than HS (percent)                             13.5       31.3       24.3         29.4
Has HS degree (percent)                            33.2       36.4       39.4         40.5
Some college (percent)                             27.2       21.0       23.6         17.0
College or more (percent)                          26.1       11.3       12.6         13.1

Observations                                       38212      2126        834          153




                                                                                        32
                                            Table 3
                                 Means of NLSY sample by Year

Variable                                        1998   2000   2002    2004    2006    2008    2010

Frequency strength-building activity per week                   1.6    1.6      1.6    1.6     1.6
Minutes vigorous physical activity per week                   265.0   262.6   240.7   205.7   214.4
Minutes moderate physical activity per week                   326.8   298.5   283.7   240.1   246.1
Obese BMI > 30 (percent)                        25.5   29.3    30.5    31.3    32.3   34.1    35.9
Body Mass Index                                 27.3   27.9    28.2    28.3    28.4   28.7    29.0
Over a year since physical (percent)                           37.6    30.6    33.8   30.9    29.1
Snacks per week                                                                        6.3     6.2
Meals skipped per week                                                                 2.8     2.6
Soft drinks per week                                                                   3.9     3.4
Fast food per week                                                                     1.7     1.5
Unemployed (percent)                             2.8    2.3    4.2    4.4      3.2     4.7     8.5
Laid off (percent)                               0.5    0.6    1.4    0.8      0.9     1.1     3.3
Plant closed (percent)                           0.2    0.1    0.4    0.2      0.1     0.1     0.3
Unemployed for 13 weeks (percent)                1.6    1.3    2.6    3.2      1.7     2.9     6.9
Unemployed for 26 weeks (percent)                1.1    0.8    1.7    2.4      1.3     2.1     5.6
Unemployed for 52 weeks (percent)                0.7    0.6    0.9    1.7      0.9     1.4     3.9
Female (percent)                                49.2   49.9   50.2    50.5    50.2    50.3    50.8
High School (percent)                           43.9   43.6   43.7    43.1    42.7    42.4    41.9
Less than HS (percent)                          10.1    9.7    9.1    8.6      8.5     8.0     7.5
Some college (percent)                          24.0   24.6   24.4    25.0    25.1    25.2    25.1
College and above (percent)                     22.1   22.2   22.7    23.3    23.7    24.4    25.6
Age in years                                    37.3   39.4   41.3    43.3    45.2    47.1    49.0
Married (percent)                               58.6   58.5   59.4    58.8    59.2    57.5    57.7
Never married (percent)                         20.5   19.1   18.1    17.3    16.6    15.9    15.0
Separated (percent)                              5.1    5.7    4.8    4.7      4.6     5.1     4.6
Divorced (percent)                              15.0   15.9   16.8    18.2    18.4    20.1    21.1
Widowed (percent)                                0.8    0.8    0.9    1.1      1.2     1.4     1.6
Non-Hispanic White (percent)                    49.9   50.0   50.0    50.3    49.6    49.5    50.3
Non-Hispanic Black (percent)                    30.1   30.2   30.4    29.9    29.7    29.7    29.4
Non-Hispanic other (percent)                     1.1    1.1    1.1    1.0      1.1     1.2     1.2
Hispanic (percent)                              18.8   18.6   18.5    18.8    19.6    19.5    19.2

Observations                                    4909   4996   4949    5005    5386    5352    4994




                                                                                              33
                                            Table 4
                        Means of NLSY Sample by Reason for Unemployment

Variable                                      Total    Unemployed    Laid off   Plant closed

Minutes vigorous physical activity per week   236.5       250.8       252.5        243.0
Minutes moderate physical activity per week   277.8       264.5       267.9        339.7
Obese BMI > 30 (percent)                       31.3        32.1        34.9        32.8
Body Mass Index                                28.3        28.4        28.8        28.7
Over a year since physical (percent)           32.4        41.8        41.4        30.6
Snacks per week                                6.2         5.7         6.1          5.8
Meals skipped per week                         2.7         2.9         3.1          2.6
Soft drinks per week                           3.7         4.6         3.8          2.9
Fast food per week                             1.6         1.3         1.2          1.5
Female (percent)                               50.2        44.2        41.5        57.8
High School (percent)                          43.0        52.8        54.8        62.5
Less than HS (percent)                         8.8         16.6        13.5        15.6
Some college (percent)                         24.8        20.5        18.8        18.8
College and above (percent)                    23.4        10.1        12.8         3.1
Age in years                                   43.3        44.5        45.2        43.3
Married (percent)                              58.5        34.3        39.2        42.2
Never married (percent)                        17.5        30.5        26.4        28.1
Separated (percent)                            4.9         8.9         8.9          7.8
Divorced (percent)                             17.9        24.7        24.8        17.2
Widowed (percent)                              1.1         1.6         0.7          4.7
Non-Hispanic White (percent)                   49.9        34.2        39.4        32.8
Non-Hispanic Black (percent)                   29.9        46.1        39.0        45.3
Non-Hispanic other (percent)                   1.1         0.7         1.1          1.6
Hispanic (percent)                             19.0        19.0        20.4        20.3

Observations                                  35591       1532            436       64




                                                                                               34
                                                                    Table 5
                                           Means of PSID Sample by Reason for Unemployment and Year

Variable                                      Total      Total    Unemployed   Unemployed   Laid off   Laid off   Plant closed   Plant closed
                                              2005       2009        2005         2009       2005       2009         2005           2009

Heavy physical activities per week              2.3        2.4        1.9          2.4        2.1        2.5          2.2            2.4
Light physical activities per week              3.6        3.5        3.1          3.6        3.4        3.7          3.7            3.2
Strength activities per week                    1.2        1.2        1.1          1.3        1.3        1.3          1.4            1.2
Body mass index                                27.7       28.2       29.1         28.5       29.2       28.8         32.1           30.1
Obese BMI >30 (percent)                        27.5       31.2       37.6         33.8       39.8       37.8         50.0           39.4
Overweight 25 < BMI <= 30 (percent)            38.0       37.2       32.3         35.6       26.9       33.6         40.9           39.4
Normal weight 18.5 < BMI <= 25 (percent)       33.2       30.5       28.9         29.5       32.4       27.8          9.1           21.2
Whether smokes (percent)                       22.4       20.7       38.2         38.8       40.7       36.7         22.7           30.3
Cigarettes per day among smokers               13.7       12.3       12.1         11.2       14.2       11.7         13.6           13.3
BMI among obese at entry                       34.9       35.5       35.5         35.4       36.4       35.8         38.1           35.9
Light physical activity per week among          2.4        2.6        2.4          2.6        3.0        2.9          5.5            2.6
sedentary at entry
Cigs/day among heavy smokers at entry          20.4       18.3       16.9         16.8       19.2       18.8         20.0           22.0
Number of children in family unit               1.1        1.1        1.3          1.2        1.2        1.1          1.1            0.9
Female (percent)                               49.9       49.8       57.5         47.9       52.8       44.0         59.1           48.5
Non-Hispanic White (percent)                   57.9       57.4       27.6         36.8       34.3       43.6         27.3           42.4
Non-Hispanic other (percent)                    3.5        3.6        2.2          3.4        1.9        3.9          0.0            6.1
Non-Hispanic Black (percent)                   30.9       30.3       63.7         49.8       58.3       44.0         68.2           30.3
Hispanic (percent)                              7.6        8.7        6.5         10.0        5.6        8.5          4.5           21.2
Married (percent)                              66.5       65.6       35.4         40.0       45.4       45.9         54.5           60.6
Cohabiting (percent)                            6.8        7.0        8.7          9.8        9.3       10.4          0.0           15.2
Age in years                                   39.9       40.7       38.2         39.8       37.5       40.1         41.0           42.9
Less than HS (percent)                         12.9       12.6       35.1         26.7       24.1       20.1         36.4           21.2
Has HS degree (percent)                        33.6       32.0       34.5         38.6       38.0       42.9         36.4           48.5
Some college (percent)                         27.6       28.1       22.0         21.7       26.9       22.4         18.2           15.2
College or more (percent)                      25.9       27.3        8.4         13.0       11.1       14.7          9.1           15.2

Observations                                  6669        6023       322          562         108        259          22             33




                                                                                                                                    35
                                                                        Table 6
                                     The effects of unemployment on health behaviors, by reason for unemployment
                                                        Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
                                                                        Females

                                                                                    Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                                     Unemployed                                     Laid-off                                   Plant closed
Outcome                                     Random Effects   Fixed Effects              Random Effects      Fixed Effects           Random Effects       Fixed Effects
                                                 1                 2                         3                    4                      5                     6

Heavy physical activities per week                 0.07+                 0.13               -0.00+                   -0.01                0.46+                    0.53
                                                  (0.08)                (0.09)              (0.12)                  (0.13)                (0.32)                  (0.33)
Light physical activities per week                 0.09+                 0.13                0.01+                    0.00                0.06+                    0.14
                                                  (0.09)                (0.10)              (0.14)                  (0.16)                (0.35)                  (0.41)
Strength activities per week                       0.11+                 0.13                0.07+                    0.04               -0.16+                   -0.17
                                                  (0.08)                (0.11)              (0.14)                  (0.16)                (0.32)                  (0.41)
Body mass index                                   -0.01+                 0.01                0.21+                    0.24                0.47+                    0.45
                                                  (0.11)                (0.11)              (0.17)                  (0.17)                (0.39)                  (0.39)
Whether smokes                                  0.03***+                 0.01              0.04**+                  0.02*                -0.00+                   -0.01
                                                  (0.01)                (0.01)              (0.01)                  (0.01)                (0.03)                  (0.03)
Log of cigs/day among smokers                     -0.00+                -0.01               -0.03+                   -0.05                0.00+                   -0.02
                                                  (0.03)                (0.03)              (0.05)                  (0.05)                (0.08)                  (0.09)
BMI among obese at entry                          -0.29+                -0.16                0.03+                    0.14                0.92+                    1.27
                                                  (0.29)                (0.29)              (0.43)                  (0.43)                (0.95)                  (0.84)
Light physical activity per week among            -0.29+                -0.31                0.08+                   -0.05               1.18*+                    0.31
sedentary at entry                                (0.25)                (0.28)              (0.33)                  (0.36)                (0.59)                  (0.54)
Log of cigs/day among heavy smokers               -0.02+                -0.03                0.02+                   -0.02              -0.23**+                -0.34***
at entry                                          (0.05)                (0.06)              (0.08)                  (0.09)                (0.08)                  (0.10)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally
control for gender, highest grade completed, race, and Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in
parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                        Table 7
                                     The effects of unemployment on health behaviors, by reason for unemployment
                                                        Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
                                                                         Males

                                                                                    Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                                     Unemployed                                     Laid-off                                   Plant closed
Outcome                                     Random Effects   Fixed Effects              Random Effects      Fixed Effects           Random Effects       Fixed Effects
                                                 1                 2                         3                    4                      5                     6

Heavy physical activities per week               -0.17**+                -0.11               -0.05+                   0.05               -0.01+                    0.19
                                                   (0.08)               (0.10)               (0.11)                 (0.12)               (0.25)                  (0.27)
Light physical activities per week                 0.13+                  0.15                0.17+                  0.27*                0.09+                    0.25
                                                   (0.10)               (0.11)               (0.13)                 (0.15)               (0.32)                  (0.34)
Strength activities per week                       0.03+                  0.09                0.01+                   0.05                0.40+                    0.58
                                                   (0.09)               (0.11)               (0.13)                 (0.15)               (0.38)                  (0.37)
Body mass index                                    0.06+                  0.09                0.11+                   0.13                0.24+                    0.28
                                                   (0.10)               (0.10)               (0.12)                 (0.12)               (0.30)                  (0.29)
Whether smokes                                     0.01+                 -0.01                0.01+                  -0.01                0.03+                    0.01
                                                   (0.01)               (0.01)               (0.01)                 (0.01)               (0.03)                  (0.03)
Log of cigs/day among smokers                     -0.05*+               -0.06*               -0.07+                 -0.08*               -0.11+                   -0.16
                                                   (0.03)               (0.03)               (0.04)                 (0.05)               (0.11)                  (0.12)
BMI among obese at entry                          0.60**+                 0.47              0.63**+                  0.64*                1.14+                    1.23
                                                   (0.29)               (0.30)               (0.32)                 (0.32)               (0.88)                  (0.83)
Light physical activity per week among             0.34+                  0.10               -0.07+                   0.15               -0.96+                   -0.18
sedentary at entry                                 (0.34)               (0.48)               (0.49)                 (0.71)               (0.66)                  (0.81)
Log of cigs/day among heavy smokers              -0.10**+              -0.11**             -0.11**+                -0.13**               -0.19+                  -0.29*
at entry                                           (0.05)               (0.05)               (0.05)                 (0.05)               (0.16)                  (0.15)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression model. Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally
control for gender, highest grade completed, race, and Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in
parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows: *significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                          Table 8
                                       The effects of unemployment on health behaviors, by reason for unemployment
                                                         National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
                                                                         Females

                                                                                   Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                               Unemployed                                       Laid-off                                         Plant closed
Outcome                              Random Effects    Fixed Effects               Random Effects        Fixed Effects             Random Effects           Fixed Effects
                                          1                  2                          3                      4                        5                         6

Frequency strength-building                0.12+                   0.28                   0.13                     0.20                   0.21                        0.07
activity per week                          (0.15)                (0.19)                  (0.24)                  (0.33)                  (0.53)                     (0.43)
Minutes vigorous physical                   -3.00                -22.66                  -13.79                  -11.96                  -29.63                     -50.74
activity per week                         (14.41)               (17.41)                 (21.82)                 (28.77)                 (52.15)                    (71.82)
Minutes moderate physical                  18.83                  -6.18                   6.02                   -52.90                   74.21                      86.04
activity per week                         (21.45)               (27.07)                 (41.03)                 (47.79)                (120.98)                   (138.31)
Obese BMI > 30                             0.01+                   0.01                  -0.01+                   -0.01                   0.07+                       0.07
                                           (0.01)                (0.01)                  (0.03)                  (0.03)                  (0.05)                     (0.05)
Body Mass Index                            0.12+                   0.13                  -0.02+                   -0.04                0.95**+                      0.96**
                                           (0.12)                (0.12)                  (0.25)                  (0.25)                  (0.46)                     (0.43)
Over a year since physical               0.06***                   0.03                   0.05                     0.06                  -0.03+                      -0.06
                                           (0.02)                (0.02)                  (0.03)                  (0.04)                  (0.08)                     (0.09)
Snacks per week                            -0.22+                 -0.12                  0.81+                     0.17                   0.10+                       0.02
                                           (0.70)                (1.20)                  (0.88)                  (1.29)                  (2.29)                     (2.44)
Meals skipped per week                   0.60**+                  -0.08                  0.68+                     0.09                   1.38+                       1.79
                                           (0.27)                (0.33)                  (0.41)                  (0.52)                  (1.06)                     (1.28)
Soft drinks per week                       0.42+                   0.12                  -0.92+                   -0.92                  -1.21+                       1.19
                                           (0.60)                (0.73)                  (0.56)                  (0.96)                  (0.85)                     (1.17)
Fast food per week                      -0.43***+               -0.70**                -0.34**+                   -0.01                  -0.43+                    -2.14**
                                           (0.10)                (0.29)                  (0.15)                  (0.21)                  (0.80)                     (1.05)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regressions model. Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally control
for gender, highest grade completed, race, and Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote significance as follows: *significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                                  38
                                                                          Table 9
                                       The effects of unemployment on health behaviors, by reason for unemployment
                                                         National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
                                                                          Males

                                                                                   Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                               Unemployed                                       Laid-off                                         Plant closed
Outcome                              Random Effects    Fixed Effects               Random Effects        Fixed Effects             Random Effects           Fixed Effects
                                          1                  2                          3                      4                        5                         6

Frequency strength-building                -0.30**                 -0.18                -0.47**                   -0.52                   -0.12                      0.31
activity per week                           (0.14)                (0.18)                  (0.20)                 (0.31)                  (0.65)                    (0.71)
Minutes vigorous physical               -81.03***+            -117.55***             -112.11***+              -161.82***                -92.07+                   -188.04
activity per week                          (22.70)               (29.20)                 (35.69)                (45.52)                (114.82)                   (120.65)
Minutes moderate physical                -74.86***             -93.98***              -106.64***              -138.79***                 -21.90                     -9.51
activity per week                          (21.83)               (28.42)                 (33.21)                (43.84)                (157.32)                   (171.91)
Obese BMI > 30                              -0.01+                 -0.00                   -0.01                  -0.01                   -0.06                     -0.06
                                            (0.01)                (0.01)                  (0.02)                 (0.02)                  (0.06)                    (0.06)
Body Mass Index                             -0.07+                 -0.05                  -0.12+                  -0.13                  -0.02+                      0.01
                                            (0.09)                (0.09)                  (0.14)                 (0.15)                  (0.31)                    (0.32)
Over a year since physical                 0.06***               0.04**                  0.07**                    0.04                   -0.10                     -0.12
                                            (0.02)                (0.02)                  (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.09)                    (0.10)
Snacks per week                             -0.32+                 -0.02                  -0.08+                   0.29                   0.31+                    3.00**
                                            (0.33)                (0.46)                  (0.56)                 (0.74)                  (1.58)                    (1.26)
Meals skipped per week                      -0.16+                 -0.13                  0.02+                   -0.36                  -0.34+                     -0.23
                                            (0.20)                (0.31)                  (0.39)                 (0.61)                  (0.71)                    (0.70)
Soft drinks per week                         -0.44                -0.94*                  -0.13+                  -0.48                   1.23+                      2.98
                                            (0.43)                (0.56)                  (0.59)                 (0.71)                  (2.60)                    (2.74)
Fast food per week                        -0.60***              -0.45**                -0.53***+                 -0.45*                  -0.74+                     -1.18
                                            (0.12)                (0.19)                  (0.16)                 (0.23)                  (0.53)                    (1.15)
Notes: Each cell represents a separate regressions model. Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally control
for gender, highest grade completed, race, and Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote significance as follows: *significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                                  39
                                                                        Table 10
                                 The effects of continuous unemployment on health behaviors, by duration unemployment
                                                        National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
                                                                        Females

                                                                                   Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                        Unemployed for 13 weeks                          Unemployed for 26 weeks                             Unemployed for 52 weeks
Outcome                             Random Effects     Fixed Effects                Random Effects        Fixed Effects                 Random Effects       Fixed Effects
                                         1                   2                           3                      4                             5                    6

Frequency strength-building               0.10+                    0.25                    -0.03                    0.03                      0.08                       0.24
activity per week                         (0.19)                 (0.24)                   (0.15)                   (0.23)                    (0.17)                    (0.23)
Minutes vigorous physical                 16.36                   -3.78                   16.37                    -7.62                     17.67                       4.19
activity per week                        (19.01)                (21.89)                  (20.98)                  (24.74)                   (24.52)                   (32.13)
Minutes moderate physical                  -0.30                 -22.08                    -8.53                  -39.24                    -16.10                     -68.44
activity per week                        (23.19)                (29.00)                  (25.77)                  (33.60)                   (31.36)                   (41.87)
Obese BMI > 30                            -0.00+                   0.00                    0.00+                    0.01                     -0.00+                      0.01
                                          (0.01)                 (0.01)                   (0.02)                   (0.02)                    (0.02)                    (0.02)
Body Mass Index                           0.22+                   0.25*                    0.25+                    0.28                      0.18+                      0.21
                                          (0.14)                 (0.14)                   (0.18)                   (0.18)                    (0.23)                    (0.23)
Over a year since physical               0.06**                    0.04                  0.07**                     0.05                    0.09**                       0.07
                                          (0.02)                 (0.03)                   (0.03)                   (0.03)                    (0.04)                    (0.04)
Snacks per week                         -0.77*+                   -0.98                   -0.85+                   -1.81                     -1.03+                     -2.62
                                          (0.46)                 (1.10)                   (0.56)                   (1.40)                    (0.89)                    (2.22)
Meals skipped per week                    0.34+                   -0.39                    0.43+                   -0.45                      0.51+                     -0.13
                                          (0.34)                 (0.37)                   (0.42)                   (0.43)                    (0.64)                    (0.61)
Soft drinks per week                      0.34+                    0.05                    0.27+                    0.15                      0.96+                      0.65
                                          (0.72)                 (0.84)                   (0.87)                   (1.06)                    (1.56)                    (1.65)
Fast food per week                     -0.50***+                 -0.72*                -0.52***+                   -0.82                   -0.58**+                     -1.19
                                          (0.12)                 (0.39)                   (0.15)                   (0.50)                    (0.23)                    (0.85)
Notes: Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally control for gender, highest grade completed, race, and
Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows:
*significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                        Table 11
                                 The effects of continuous unemployment on health behaviors, by duration unemployment
                                                        National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
                                                                         Males

                                                                                 Unemployment indicator & estimation method

                                      Unemployed for 13 weeks                            Unemployed for 26 weeks                             Unemployed for 52 weeks
Outcome                          Random Effects       Fixed Effects                 Random Effects        Fixed Effects                 Random Effects       Fixed Effects
                                      1                     2                            3                      4                             5                    6

Frequency strength-                    -0.21+                     0.03                     -0.17                     0.08                    -0.36*                      0.03
building activity per week             (0.17)                    (0.21)                   (0.19)                   (0.25)                    (0.21)                    (0.28)
Minutes vigorous physical          -100.40***+               -125.89***               -112.71***+               -138.39***               -121.50***+                -150.49**
activity per week                     (28.23)                   (37.55)                  (32.46)                  (42.85)                   (41.30)                   (56.85)
Minutes moderate physical           -87.35***                 -96.78***                -86.40***                 -90.63**                 -96.37***                  -95.23**
activity per week                     (24.16)                   (31.39)                  (27.67)                  (35.65)                   (33.58)                   (44.79)
Obese BMI > 30                           0.00                     0.00                      0.02                     0.02                      0.02                      0.02
                                       (0.01)                    (0.02)                   (0.02)                   (0.02)                    (0.02)                    (0.02)
Body Mass Index                         0.01+                     0.03                     0.04+                     0.05                     0.07+                      0.08
                                       (0.12)                    (0.12)                   (0.15)                   (0.15)                    (0.19)                    (0.20)
Over a year since physical           0.09***+                   0.06**                   0.09***                   0.06**                  0.15***                   0.14***
                                       (0.02)                    (0.02)                   (0.02)                   (0.03)                    (0.03)                    (0.03)
Snacks per week                        -0.41+                    -0.20                    -0.28+                     0.27                    -0.12+                      0.57
                                       (0.38)                    (0.56)                   (0.47)                   (0.62)                    (0.64)                    (0.82)
Meals skipped per week                   0.02                    -0.07                     0.13+                    -0.18                     -0.14                      0.00
                                       (0.27)                    (0.42)                   (0.33)                   (0.54)                    (0.35)                    (0.48)
Soft drinks per week                    -0.49                   -1.19*                   -1.03**                  -1.67**                    -0.57+                     -0.51
                                       (0.49)                    (0.69)                   (0.51)                   (0.77)                    (0.58)                    (0.75)
Fast food per week                   -0.62***                  -0.51**                  -0.64***                  -0.72**                 -0.74***+                    -0.72*
                                       (0.13)                    (0.22)                   (0.15)                   (0.27)                    (0.19)                    (0.39)
Notes: Fixed-effects models control for age, marital status, state of residence, and month. Random-effects additionally control for gender, highest grade completed, race, and
Hispanic origin. Standard errors, adjusted for arbitrary correlation within individual cells over time, are reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote significance as follows:
*significant at 10% level; **significant at 5% level; ***significant at 1% level
+ random-effects model rejected at 5% level (i.e. panel effects are correlated with independent variables)




                                                                                                                                                                                 41
