                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                       CAPITAL SHARE RISK IN U.S. ASSET PRICING

                                         Martin Lettau
                                      Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                            Sai Ma

                                       Working Paper 20744
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20744

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 2014, Revised August 2018

Previously circulated as "Capital Share Risk and Shareholder Heterogeneity in U.S. Stock
Pricing" and "Capital Share Risk in U.S. Stock Pricing."

I, Martin Lettau, declare that I received no funds from interested parties and am not an officer or
director of any non-profit or profit-making entity. No other party had the right to review the paper
prior to its circulation.

Sydney Ludvigson received financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied Economics
at NYU. I, Sydney Ludvigson, declare that I received no funds from interested parties and am not
an officer or director of any non-profit or profit-making entity. I am a member of the Economic
Advisory Panel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which meets twice per year to discuss
policy areas of interest to the president of the bank. This position is unpaid. No other party had
the right to review the paper prior to its circulation.

I, Sai Ma, state that I have nothing to disclose. No other party had the right to review the paper
prior to its circulation.

We are grateful to Federico Belo, John Y. Campbell, Kent Daniel, Lars Lochstoer, Hanno Lustig,
Stefan Nagel, Dimitris Papanikolaou, and to seminar participants at Duke, USC, the Berkeley-
Stanford joint seminar, the Berkeley Fun Center for Risk Management, Minnesota Macro-Asset
Pricing Conference 2015, the NBER Asset Pricing meeting April 10, 2015, the Minnesota Asset
Pricing Conference May 7-8, 2015, and the 2016 Finance Down Under Conference for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Share Risk in U.S. Asset Pricing
Martin Lettau, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 20744
December 2014, Revised August 2018
JEL No. E25,G11,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

A single macroeconomic factor based on growth in the capital share of aggregate income exhibits
significant explanatory power for expected returns across a range of equity characteristic
portfolios and non-equity asset classes, with risk price estimates that are of the same sign and
similar in magnitude. Positive exposure to capital share risk earns a positive risk premium,
commensurate with recent asset pricing models in which redistributive shocks shift the share of
income between the wealthy, who finance consumption primarily out of asset ownership, and
workers, who finance consumption primarily out of wages and salaries.


Martin Lettau                                  Sai Ma
Haas School of Business                        Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley             New York University
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900               19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                        New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                       sai.ma@nyu.edu
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu

Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
Contemporary asset pricing theory remains in search of an empirically relevant stochastic
discount factor (SDF) linked to the marginal utility of investors. This study presents evidence
that a single macroeconomic factor based on growth in the capital share of aggregate income
exhibits signi…cant explanatory power for expected returns across a wide range of equity
characteristic portfolio styles and non-equity asset classes, with positive risk price estimates
of similar magnitude. These assets include equity portfolios formed from sorts on size/book-
market, size/investment, size/operating pro…tability, long-run reversal, and non-equity asset
classes such as corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, credit default swaps, and options.
      Why should growth in the share of national income accruing to capital (the “capital
share”hereafter) be a source of systematic risk? After all, a mainstay of contemporary asset
pricing theory is that assets are priced as if there were a representative agent, leading to
an SDF based on the marginal rate of substitution over aggregate household consumption.
Under this paradigm, the division between labor and capital of aggregate income is irrel-
evant for the pricing of risky securities, once aggregate consumption risk is accounted for.
The representative agent model is especially convenient from an empirical perspective, since
aggregate household consumption is readily observed in national income data.
      But there are reasons to question a model in which average household consumption is the
appropriate source of systematic risk for the pricing of risky …nancial securities. Wealth is
highly concentrated at the top and limited securities market participation remains pervasive.
The majority of households still own no equity but even among those who do, most own
very little. Although just under half of households report owning stocks either directly or
indirectly in 2013, the top 5% of the stock wealth distribution owns 75% of the stock market
value.1 It follows that any reasonably de…ned wealth-weighted stock market participation
rate will be much lower than 50%, as we illustrate below. Moreover, unlike the average
household, the wealthiest U.S. households earn a relatively small fraction of income as labor
compensation, implying that income from the ownership of …rms and …nancial investments,
  1
      Source: 2013 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF).
i.e., capital income, …nances much more of their consumption.2 Consistent with this, we …nd
that the capital share is strongly positively related to the income shares of those in the top
5-10% of the stock market wealth distribution, but negatively related to the income shares
of those in the bottom 90%.
       These observations suggest a di¤erent approach to explaining return premia on risky
assets. Recent inequality-based asset pricing models imply that the capital share should
be a priced risk factor whenever risk-sharing is imperfect and wealth is concentrated in the
hands of a few investors, or “shareholders,”while most households are “workers”who …nance
consumption primarily out of wages and salaries (e.g., Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson
(2014), GLL). In these models, redistributive shocks that shift the share of income between
labor and capital are a source of systematic risk for asset owners. In the extreme case
where workers own no risky asset shares and there is no risk-sharing between workers and
shareholders, a representative shareholder who owns the entire corporate sector will have
consumption in equilibrium equal to Ct KSt , where Ct is aggregate (shareholder plus worker)
consumption and KSt is the capital share of aggregate income.3 The capital share is then a
source of priced risk.
       With this theoretical motivation as backdrop, this paper explores whether growth in the
capital share is a priced risk factor for explaining cross-sections of expected asset returns. We
…nd that an asset’s exposure to short-to-medium frequency (i.e., 4-8 quarter) ‡uctuations in
capital share growth has strong explanatory power for the cross-section of expected returns
on a range of equity characteristics portfolios as well as other asset classes. For the equity
portfolios and asset classes mentioned above, we …nd that positive exposure to capital share
risk earns a positive risk premium, with risk prices of similar magnitude across portfolio
   2
     In the 2013 SCF, the top 5% of the net worth distribution had a median wage-to-capital income ratio
of 18%, where capital income is de…ned as the sum of income from dividends, capital gains, pensions, net
rents, trusts, royalties, and/or sole proprietorship or farm.
   3
     This reasoning goes through as an approximation even if workers own a small fraction of the corporate
sector and even if there is some risk-sharing in the form of risk-free borrowing and lending between workers
and shareholders, as long as any risk-sharing across these groups is imperfect.


                                                     2
groups. A preview of the results for equity characteristics portfolios is given in Figure 1,
which plots observed quarterly return premia (average excess returns) on each portfolio on
the y-axis against the portfolio capital share beta for exposures of H = 8 quarters on the
x-axis. The estimates show that the model …t is high across a variety of equity portfolio
styles. (We discuss this …gure further below.) Pooled estimations of the many di¤erent stock
portfolios jointly and one that combines the stock portfolios with the portfolios of other asset
classes also indicate that capital share risk has substantial explanatory power for expected
returns. In principle, these …ndings could be consistent with the canonical representative
agent model if aggregate consumption growth were perfectly positively correlated with capital
share growth. But this is not what we …nd. For all but one portfolio group studied here,
aggregate consumption risk measured over any horizon exhibits far lower explanatory power
for the cross-section of returns, and/or is not statistically important once exposures to capital
share risk are introduced.
    A notable result of our analysis is that an empirical model with capital share growth
as the single source of macroeconomic risk explains a larger fraction of expected returns
on equity portfolios formed from size/book-market sorts than does the Fama-French three-
factor model, an empirical speci…cation explicitly designed to explain the large cross-sectional
variation in average return premia on these portfolios (Fama and French (1993)). Moreover,
the risk prices for the return-based factors SMB and HML are either signi…cantly attenuated
or completely driven out of the pricing regressions by the estimated exposure to capital share
risk.
    We also compare the empirical capital share pricing model studied here to two other
empirical models recently documented to have explanatory power for cross-sections of ex-
pected asset returns, namely the intermediary-based asset pricing models of Adrian, Etula,
and Muir (2014) (AEM) and He, Kelly, and Manela (2016) (HKM). This comparison is apt
because the motivations behind the inequality- and intermediary-based asset pricing theories
are quite similar. Both theories are macro factor frameworks in which average household con-


                                               3
sumption is not by itself an appropriate source of systematic risk for the pricing of …nancial
securities. In the intermediary-based paradigm, intermediaries are owned by “sophisticated”
or “expert”investors who are distinct from the majority of households that comprise aggre-
gate consumption. It is reasonable to expect that sophisticated investors often coincide with
wealthy asset owners and face similar if not identical sources of systematic risk. Indeed, we
…nd that capital share growth exposure contains information for the pricing of risky secu-
rities that overlaps with that of the banking sector’s equity capital ratio factor studied by
HKM and the broker-dealer leverage factor studied by AEM. But the information in these
intermediary balance-sheet exposures is almost always subsumed in part or in whole by
the capital share exposures, suggesting that the latter contain additional information about
the cross-section of expected returns that is not present in the intermediary-based factor
exposures.
   The last part of the paper provides additional evidence from household-level data that
sharpens the focus on redistributive shocks as a source of systematic risk for the wealthy.
First, we show that growth in the income shares of the richest stockowners (e.g., the top
10% of the stock wealth distribution) is su¢ ciently strongly negatively correlated with that
of non-rich stockowners (e.g., the bottom 90%), that growth in the product of these shares
with aggregate consumption is also strongly negatively correlated. This means that the in-
versely related component in the product operating through income shares outweighs the
common component operating through aggregate consumption. While this …nding is sug-
gestive of limited risk-sharing, some income share variation between these groups is likely
to be idiosyncratic and capable of being diversi…ed away. We therefore form an estimate of
the component of income share variation that represents systematic risk as the …tted values
from a projection of each group’s income share on the aggregate capital share. Finally, we
form a proxy for the consumption of the wealthiest stockholders as the product of aggregate
consumption times the top group’s …tted income share. We …nd that estimated exposures to
this proxy help explain expected return premia on the same equity characteristic portfolios


                                              4
that are well explained by capital share exposures.
   Our investigation is related to a classic older literature emphasizing the importance
for stock pricing of limited stock market participation and heterogeneity (Mankiw (1986),
Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Constantinides and Du¢ e (1996), Vissing-Jorgensen (2002),
Ait-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo (2004), Guvenen (2009), and Malloy, Moskowitz, and Vissing-
Jorgensen (2009)). In contrast to this literature, the limited participation dimension relevant
for our analysis is not shareholder versus non-shareholder, but rather investors who di¤er
according to whether their income is earned primarily from supplying labor or from owning
assets. Our results suggest the relevance of frameworks in which investors are concerned
about shocks that have opposite e¤ects on labor and capital. Such redistributive shocks play
no role in the traditional limited participation literature.
   A growing body of literature considers the role of redistributive shocks that transfer
resources between shareholders and workers as a source of priced risk when risk sharing is
imperfect (Danthine and Donaldson (2002); Favilukis and Lin (2013a, 2013b, 2015), Gomez
(2016), GLL, Marfe (2016)). In this literature, labor compensation is a charge to claimants
on the …rm and therefore a systematic risk factor for aggregate stock and bond markets.
In those models that combine these features with limited stock market participation, such
as that in GLL, the capital share matters for risk pricing. Finally, the …ndings here are
related to a body of evidence suggesting that the returns to human capital are negatively
correlated with those to stock market wealth (Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008); Lettau
and Ludvigson (2009); Chen, Favilukis, and Ludvigson (2014), Lettau and Ludvigson (2013),
GLL, Bianchi, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2016)).
   We note that estimated exposures to capital share risk do not explain cross-sections of
expected returns on all portfolio types. Results (not reported) indicate that these exposures
have no ability to explain cross-sections of expected returns on industry portfolios, or on
the foreign exchange and commodities portfolios that HKM …nd are well explained by their
intermediary sector equity-capital ratio. Moreover, momentum portfolios present a puzzle


                                               5
for both the inequality-based and the intermediary-based models, since these factors often
earn a negative risk price when explaining cross-sections of expected momentum returns.
The exploration of this momentum-related puzzle is taken up in a separate paper (Lettau,
Ludvigson, and Ma (2014)).
      The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses data and presents some
preliminary analyses. Section II describes the econometric models to be estimated, while
Section III discusses the results of these estimations. Section IV concludes.


                         I. Data and Preliminary Analysis

      This section brie‡y describes our data. A more detailed description of the data and our
sources is provided in the Online Appendix. Our sample is quarterly and unless otherwise
noted spans the period 1963:Q3 to 2013:Q4 before loosing observations to computing long
horizon relations as described below.
      We use equity return data available from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth website on 25
size/book-market sorted portfolios (size/BM), 25 size/operating pro…tability portfolios (size/OP),
10 long-run reversal portfolios (REV), and 25 size/investment portfolios (size/INV). We also
use the portfolio data recently explored by HKM to investigate other asset classes, includ-
ing the 10 corporate bond portfolios from Nozawa (2014) spanning 1972:Q3-1973:Q2 and
1975:Q1-2012:Q4 (“bonds”), six sovereign bond portfolios from Borri and Verdelhan (2011)
spanning 1995:Q1-2011:Q1 (“sovereign bonds”), 54 S&P 500 index options portfolios sorted
on moneyness and maturity from Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Savov (2013) spanning
1986:Q2-2011:Q4 (“options”) and the 20 CDS portfolios constructed by HKM spanning
2001:Q2-2012:Q4.4
      We de…ne the capital share as KS         1       LS; where LS is the labor share of national
income. Our benchmark measure of LSt is the labor share of the nonfarm business sector as
  4
    We are grateful to Zhiguo He, Bryan Kelly and Asaf Manela for making their data and code available
to us.


                                                   6
compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), measured on a quarterly basis.
   There are well known di¢ culties with accurately measuring the labor share. Most notable
is the di¢ culty with separating income of sole proprietors into components attributable to
labor and capital inputs. But Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) report trends for the labor
share, i.e., changes, within the corporate sector that are similar to those for sectors that
include sole proprietors, such as the BLS nonfarm measure (which makes speci…c assumptions
on how proprietors’income is proportioned). Indirect taxes and subsidies can also create a
wedge between the labor share and the capital share, but Gomme and Rupert (2004) …nd
that these do not vary much over time, so that movements in the labor share are still strongly
(inversely) correlated with movements in the capital share. Thus the main di¢ culties with
measuring the labor share pertain to getting the level of the labor share right. Our results
rely instead on changes in the labor share, and we maintain the hypothesis that they are
informative about opposite signed changes in the capital share. Figure 2 plots the rolling
eight-quarter log di¤erence in the capital share over time. This variable is volatile throughout
our sample.
   The empirical investigation of this paper is motivated by the inequality-based asset pric-
ing literature discussed above. One question prompted by this literature is whether there is
any evidence that ‡uctuations in the aggregate capital share are related in a quantitatively
important way to observed income shares of wealthy households, and the latter to expected
returns on risky assets. To address these questions, we make use of two household-level
datasets that provide information on wealth and income inequality. The …rst is the trien-
nial survey data from the survey of consumer …nances (SCF), the best source of micro-level
data on household-level assets and liabilities for the United States. The SCF also provides
information on income and on whether the household owns stocks directly or indirectly. The
SCF is well suited to studying the wealth distribution because it includes a sample intended
to measure the wealthiest households, identi…ed on the basis of tax returns. It also has a
standard random sample of US households. The SCF provides weights for combining the


                                               7
two samples, which we use whenever we report statistics from the SCF. The 2013 survey is
based on 6015 households.
      The second household level dataset uses the income-capitalization method of Saez and
Zucman (2016) (SZ) that combines information from income tax returns with aggregate
household balance sheet data to estimate the wealth distribution across households annually.5
This method starts with the capital income reported by households on their tax forms to
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). For each class of capital income (e.g., interest income,
rents, dividends, capital gains etc.,) a capitalization factor is computed that maps total ‡ow
income reported for that class to the amount of wealth from the household balance sheet
of the US Financial Accounts. Wealth for a household and year is obtained by multiplying
the individual income components for that asset class by the corresponding capitalization
factors. We modify the selection criteria to additionally form an estimate of the distribution
of wealth and income among just those individuals who can be described as stockholders.6
We de…ne a stockholder in the SZ data as any individual who reports having non-zero income
from dividends and/or realized capital gains. Note that this classi…cation of stockholder …ts
the description of “direct” stockowner, but unlike the SCF, there is no way to account for
indirect holdings in for example, tax-deferred accounts. The annual data we employ span
the period 1963-2012. We refer to these data as the “SZ data”.
      The empirical literature on limited stock market participation and heterogeneity has often
relied on the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We do not use this survey because we
wish to focus on wealthy households and there are several reasons the CEX does not provide
reliable data for this purpose. First, the CEX is an inferior measure of household-level assets
and liabilities as compared to the SCF and SZ data, which both have samples intended to
measure the wealthiest households identi…ed from tax returns. Second, CEX answers to
asset questions are often missing for more than half of the sample and much of the survey is
  5
      We are grateful to Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman for making their code and data available.
  6
      See the Internet Appendix for details.



                                                    8
top-coded. Third, wealthy households are known to exhibit very high non-response rates in
surveys such as the CEX that do not have an explicit administrative tax data component that
directly targets wealthy households (Sabelhaus, Johnson, Ash, Swanson, Garner, Greenlees,
and Henderson (2014)). The last section of the paper considers a way to form a proxy for
the top wealth households’consumption using the income data.
       Panel A of Table I shows the distribution of stock wealth across households, conditional
on the household owning a positive amount of corporate equity. The left part of the panel
shows results for stockholdings held either directly or indirectly from the SCF.7 The right
part shows the analogous results for the SZ data, corresponding to direct ownership. Panel
B shows the distribution of stock wealth among all households, including non-stockowners.
The table shows that stock wealth is highly concentrated. Among all households, the top
5% of the stock wealth distribution owns 74.5% of the stock market according to the SCF in
2013, and 79.2% in 2012 according to the SZ data. Focusing on just stockholders, the top 5%
of stockholders own 61% of the stock market in the SCF and 63% in the SZ data. Because
many low-wealth households own no equity, wealth is more concentrated when we consider
the entire population than when we consider only those households who own stocks.
       Panel C of Table I reports the “raw” stock market participation rate from the SCF,
denoted rpr, across years, and also a “wealth-weighted”participation rate. The raw partic-
ipation rate is the fraction of households in the SCF who report owning stocks, directly or
indirectly. The wealth-weighted rate takes into account the concentration of wealth. As an
illustration, we compute a wealth-weighted participation rate by dividing the survey popula-
tion into three groups: the top 5% of the stock wealth distribution, the rest of the stockowning
households representing (rpr       :05) % of the population, and the residual who own no stocks
and make up (1       rpr) % of the population. In 2013, stockholders outside the top 5% are 46%
of households, and those who hold no stocks are 51% of households. The wealth-weighted
   7
    For the SCF we start our analysis with the 1989 survey. There are two earlier surveys, but the survey
in 1986 is a condensed reinterview of respondents in the 1983 survey.



                                                   9
participation rate is then 5% w5% + (rpr        0:05) % 1      w5% + (1      rpr) % 0, where w5% is
the fraction of wealth owned by the top 5%. The table shows that the raw participation rate
has steadily increased over time, rising from 32% in 1989 to 49% in 2013. But the wealth-
weighted rate is much lower than 49% in 2013 (equal to 20%) and has risen less over time.
Note that the choice of the top 5% to measure the wealthy is not crucial; any percentage at
the top can be used to illustrate how the concentration of wealth a¤ects the intensive mar-
gin of stockmarket participation. The calculation shows that steady increases stock market
ownership rates do not necessarily correspond to quantitatively meaningful changes in stock
market ownership patterns, underscoring the conceptual challenges to explaining equity re-
turn premia using a representative agent SDF that is a function of aggregate household
consumption.
      The inequality-based asset pricing literature predicts that the income shares of wealthy
capital owners should vary positively with the national capital share. Table II investigates
this implication by showing the output from regressions of income shares on the aggregate
capital share KSt . The regressions are carried out for households located in di¤erent per-
centiles of the stock wealth distribution. For this purpose, we use the SZ data, since the
annual frequency provides more information than the triennial SCF, though the results are
similar using either dataset. To compute income shares, income Yti from all sources, includ-
ing wages, investment income and other for percentile group i is divided by aggregate income
for the SZ population, Yt , and regressed on the aggregate capital share KSt .8 The left panel
of the table reports regression results for all households, while the right panel reports results
for stockowners.
      The information in both panels is potentially relevant for our investigation. The wealth-
iest shareholders are likely to be a¤ected by a movement in the labor share because corpo-
rations pay all of their employees more or less, not just the minority who own stocks. The
  8
    We use the average of the quarterly observations on KSt over the year corresponding to the year for
which the income share observation in the SZ data is available.



                                                  10
regression results on the left panel speak directly to this question and show that movements
in the capital share are strongly positively related to the income shares of those in the top
10% of the stock wealth distribution and strongly negatively related to the income share of
the bottom 90% of the stock wealth distribution. Indeed, this single variable explains 61% of
the variation in the income shares of the top 10% group (63% of the top 1%) and is strongly
statistically signi…cant with a t-statistic greater than 8. These R2 statistics are quite high
considering that some of the income variation in these groups can still be expected to be
idiosyncratic and uncorrelated with aggregate variables. The right panel shows the same
regression output for the shareholder population only. The capital share is again strongly
positively related to the income share of stockowners in the top 10% of the stock wealth
distribution and strongly statistically signi…cant, while it is negatively related to the income
share of stockowners in the bottom 90%. The capital share explains 55% of the top one
percent’s income share, 48% of the top 10%, and 50% of the bottom 90%. This underscores
the extent to which most households, even those who own some stocks, are better described
as “workers”whose share of aggregate income shrinks when the capital share grows.
       Of course, the resources that support the consumption of each group contain both a
common and idiosyncratic components. Figure 3 provides one piece of evidence on how these
components evolve over time. The top panel plots annual observations on the gross growth
             Yi
rate of Ct Ytt for the top 10% and bottom 90% of the stockowner stock wealth distribution,
where Ct is aggregate consumption for the corresponding year, measured from the National
                                              Yti
Income and Product Accounts, while            Yt
                                                    is computed from the SZ data for the two groups
i = top 10, bottom 90. The bottom panel plots the same concept on quarterly data using
                 c
                 Yi
the …tted values Ytt from the right-hand-panel regressions in Table II, which is based on the
                                                                                                            Yi
subsample of households that report having income from stocks.9 Growth in the product Ct Ytt
                 c
                 Yi
   9
    Speci…cally, Ytt is constructed using the estimated intercepts b& i0 and slope coe¢ cients b& i1 from these
regressions along with quarterly observations on the capital share to generate a quarterly observations on
                      c
                      Yi
…tted income shares Ytt .



                                                      11
is much more volatile for the top 10% than the bottom 90% of the stockowner stock wealth
distribution, but both panels of the …gure display a clear negative comovement between
the two groups. Using the raw data, the correlation is -0.97. In the quarterly data, it is -
0.85. Thus the common component in this variable, accounted for by aggregate consumption
growth, is more than o¤set by the negatively correlated component driven by their inversely
related income shares, a …nding suggestive of imperfect risk-sharing between the two groups.


                               II. Econometric Model

   This section describes the econometric models we consider. Throughout the paper we use
the superscript “o”to denote the true value of a parameter and “hats”to denote estimated
values.

   A. SDF and Beta Representation

   Our main analysis is based on estimation of SDF models with familiar no-arbitrage Euler
equations taking the form
                                             e
                                     E Mt+1 Rjt+1 = 0;                                    (1)

or equivalently,
                                                         e
                                 e           Cov Mt+1 ; Rt+1
                              E Rjt+1 =                      ;                            (2)
                                               E (Mt+1 )
                                   e
where Mt+1 is a candidate SDF and Rjt+1 is the excess return on an asset indexed by j held
by the investor with marginal rate of substitution Mt+1 at time t + 1. The excess return is
              e
de…ned to be Rj;t    Rj;t   Rf;t , where Rj;t denotes the gross return on asset j, with Rf;t a
risk-free asset return that is uncorrelated with Mt+1 .
   In this paper we consider a stylized limited participation endowment economy in which
wealth is concentrated in the hands of a few investors, or “shareholders,”while most house-
holds are “workers” who …nance consumption out of wages and salaries. We suppose that
workers own no risky asset shares and consume their labor earnings. There is no risk-sharing
between workers and shareholders. In this case, a representative shareholder who owns the

                                              12
entire corporate sector and earns no labor income will then have consumption in equilibrium
that is equal to Ct KSt , where Ct is aggregate (shareholder plus worker) consumption and
KSt is the capital share of aggregate income.10 These features of the model follow GLL.
Denote Ct KSt = Cst , where the “s”denotes shareholder.
       To evaluate such a framework empirically, the econometrician could start by considering
an especially simple limited participation SDF in which the capital share plays a role via its
in‡uence on the richest shareholders’consumption:
                                                          Cst+1
                                           Mt+1 =                               :                                   (3)
                                                           Cst
In the above,       may be interpreted as a subjective time-discount factor and                      as a coe¢ cient
of relative risk aversion. Note that worker consumption plays no role in the SDF since
workers do not participate in risky asset markets. In the endowment economy, the capital
share is equal in equilibrium to the consumption share of shareholders. In this case (3)
collapses to a simple power utility model over Cst , which has an approximate linear factor
speci…cation taking the form
                                                Ct+1                            KSt+1
                          Mt+1    b0       b1             1                b2             1 ;                       (4)
                                                 Ct                              KSt
                                                                                                                0
                                                                                          Ct+1
with b0 = 1 + ln ( ), and b1 = b2 = . Denote the vector f                                  Ct
                                                                                                 1; KSt+1
                                                                                                     KSt
                                                                                                            1       and
b = (b1 ; b2 )0 . Equations (2) and (4) together imply a representation in which expected returns
                                                                  0
are a function of factor risk exposures, or betas                 j,   and factor risk prices :

                                e                         0
                             E Rjt+1        =    0   +    j   ;                                                     (5)
                                       0                               1
                                       j    = Cov (f; f 0 )                        e
                                                                           Cov f; Rjt+1
                                                              1
                                            = E (Mt )             Cov (f; f 0 ) b:

Below we use the three month Treasury bill (T -bill) rate to proxy for a risk-free rate. The
parameter      0   (the same in each return equation) is included to account for a “zero beta”
  10
   This statement presumes a closed economy. See the section on “A Stylized Model of Asset Owners and
Workers” in the Online Appendix.

                                                         13
rate if there is no true risk-free rate (or quarterly T -bills are not an accurate measure of the
risk-free rate).

       B. Longer-horizon Betas

       A common approach to estimating equations such as (5) is to run a cross-sectional re-
                                                                                       0                         0               0
gression of average returns on estimates of the risk exposures                         j   =   jC;1 ;    jKS;1       , where     j

are obtained from a …rst-stage time series regression of excess returns on factors,11

            e
           Rj;t+1;t = aj +    jC;1   (Ct+1 =Ct ) +    jKS;1      (KSt+1 =KSt ) + uj;t+1;t ; t = 1; 2:::T:                      (6)

                                           e
The above uses the more explicit notation Rj;t+1;t to denote the one-period return on asset
j from the end of t to the end of t + 1.12 Equation (6) is used to estimate one-period betas,
             0
denoted      j.

       The gross H-period excess return on asset j from the end of t to the end of t + H is
         e                                                             0                           0
denoted Rj;t+H;t .13 Longer horizon risk exposures                     jH   =     jC;H ;   jKS;H        may be estimated
from a regression of longer-horizon returns on longer-horizon factors, i.e.,

          e
         Rj;t+H;t = aj +     jC;H   (Ct+H =Ct ) +     jKS;H      (KSt+H =KSt ) + uj;t+H;t ; t = 1; 2:::T:                      (7)

                                                                                                        0
There are at least two circumstances under which longer-horizon betas                                   jH   may be useful
for explaining one-period expected return premia. First, the factors on the right-hand-side
  11
     Restrictions on the SDF coe¢ cients of multiple factors, such as b1 = b2 , require restrictions on the in
the cross-sectional regression. We address this issue in the next section.
  12
     The speci…cation of factors in terms of gross versus net growth rates is immaterial and only a¤ects the
units of the time-series coe¢ cients.
  13
     The gross multiperiod (long-horizon) return from the end of t to the end of t + H is denoted Rj;t+H;t :
                                                             H
                                                             Y
                                              Rj;t+H;t              Rj;t+h ;
                                                             h=1

and the gross H-period excess return
                                                     H
                                                     Y                 H
                                                                       Y
                                         e
                                        Rj;t+H;t           Rj;t+h           Rf;t+h :
                                                     h=1              h=1




                                                            14
of (6) could be measured with transitory error. Second, the econometrician’s simple SDF
(3) could be misspeci…ed and omit additional risk factors that do not appear in (3). In both
circumstances, estimates of multi-period risk exposures could be closer to the true one-period
exposures than are estimates of the one-period risk exposures.
   A pre-existing literature has pointed out that measurement error in macroeconomic data
can have e¤ects on the estimation of asset pricing models. This literature has focused
mostly on how measurement error in consumption may in‡uence tests of the Consumption
CAPM. Daniel and Marshall (1997) show that long-horizon consumption growth can partially
explain the equity premium puzzle if quarterly consumption is contaminated by transitory
measurement error. Parker and Julliard (2004) suggest measurement error as motivation
for their use of long-horizon consumption growth and Kroencke (2017) studies methods for
undoing the smoothing-type …lters that data collection agencies appear to apply to di¤erent
components of aggregate consumption. Our framework di¤ers somewhat from the models in
these papers. Instead of using consumption growth, our model is based on the capital share
(or one minus the labor share), which unlike consumption is a ratio of two macroeconomic
series. Each of these series, labor compensation in the numerator and value added in the
denominator, are likely to be measured with error, leaving the magnitude of the e¤ect on
the ratio unclear. But smoothing …lters, of the type emphasized by Kroencke (2017) for
example, would contribute to positive autocorrelation in the growth of both the numerator
and denominator of the labor share. Except in knife-edge cases where these e¤ects exactly
cancel, such a smoothing procedure would contribute to the negative autocorrelation in the
the capital share growth rate that is observed in the data. In this case, the use of long-
horizon betas could provide a simple method for undoing measurement error in capital share
growth caused by smoothing …lters.
   An alternative reason for focusing on longer-horizon betas is that the simple SDF (3)
is likely to be misspeci…ed because it misses some additional risk factors. A growing body
of evidence using equity options data that suggests the existence of a volatile but highly


                                             15
transitory component in equity market risk premia that is at odds with that a range of
consumption-based models, even those that generate a time-varying market risk premium
(e.g., see the evidence in Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), Andersen, Fusari, and
Todorov (2013), and Martin (2017)). The time-variation in market risk premia generated
by standard consumption-based models is much less volatile and much more persistent than
that suggested by options data.
          With this evidence in mind, suppose that the econometrician presumes the SDF takes
the form (3) but the true SDF instead takes the form

                                                           Cst+1            Gt+1
                                              Mt+1 =   t                               ;                     (8)
                                                            Cst              Gt

where            is a parameter and Gt+1 are any additional components of the SDF that contribute to
volatility in priced risk, but are unobserved to the econometrician.14 Since any such unknown
factors would be omitted from the right-hand-side of (6) by the econometrician, their presence
could bias estimates of risk exposures on the included factors such as capital share growth in
(6). In particular, if positive exposure to an omitted factor earns a risk premium, estimates
of risk exposures on the included factors in (6) will tend to be biased down whenever the
omitted factor is negatively correlated with the included factor. If, in addition, the omitted
source of risk is more transitory than the included source of risk, this bias can be mitigated
by estimating longer-horizon betas rather than one-period betas. The Online Appendix gives
a speci…c parametric example and simulation in repeated …nite samples of this phenomenon
in which it is shown that a substantial downward bias in estimated one-period capital share
betas may be attenuated by estimating the longer-horizon relationships in (7). In essence,
estimates of the long-horizon relationships …lter out the higher frequency “noise”generated
     14
    Following GLL, volatility in Gt+1 need not translate into unrealistic volatility in the risk-free rate if the
parameter t varies over time in a manner that generalizes to non-normal functions the familiar compensating
Jensen’s term that appears in lognormal models of the SDF (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Lettau
and Wachter (2007)). In the above, a speci…cation for t that renders the risk-free rate constant, for example,
               exp( rf )                       Cst+1       Gt+1
is    t   =   Et [Dt+1 =Dt ] ,   where Dt+1     Cst         Gt         and rf is a parameter.



                                                                  16
by a more transitory omitted factor that is the source of the bias in the estimated one-period
exposures.
       These examples motivate us to investigate whether multi-quarter, i.e., H-period, es-
timated risk exposures from regressions such as (7) explain cross-sections of one-period
                                      e
(quarterly) expected return premia E Rj;t+1 . Note that the point of estimating longer-
horizon risk exposures in the …rst stage is not to ask how they a¤ect longer-horizon ex-
                        e
pected return premia E Rj;t+H;t in the cross section.15 The point is instead to obtain
a more accurate estimate of the true one-period exposures, which can be used to explain
                                     e
one-period expected return premia E Rj;t+1;t in the cross-section. For the linearized SDF
model (4), this may be implemented by running time-series regressions of the form (7) to
        0
obtain bjH = bjC;H ; bjKS;H , and then running a second-pass cross-sectional regression of
the form


                    e
                 E Rj;t =     0   + bj;C;H   C;H   + bj;KS;H    KS;H   + j;    j = 1; 2::::N;              (9)
                                                                    e
where j = 1; :::; N indexes the asset with quarterly excess return Rj;t .
       Although aggregate consumption growth in principle plays a role as a risk factor in (4),
we focus on the more parsimonious SDF model that depends only on capital share growth.
We do so because, as shown below, the capital share is the most important empirical compo-
nent of Ct KSt for explaining cross-sections of asset returns, while the aggregate consumption
component is relatively unimportant. For this parsimonious speci…cation, we use a univari-
ate time-series regression of H-period excess returns on H-period capital share growth to
estimate bj;KS;H and a cross-sectional regression to estimate the risk price                   KS;H :

                           e
                        E Rj;t =       0   + bj;KS;H   KS;H    + j;     j = 1; 2::::N:                    (10)

       In all the above equations, t represents a quarterly time period, and             ;H   are the H-period
risk price parameters to be estimated. We refer to the joint time-series and cross-sectional
   This observation does not rule out the possibility that b b;H also explains cross-sections of expected
  15

H-period returns as well as one-period returns.

                                                       17
regression approach as the “two-pass”regression approach, even though both equations are
estimated jointly in one Generalized Method of Moments (GMM Hansen (1982)) system as
detailed in the Online Appendix.
       Although we maintain the linear SDF speci…cations as our baseline, we also undertake a
GMM estimation that applies the approach just discussed to the nonlinear SDF version of
(4). The moment conditions upon which the estimation is based are in this case given by

                                "                                                       #       "       #
                                                             (Mt+H;t         )Ret+H;t
                                    Ret           0 1N   +               H
                                                                                                    0
                            E                                            H                  =               (11)
                                                    Mt+H;t           H
                                                                                                    0
where                                                    "                                      #
                                                    H        Ct+H              KSt+H
                                Mt+H;t =                                                            :
                                                              Ct                KSt
For the reasons discussed above, this nonlinear estimation again implements the approach of
using H-period empirical covariances between excess returns Ret+H;t and the SDF Mt+H;t to
explain one-period (quarterly) average return premia E (Ret ) in the cross-section. The details
of this estimation are given in the Online Appendix and will be commented on below.
       In the …nal empirical analysis of the paper, we explicitly connect aggregate capital share
‡uctuations to ‡uctuations in the income shares of rich versus non-rich stockowners using
the SZ household-level data to investigate whether a proxy for the consumption of wealthy
stockholders is priced in our asset return data. This investigation is described below.
                                                                 2
       For all estimations above, we report an R for the cross-sectional block of moments as a
measure of how well the model explains the cross-section of quarterly returns.16 Bootstrapped
  16
       This measure is de…ned as

                                                              V arc E Rje           be
                                                                                    Rj
                                              2
                                          R        =     1
                                                                 V arc E Rje
                                          be
                                          R        =     b0 + b 0 bH ;
                                           j                    j;H
                                                              |{z}|{z}
                                                                1 KK 1

                                                                                                     be is
where K are the number of factors in the asset pricing mode, V arc denotes cross-sectional variance, Rj
the average return premium predicted by the model for asset j, and “hats” denote estimated parameters.


                                                                 18
                                 2
con…dence intervals for the R are reported. Also reported are the root-mean-squared pricing
errors (RMSE) as a fraction of the root-mean-squared return (RMSR) on the portfolios being
priced, i.e.,
                         v                                                v
                         u                                                u
                         u1 X N
                                                       2                  u1 X N
                RM SE    t       E Rje            be
                                                  R        ;     RM SR    t       E Rje
                                                                                            2
                                                   j
                           N j=1                                            N j=1

                                                         bje = b0 + b0j;H bH . Finally, in
where Rje refers to the excess return of portfolio j and R
keeping with our acknowledgement that capital share risk is an incomplete description of
the true SDF, we use of statistics for model comparison such as the Hansen-Jagannathan
distance (HJ-distance, Hansen and Jagannathan (1997)) that explicitly recognize model
misspeci…cation.


                                               III. Results

    This section presents empirical results. We begin with a preliminary analysis of the rel-
ative importance of aggregate consumption growth versus capital share growth in linearized
SDF model (4).
                                          Ct+H                 KSt+H
    A. The Relative Importance of          Ct
                                                 versus         KSt

    As discussed above, we investigate whether H-quarter risk exposures explain quarterly
expected return premia in the cross-section. For the linearized SDF with Ct KSt = Cst ,
                                                                             e
this is tantamount to asking whether covariances of H-period excess returns Rt+H;t with the
H-period linearized SDF Mt+H;t , where

                                               Ct+H                     KSt+H
                        Mt+H;t       b0   b1               1       b2           1 ;                (12)
                                                Ct                       KSt
                                                                e
have explanatory power for one-period expected return premia E Rj;t+1;t . Although the
speci…cation (12), which follows from (3), restricts the coe¢ cients b1 = b2 = , it need not
follow that the two factors are equally priced in the cross-section. That is,         C;H   in (9) could


                                                      19
be much smaller than           KS;H ,   in which case, capital share risk would be a more important
determinant of the cross-section of expected returns than is aggregate consumption risk,
despite their equally-weighted presence in the linearized SDF. To see why, observe that the
                                              0
factor risk prices    H   =(    C;H ,   KS;H )        are related to the SDF coe¢ cients b1 and b2 according
to
                                                               1
                                        H   = E (Mt+H;t )          Cov (fH ; fH0 ) b;                   (13)
                                                  0
                Ct+H
where fH =       Ct
                          1; KSt+H
                              KSt
                                             1 , and b = (b1 ; b2 )0 : Equation (13) shows that, even if
b1 = b2 6= 0,   C;H   will be smaller than              KS;H   whenever consumption growth is less volatile
than capital share growth and the two factors are not too strongly correlated.
     We use GMM to estimate the elements of Cov(fH ; fH0 ) along with the parameters b, while
restricting b1 = b2 and using data on the same cross-sections of asset returns employed in
the main investigation of the next section. Doing so provides estimates of the risk prices
 H   from (13). The following results are reported in the Online Appendix, for H = 4 and
H = 8 quarters. First, estimates of Cov(fH0 ; fH ) show that consumption growth is much less
volatile than capital share growth while the o¤-diagonal elements of Cov(fH0 ; fH ) are small.
As a consequence, estimates of              C;H   from (13) using data on di¤erent asset classes and equity
characteristic portfolios are in most cases several times smaller than those of                KS;H   despite
b1 = b2 . (See Table AI of the Online Appendix. The big exception to this are the estimates
using options data for H = 8). Note that if aggregate consumption growth were constant,
 C;H   = 0 no matter what the value of b1 = b2 : This reasoning and the foregoing result
suggests that an approximate empirical SDF that eliminates consumption growth altogether
is likely to perform almost as well as one that includes it.
     Second, Table AII of the Online Appendix shows the GMM restricted parameter estimates
of b1 = b2 (denoted b in the table) for explaining quarterly expected return premia when both
H-period consumption and capital share growth are included as risk factors, while Table AIII
shows the same when b1 is restricted to be zero, e¤ectively eliminating consumption growth
from the SDF. The results show that little is lost in terms of cross-sectional explanatory

                                                            20
power or pricing errors by estimating a model with b1 constrained to be zero. By contrast,
restricting b2 to be zero, i.e., dropping capital share growth from the linearized SDF, makes
a big di¤erence to the cross-sectional …t, which is typically far lower than the previous two
cases (Table AIV).
   Given these results, we make the more parsimonious SDF that depends only on capital
                                                                      KSt+H
share growth our baseline empirical model, i.e., Mt+H;t = b0     b2    KSt
                                                                              1 , referred to
hereafter as the capital share SDF. This is estimated with a univariate time-series regression
to obtain bj;KS;H combined with the cross-sectional regression (10) to explain quarterly
expected return premia. Of course, if risk-sharing between shareholders and workers were
perfect, capital share growth should not appear in the SDF at all (i.e., b2 = 0) and only
growth in aggregate consumption should be priced in the cross-section once the betas for
both variables are included. But the results just reported show that this is not what we
…nd. The …ndings are therefore strongly supportive of a model with limited participation
and imperfect risk-sharing between workers and shareholders.

   B. A Parsimonious Capital Share SDF

   This subsection presents our main results on whether capital share risk is priced in
the cross-section when explaining expected returns on a range of equity styles and non-
equity asset classes. This is followed by subsections reporting results that control for the
betas of empirical pricing factors from other models, statistical signi…cance of our estimated
beta spreads, and tests that directly use the distribution of income shares and wealth from
the household-level SZ data. In all cases we characterize sampling error by computing
block bootstrap estimates of the …nite sample distributions of the estimated risk prices and
                 2
cross-sectional R , from which we report 95% con…dence intervals for these statistics. The
bootstrap procedure corrects for the “…rst-stage” estimate of the risk exposures b as well
as the serial dependence of the data in the time-series regressions used to compute the risk
exposures. The Appendix provides a description of the bootstrap procedure.
   Panels A-E of Table III report results from estimating the cross-sectional regressions (10)

                                             21
on four distinct equity characteristic portfolio groups: size/BM, REV, size/INV, size/OP
and a pooled estimation of the many di¤erent stock portfolios jointly. To give a sense of
which portfolio groups are most mispriced in the pooled estimation, Panel F reports the
RM SEi =RM SRi for each group i computed from the pooled estimation on “all equity”
characteristics portfolios. Panels G-J report results from estimating the cross-sectional re-
gressions on portfolios of four non-equity asset classes: bonds, sovereign bonds, options, and
CDS. Finally Panel K reports these results for the pooled estimation on the many di¤erent
stock portfolios with the portfolios of other asset classes. For each portfolio group, and for
H = 4 and 8 quarters, we report the estimated capital share factor risk prices bKS;H and
      2
the R with 95% con…dence intervals for these statistics in square brackets, along with the
RM SE=RM SR for each portfolio group in the …nal row.
   Turning …rst to the equity characteristic portfolios, Table III shows that the risk price
for capital share growth is positive and strongly statistically signi…cant in each of these
cross-sections, as indicated by the 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval which includes only
positive values for bKS that are bounded well away from zero. Exposure to this single
macroeconomic factor explains a large fraction of the cross-sectional variation in return
                                                                            2
premia on these portfolios. For H = 4 and H = 8, the cross-sectional R statistics are 51%
and 80%, respectively for size/BM, 70% and 86% for REV, and 39% and 62% for size/INV,
                                       2
and 78% and 76% for size/OP. The R statistics remain sizable for all three portfolio groups
even after taking into sampling uncertainty and small sample biases. And while the 95%
                                                                      2
bootstrap con…dence intervals for the cross-sectional (adjusted) R statistics are fairly wide
in some cases especially for H = 4, for H = 8 most show relatively tight ranges around high
values, i.e., [52%; 91%] ; [68%; 96%] ; [29%; 81%], and [42%; 90%] for size/BM, REV, size/INV
and size/OP, respectively. The interval for all equities combined is [51%; 84%]. Moreover,
the estimated risk prices are similar across the di¤erent equity portfolio characteristic groups.
This is re‡ected in the …nding that the pooled estimation on the di¤erent equity portfolios
                                                              2
combined retains substantial explanatory power with an R equal to 0.74% and a risk price


                                               22
estimate from the pooled “all equity” group that is about the same magnitude as those
estimated on the individual portfolio groups. Panel F, which shows the RM SEi =RM SRi
for each equity portfolio group i shows that the pricing errors are all very similar as a fraction
of the mean squared expected returns on those each group.
   A caveat with the results above is that the estimated zero-beta rates          0   are large for
some cross-sections, a result suggestive of misspeci…cation. (The numbers are multiplied by
100 in the Table.) However, estimation of the full nonlinear SDF show that these zero-beta
parameters are often half as large or smaller than those reported above for the linear SDF
models. We discuss this further below.
   Turning to the non-equity asset classes (corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, options, and
CDS), we …nd that the risk prices for the capital share betas are again positive and strongly
statistically signi…cant in each case. For H = 4 the capital share beta explains 86% of the
cross-sectional variation in expected returns on corporate bonds, 79% on sovereign bonds,
95% on options, and 84% on CDS. For H = 8, the …t is similar with the exception of sovereign
                    2
bonds, where the R is lower at 32%. The magnitudes of the risk prices are somewhat larger
on average for these asset classes than they are for the equity characteristics portfolios,
but they remain roughly in the same ballpark. This is re‡ected in the …nding that the
pooled estimation on “all assets”that combines the many di¤erent stock portfolios with the
                                                                                        2
portfolios of other asset classes retains substantial explanatory power, with an R equal to
                                     2
78% for H = 4. For H = 8, the R from this pooled estimation is lower, equal to 44%, in
part because the …t for sovereign bonds is lower for this horizon.
   Figure 1 and Figure 4 give a visual impression of these results. Figure 1 focuses on the
equity characteristic portfolios and plots observed quarterly return premia (average excess
returns) on each portfolio on the y-axis against the portfolio capital share beta for exposures
of H = 8 quarters on the x-axis. The solid lines show the …tted return implied by the
model using the single capital share beta as a measure of risk. Size-book/market portfolios
are denoted SiBj, where i; j = 1; 2; :::; 5; with i = 1 the smallest size category and i = 5


                                               23
the largest, while j = 1 denotes the lowest book-market category and j = 5 the largest.
Analogously, size/INV portfolios are denoted SiIj, size/OP portfolios are denoted SiOj, and
REV portfolios are denote REVi.
   Figure 1 shows that the largest spread in returns on size/book-market portfolios is found
by comparing the high and low book-market portfolios is the smaller size categories. Value
spreads for the largest S=5 or S=4 size category are much smaller. This underscores the
importance of using double-sorted (on the basis of size and book-market) portfolios for
studying the value premium in U.S. data. The betas for size/book-market portfolios line up
strongly with return spreads for the smaller sized portfolios, but the model performs least
well for larger stock portfolios, for example, S4B2 and S4B3 where the return spreads are
small. At the same time, the model …ts the extreme high and extreme low portfolio returns
almost perfectly for both sets of portfolios. Observations for the high return S1B5 and
low return S1B1 portfolios lie almost spot on the …tted lines. Thus, capital share exposure
explains virtually 100% of the maximal return obtainable from a long-short strategy designed
to exploit these spreads. Moreover, exposure to capital share risk alone produces virtually no
pricing error for the challenging S1B1 “micro cap” growth portfolio that Fama and French
(2015) …nd is most troublesome for their new …ve factor model. The pooled estimation for
all equities shows a similar result. Finally, the …gure shows that the spread in betas for all
sets of portfolios is large. For example, the spread in the capital share betas between S1B5
and S1B1 is 3.5 compared to a spread in returns of 2.6% per quarter. Thus, these …ndings
are not a story of tiny risk exposures multiplied by large risk prices.
   Figure 4 shows the analogous plot for the pooled estimation that combines the many
di¤erent equity portfolios with the portfolios from the other asset classes. The results show
that the options portfolios are the least well priced in the estimations with H = 4 while CDS
and sovereign bonds are less well priced when H = 8: On the other hand, the micro cap
S1B1 and most equity portfolios remain well priced in the pooled estimation on all assets.
   It is worth emphasizing that the estimates of   KS;H   reported in Table III imply reasonable


                                              24
levels of risk aversion. These estimates, which use the two-pass regression approach, are
very close to the estimates of     KS;H   obtained from estimating the empirical model Mt+H;t =
           KSt+H
b0    b2    KSt
                   1 using GMM and the restriction (13). (The GMM estimates of                 KS;H

for each portfolio group are given in Table AV of the Online Appendix.) For example, for
the size/BM portfolio group, the two-pass regression approach produces bKS;H = 0:74 and
bKS;H = 0:68 for H = 4; and 8 respectively, while the GMM estimates of bKS;H = 0:74 and
bKS;H = 0:69. Moreover, the GMM estimates of           KS;H   correspond to estimates of b2 that are
10.1 and 4.9 for H = 4; and H = 8 respectively. (See Table AIII of the Online Appendix).
Bearing in mind that b2 should equal        from the theoretical model, this demonstrates that the
estimates of   KS;H   reported in Table III are consistent with plausible levels of risk aversion.
     We close this section by brie‡y commenting on the results for the nonlinear SDF esti-
mation (equations 11). These results are reported in Table AVI. Several results are worth
noting. First, the estimates of the (constant) risk aversion parameter            imply reasonable
values that monotonically decline with H from            = 9:2 at H = 4 to        = 4:2 at H = 8.
(These values are also very close to those obtained when estimating the linearized speci…ca-
tions; see Table AIII of the Online Appendix.) The …nding that estimates of risk aversion
decline with the horizon H is consistent with a model in which low frequency capital share
exposures capture sizable systematic cash ‡ow risk for investors, such that …tting return
premia does not require an outsized risk aversion parameter. Second, estimates of measures
of cross-sectional …t are similar to those for the linear SDF speci…cations. Third, estimates
of the zero-beta term     0   are in almost all cases much smaller than for the linear SDF and
typically not statistically distinguishable from zero.(the intercept values reported in the table
are multiplied by 100). The smaller values can occur if higher order terms that are omitted
in the linear SDF speci…cation contain a common component across assets, thereby biasing
upward the estimate of the zero-beta constant in the second stage regression.

     C. Controlling for Other Pricing Factors

     In this section we consider whether the explanatory power of capital share risk is merely

                                                  25
proxying for exposure to other risk factors. To address this question we include estimated be-
tas from several alternative factor models and explore whether the information in our capital
share beta is captured by other pricing models by estimating cross-sectional regressions that
include the betas from competing models alongside the capital share betas. For example, we
estimate a baseline Fama-French three-factor speci…cation taking the form,
       e
    E Rj;t =     0   + bj;KS;H   KS   + bj;M KT   M KT   + bj;SM B   SM B   + bj;HM L   HM L   +   j;t


and then include bj;KS;H as an additional regressor. Analogous speci…cations are estimated
controlling for the intermediary-based factor exposures, i.e., the beta for the leverage factor,
LevF act , advocated by AEM, or the beta for the banking sector’s equity-capital ratio advo-
cated by HKM, which we denote EqF act in this paper. The betas for the alternative models
are are estimated in the same way as in the original papers introducing those risk factors.
   For size/BM we compare the model to the Fama-French three-factor model, which uses
                          e
the market excess return Rm;t , SM Bt and HM Lt as factors, an empirical speci…cation
explicitly designed to explain the large cross-sectional variation in average return premia
on these portfolios. We also consider the intermediary SDF model of AEM using their
broker-dealer leverage factor LevF act , and the intermediary SDF model of HKM using their
                                                                                   e
banking equity-capital ratio factor EqF act jointly with the market excess return Rm;t , which
HKM argue is important to include. In all cases we compare the betas from these models to
capital share betas for H = 8 quarter horizons. Because the number of factors varies widely
across these models, we rank competing speci…cations according to a Bayesian Information
Criterion (BIC) that adjusts for the number of free factor risk prices              chosen to minimize
the pricing errors. The smaller is the BIC criterion, the more preferred is the model.
   Table IV reports results that control for the Fama-French factor betas. The …rst set of
results forms the relevant benchmark by showing how these models perform on their own.
Comparing to this benchmark, the results in Panel A of Table IV for size/book-market
portfolios show that the capital share risk model generates pricing errors that are lower than
the Fama-French three-factor model. The RMSE/RMSR pricing errors are 12% for capital

                                                   26
                                                                                      2
share model and 15% for the Fama-French three-factor model. The cross-sectional R = 0:80
for the capital share model, as compared to 0:69 for the Fama-French three-factor model.
Panel B shows a similar comparison holds for the pooled estimation on all four types of
equity characteristic portfolios.
   Once the capital share beta is included alongside the betas from the Fama-French model
in the cross-sectional regression, the risk prices on the exposures to SM Bt and HM Lt fall
by large magnitudes. For example, the risk price for HM Lt declines 82% from 1.35 to 0.24.
Moreover, the 95% con…dence intervals for these risk prices are far wider, which now include
values around zero. By contrast, the risk price for the capital share beta retains its strong
explanatory power and most of its magnitude. According to the BIC criterion, the single
capital share risk factor performs better than the three-factor model in explaining these
portfolios. A similar …nding holds for the pooled regression on all equities (Panel B). It is
striking that a single macroeconomic risk factor drives out better measured return-based
factors that were designed to explain these portfolios.
   Table V compares the pricing power of the capital share model to the intermediary-based
models for the four equity characteristics portfolios, as well as the pooled estimation on all
equity portfolios jointly. For the most part, the intermediary-models do well on their own,
and we reproduce the main …ndings of these studies. For all portfolios types, however, the
                                                                                             2
capital share risk model has the lowest pricing errors, lowest BIC criterion, and highest R .
Once we include the capital share beta alongside the betas for these factors we …nd that the
risk prices for intermediary factors are either signi…cantly attenuated or driven out of the
pricing regressions by the estimated exposure to capital share risk. This is especially true of
the equity-capital ratio factor EqF act where the con…dence intervals are wide and include
zero once the capital share beta is included while the risk price for the capital share beta
retains its strong explanatory power and most of its magnitude in all cases. These …ndings
suggest that the information contained in the intermediary balance sheet factors for risk
pricing is largely subsumed by that in capital share growth.


                                              27
   Table VI further compares the capital share model’s explanatory power for cross-sections
of expected returns on the non-equity asset classes with the HKM intermediary model, which
was also employed to study a broad range of non-equity classes. As shown above, the risk
price for the capital share beta is positive and statistically signi…cant in non-equity port-
folio case, explaining 89% of the cross-sectional variation in expected returns on corporate
bonds, 81% on options, 94% on CDS, and 32% on sovereign bonds. In a separate regression,
                                              e
the risk prices for the betas of EqF act and Rm;t are positive and have strong explanatory
power for each of these groups, consistent with what HKM report. But when we include
                                                            e
the capital share betas alongside the betas of EqF act and Rm;t , we …nd that the risk prices
for exposures to EqF act become negative when pricing corporate bonds and CDS and sta-
tistically insigni…cant when pricing every category except options. By contrast, the capital
share risk price remains positive and strongly signi…cant in each case. When pricing options,
                                                       e
both the capital share beta and those for EqF act and Rm;t retain independent statistical
explanatory power. However, for both models, the magnitudes of the estimated risk prices
when estimated on the options portfolios are somewhat larger than those estimated on other
portfolios. For example, compared to the estimations on size/BM portfolios, the estimated
options risk price for KS growth (alone) is a bit over twice as large, while that for EqF act
is more than three times as large. When all three betas are included to explain the cross-
section of options returns, the risk-price for KS growth is then about the same as it is for
explaining size/BM, while that for EqF act is still more than twice as large.

   D. Spreads Between the Betas

   Figures (1) and (4) discussed above show large spreads in the estimated capital share
betas between the high and low return portfolios in each asset group. These …ndings suggest
that the explanatory power of capital share risk exposure for the cross-section of expected
asset returns is not the product of tiny risk exposures multiplied by large risk prices. A
potential concern, however, is that the estimated betas may be imprecisely measured, so that
the spreads are not statistically signi…cant. To address this concern, we compute the spread

                                             28
in capital share betas between the highest and lowest average quarterly return portfolio for
each portfolio group, along with 95% bootstrapped con…dence interval for the spread. For
comparison, we also report the same numbers for the spread in the Fama-French factor betas
and the intermediary-based factor betas. For the size/BM portfolio group, we separately
analyze the largest attainable value premium (the spread in returns/betas between the S1B5
and S1B1 portfolios), and the largest attainable size premium (the spread in returns/betas
between the S1B5 and S5B5 portfolios). To facilitate the comparison across models, all
factors are standardized to unit variance before performing the calculation.17 The results
are reported in Table VII.
       Panel A of Table VII shows the spreads in betas for the value premium. The spread
in capital share betas when H = 4 is slightly smaller than that of the HM L beta, but is
more than two times larger than the HM L beta spread when H = 8: (The spread in H = 8
quarter capital share betas is 0.13, versus 0.06 for HM L beta spread, 0.041 for the EqF ac
beta spread, and 0.015 for the LevF ac beta spread.) For all models except LevF ac, these
spreads are statistically di¤erent from zero, as indicated by the 95% con…dence sets for the
spreads that exclude zero. Panel B shows the analogous results for the size premium. The
spread in the H = 8 quarter capital share betas corresponding to the size premium is 0.093,
versus 0.076 for the SM B beta spread, 0.002 for the EqF ac beta spread, and 0.005 for
the LevF ac beta spread. In this case the spreads in the capital share and SM B betas are
statistically signi…cant, while those for EqF ac and LevF ac are statistically signi…cant.
       Panels C-J of Table VII present results for the other eight portfolio groups and may
be summarized as follows.18 There are three sets of portfolios for which the spread in
capital share betas between the high and low average return portfolios for each group are
quantitatively sizable but not statistically signi…cant. These are: size/INV, sovereign bonds,
  17
    For this reason the units of the betas are than those in Figures (1) and (4).
  18
    The numbers in Panel F for “All Equities” are identical to those in Panel A for the value premium
because the spread in average returns between the S1B5 and S1B1 portfolios is the largest in the All
Equities category.



                                                 29
and options. However, the spreads in HM L, SM B, EqF ac and LevF ac betas are also
insigni…cant for two of these (sovereign bonds and options), and smaller in magnitude than
the capital share beta spread. On the size/INV portfolio group, the spread in SM B betas is of
the same magnitude as the spread in H = 8 quarter capital share betas, but in contrast to the
spread in capital share betas, statistically signi…cant. For the remaining …ve other portfolios
groups (REV, size/OP, all equities, bonds, and CDS), the spread in capital share betas is
in each case several times larger than the spreads in HM L, SM B, EqF ac and LevF ac
betas, and statistically signi…cant. For the all equities portfolio group, only the spreads in
H = 8 capital share betas, EqF ac betas, and HM L betas are statistically signi…cant, with
the largest spread magnitude identi…ed with the capital share betas equal to 0.129, followed
by 0.056 for the HM L beta spread and 0.041, for the EqF ac beta spread. For size/OP,
only the spread in the capital share betas (for both H = 4; 8) and the spread in SM B betas
are statistically signi…cant, with the H = 8 capital share beta spread 1.3 times as large as
the SM B beta spread. For corporate bonds, the spread in H = 8 capital share betas is 4.9
times larger than the model with the next largest spread, (the HM L beta), while the spread
in all other betas are statistically insigni…cant. Finally, for the CDS portfolio group, only
the spread in H = 8 capital share betas is statistically signi…cant, and is …ve times large in
magnitude than the model with the next largest spread, (the EqF ac beta). Taken together,
these results indicate that the capital share exposures consistently exhibit large spreads for
a range of portfolio groups and compare favorably relative to competing models, even when
taking into account sampling error.

   E. An SDF Based On Household-Level Data

   A core hypothesis of this investigation is that an SDF based on the marginal utility of the
wealthiest households is more likely to be relevant for the pricing of risky securities than is
one based on that of the average household. In the …nal empirical analysis of the paper, we
therefore explicitly connect capital share variation to ‡uctuations in the micro-level income
shares of rich and non-rich stockowners using the SZ household-level data. The SZ household-

                                              30
level income and wealth data are especially advantageous for this purpose because they are
of high quality and detailed and, as discussed above, reliable household-level consumption
data are unavailable for the wealthy. Thus we use the SZ household-level income and wealth
data to construct a proxy for the consumption growth and SDF of rich stockowners.
   To motivate this exercise, …rst note that the consumption of a representative stockowner
in the ith percentile of the stock wealth distribution can be tautologically expressed as Ct it ,
        i                                                                                                i
where   t   is the ith percentile’s consumption share in period t. We do not observe Ct                  t
                                     i
because reliable observations on     t   are unavailable for wealthy households. We do observe
                                         Yit
reliable estimates of income shares,     Yt
                                             ;   however, and a crude estimate of the ith percentile’s
consumption could be constructed as Ct YYitt . But since some of the variation in             Yit
                                                                                              Yt
                                                                                                    across
percentile groups is likely to be idiosyncratic, capable of being insured against and therefore
not priced, a better measure would be one that isolates the systematic risk component of the
income share variation. Given imperfect insurance between workers and capital owners, the
inequality-based literature discussed above implies that ‡uctuations in the aggregate capital
share should be a source of non-diversi…able income risk to which investors are exposed. We
therefore form an estimate of the component of income share variation for the ith percentile
                                                                      Yit
that represents systematic risk by replacing observations on          Yt
                                                                            with the …tted values from a
                Yit
projection of   on KSt . (Note that this is not the same as using KSt itself as a risk-factor.)
                Yt
                                                               c
                                                               Yi
That is, we ask whether betas for the H-period growth in Ct Ytt are priced, where Y\    i
                                                                                       t =Yt =

b& i0 + b& i1 (KSt ) are quarterly observations on …tted income shares from the ith percentile. The
parameters b& i0 and b& i1 are the estimated intercepts and slope coe¢ cients from the regressions
of income shares on the capital share reported in the right panel of Table II pertaining
                                                   c
                                                   Yi
to households who are stockholders. We refer to Ct Ytt as a proxy for the ith percentiles
consumption. Finally, we focus on i = top 10% of the stockowner stock wealth distribution.
Estimates from the cross-sectional regressions of expected returns on the …ve equity portfolios
are given in Table VIII.
   Table VIII shows that the betas for this proxy for rich stockowner’s consumption growth


                                                      31
strongly explains return premia on all equity portfolios. For size/BM portfolios, the H = 8
                     Yd>10
quarter growth in Ct tYt (where “> 10”denotes top 10% in the table) explains 85% of the
cross-sectional variation in expected returns, with a positive and strongly statistically sig-
ni…cant risk price. It explains 84%, 69%, and 74%, respectively, of the variation in expected
returns on the REV, size/INV and size/OP portfolios. These …ndings are consistent with
the hypothesis that rich stockowners are marginal investors for these portfolio groups.


                                    IV. Concolusion

   This paper …nds that exposure to a single macroeconomic variable, namely ‡uctua-
tions in the growth of the capital share of national income, has substantial explanatory
power for expected returns across a range of equity characteristics portfolios and other as-
set classes. These assets include equity portfolios formed from sorts on size/book-market,
size/investment, size/operating pro…tability, long-run reversal, and non-equity asset classes
such as corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, credit default swaps, and options. Positive ex-
posure to capital share risk earns a signi…cant, positive risk premium with estimated risk
prices of similar magnitude across portfolio groups. The information contained in capital
share exposures subsumes the information contained in the …nancial factors SM B and HM L
for pricing equity characteristics portfolios as well as previously successful empirical factors
that use intermediaries’balance sheet data. A proxy for the consumption growth of the top
10% of the stock wealth distribution using household-level income and wealth data exhibits
similar substantial explanatory power for the equity characteristic portfolios. These …ndings
are commensurate with the hypothesis that wealthy households, whose income shares are
strongly positively related to the capital share, are marginal investors in many asset markets
and that redistributive shocks that shift the allocation of rewards between workers and asset
owners are an important source of systematic risk.




                                              32
References
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries and the cross-
  section of asset returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557–2596.

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Jonathan A. Parker, and Motohiro Yogo, 2004, Luxury goods and the
  equity premium, Journal of Finance 59, 2959–3004.

Andersen, Torben G., Nicola Fusari, and Viktor Todorov, 2013, The risk premia embedded
  in index options, Unpublished paper, Northwester Kellog.

Bianchi, Francesco, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2016, Monetary policy and
  asset valuaton, http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/ludvigsons/reg.pdf.

Bollerslev, Tim, George Tauchen, and Hao Zhou, 2009, Expected stock returns and variance
  risk premia, Review of Financial Studies 22, 4463–4492.

Borri, Nicola, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Sovereign risk premia, Unpublished manuscript,
  M IT Sloan School.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
  251.

Chen, Xiaohong, Jack Favilukis, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2014, An estimation of economic
  models with recursive preferences, Quantitative Economics 4, 39–83.

Constantinides, George M., and Darrell Du¢ e, 1996, Asset pricing with heterogeneous con-
  sumers, Journal of Political Economy 104, 219–40.

Constantinides, George M, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Alexi Savov, 2013, The puzzle of
  index option returns, Review of Asset Pricing Studies p. rat004.

Daniel, Kent, and David Marshall, 1997, Equity-premium and risk-free-rate puzzles at long
  horizons, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 452–484.
Danthine, Jean-Pierre, and John B. Donaldson, 2002, Labour relations and asset returns,
  Review of Economic Studies 69, 41–64.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
  stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2015, A …ve-factor asset pricing model, Journal
  of Financial Economics 116, 1–22.

Favilukis, Jack, and Xiaoji Lin, 2013, The elephant in the room: The impact of labor oblig-
  ations on credit risk, https://sites.google.com/site/jackfavilukis/WageCreditRisk.pdf.

Favilukis, Jack, and Xiaoji Lin, 2015, Wage rigidity: A quantitative solution to several asset
  pricing puzzles, The Review of Financial Studies 29, 148–192.

Favilukis, Jack, and Xiaoji Lin, 2016, Does wage rigidity make …rms riskier? evidence from
  long-horizon return predictability, Journal of Monetary Economics 78, 80–95.

Gomez, Matthieu, 2016, Asset prices and wealth inequality, Unpublished paper: Princeton.
  http://www. princeton. edu/˜mattg/…les/jmp. pdf.

Gomme, Paul, and Peter Rupert, 2004, Measuring labor’s share of income, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Cleveand Policy Discussion Papers.

Greenwald, Daniel, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2014, Origins of stock market
  ‡uctuations, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 19818.

Guvenen, M. Fatih, 2009, A parsimonious macroeconomic model for asset pricing, Econo-
  metrica 77, 1711–1740.

Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, Large sample properties of generalized methods of moments esti-
  mators, Econometrica 50, 1029–54.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1997, Assessing speci…cation errors in stochastic
  discount factor models, Journal of Finance 52, 557–590.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2016, Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence
  from many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Karabarbounis, Loukas, and Brent Neiman, 2013, The global decline of the labor share,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 61–103.

Kroencke, Tim A., 2017, Asset pricing without garbage, The Journal of Finance 72, 47–98.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2009, Euler equation errors, The Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics 12, 255–283.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C Ludvigson, 2013, Shocks and crashes, in Jonathan Parker, and
  Michael Woodford, ed.: National Bureau of Economics Research Macroeconomics Annual:
  2013, vol. 28 . pp. 293–354 (MIT Press: Cambridge and London).

Lettau, Martin, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma, 2014, Capital share risk in u.s. asset
  pricing, Unpublished paper, NYU.

Lettau, Martin, and Jessica Wachter, 2007, The term structures of equity and interest rates,
  Unpublished paper.

Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, The returns on human capital: Good
  news on wall street is bad news on main street, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2097–
  2137.

Malloy, Christopher J., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2009, Long-run
  stockholder consumption risk and asset returns, Journal of Finance 64, 2427–2479.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 1986, The equity premium and the concentration of aggregate shocks,
  Journal of Financial Economics 17, 97–112.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and
  nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97–112.

Marfe, Roberto, 2016, Income insurance and the equilibrium term structure of equity,
  http://robertomarfe.altervista.org/.
Martin, Ian, 2017, What is the expected return on the market?, The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132, 367–433.

Nozawa, Yoshio, 2014, What drives the cross-section of credit spreads?: A variance decom-
  position approach, Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago.

Parker, Jonathan, and Christian Julliard, 2004, Ultimate consumption risk and the cross-
  section of expected returns, Journal of Political Economy 113, 185–222.

Sabelhaus, John, David Johnson, Stephen Ash, David Swanson, Thesia Garner, John Green-
  lees, and Steve Henderson, 2014, Is the consumer expenditure survey representative by
  income?, in Christopher D. Carrol, Thomas Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, ed.: Improving
  the Measurement of Consumer Expenditures (University of Chicago Press: Cambridge,
  MA).

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman, 2016, Wealth inequality in the united states since
  1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  131, 519–578.

Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, Limited asset market participation and intertemporal
  substitution, Journal of Political Economy 110, 825–853.
                                                                     Panel (a) Size/Bm, H = 8                                                                                                   Panel (b) REV, H = 8                                                                Panel (c) Size/INV, H = 8
                                                                 4                                                                                              3.5                                                                                                           3.5                                      S1I1
                                                                                                                  S1B5
                                 Average Quarterly Return in %




                                                                                                                         Average Quarterly Return in %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Average Quarterly Return in %
                                                                                         2
                                                                                       R = 0.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              R = 0.86                                                                              R2 = 0.62S1I2S1I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REV1
                                                                                                    S3B5
                                                                                                S1B4 S2B5
                                                                                                                                                                                         3                                                                                     3                                   S2I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S3I2  S2I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S1I4 S2I2 S2I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S3I1

                                                                 3                             S2B4
                                                                                                S2B3                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S4I1S3I3
                                                                                                 S3B4
                                                                                               S1B3
                                                                                                  S4B5
                                                                                           S1B2S4B4
                                                                                                                                                                2.5                                                                                                           2.5                       S4I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 REV2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REV3                                                                                               S4I3
                                                                                              S3B2S3B3                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S4I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S5I1
                                                                                             S2B2
                                                                                               S4B3
                                                                                                                                                                                         2           REV6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 REV4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REV5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                 2            S4B1S5B5
                                                                                               S4B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      REV7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S4I5
                                                                                                                                                                                                         REV8                                                                                    S5I2     S2I5S3I5
                                                                                 S5B4S2B1
                                                                                   S3B1                                                                                                      REV10
                                                                     S5B1
                                                                                S5B2
                                                                                S5B3
                                                                                                                                                                1.5                              REV9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5   S5I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S5I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S1I5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S5I5

                                                                       S1B1
                                                                 1                                                                                                                       1                                                                                     1
                                                                            0          1         2            3                                                                                      0          1         2          3                                         −1             0            1              2      3
                                                                            Capital Share Beta                                                                                                       Capital Share Beta                                                                      Capital Share Beta

                                                                     Panel (d) Size/OP, H = 8                                                                                            Panel (e) All Equities, H = 8
                                        3.5                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S1B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              R2 = 0.74
 Average Quarterly Return in %




                                                                                                                                                         Average Quarterly Return in %




                                                                                   R2 = 0.76
                                                                                                              S2O5
                                                                                                                 S1O4

                                                                 3                                    S3O5
                                                                                                       S1O2
                                                                                                               S1O5                                                                                                    S1I1 S3B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S1B4 S2B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S2O5
                                                                                                                  S1O3                                                                                                       S1I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S1I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S1O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REV1
                                                                                             S4O5S2O3
                                                                                                         S2O4
                                                                                                                                                                                         3                             S3O5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S1O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S2B4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S2I3S2B3S1O5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S3I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S1I4 S2I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S2I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S2I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S3I1
                                        2.5                                                              S2O2
                                                                                                         S3O4
                                                                                                          S3O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S4O5S2O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S1B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                S3I4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S3B4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S1B3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S4B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S4B4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S1O3

                                                                                                       S3O3                                                                                                               S2O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S3I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S4I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S3B2S3B3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S2O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3O4
                                                                                           S4O4                                                                                                                             S3O2
                                                                                          S4O2                                                                                                              S4I4    S2B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  REV2   S3O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S4I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REV3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S4I2
                                                                 2                     S1O1
                                                                                         S2O1
                                                                                                S4O3                                                                                                            S5I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S4O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S4O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S4B3


                                                                      S5O5
                                                                                   S4O1
                                                                                  S3O1
                                                                                                                                                                                         2             S4B1S5B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     REV6
                                                                                                                                                                                                      REV7 S4O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  REV4S4O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S1O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REV5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S2O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S4B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                              S4I5
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S5O5 S3O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          S5B4 S2B1
                                                                                                                                                                                                             S3B1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          REV8    S3I5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S2I5
                                        1.5                          S5O3
                                                                                S5O4
                                                                                                                                                                                              REV10S5I3
                                                                                                                                                                                             S5I4
                                                                                                                                                                                              S5B1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S5I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S5B2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       S5O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                        S5B3
                                                                                                                                                                                                S5O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                   REV9          S1I5
                                                                       S5O1                                                                                                                    S5I5
                                                                                                                                                                                                   S5O1
                                                                         S5O2                                                                                                                       S5O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  S1B1
                                                                 1                                                                                                                       1
                                                                            0              1             2                                                                               −1          0          1        2         3
                                                                            Capital Share Beta                                                                                                       Capital Share Beta




Figure 1: Capital share betas. Betas constructed from Fama-MacBeth regressions of average returns on
capital share beta for di¤erent equity characteristic portfolios or using all equity portfolios together (size/bm,
REV, size/INV and size/OP). H indicates the horizon in quarters over which capital share exposure is
measured. The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.
Figure 2: Capital share, 8 quarter log di¤erence. The vertical lines correspond to the NBER recession
dates. The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.
                                                                        h                  i
                                                                 Ct           Yti /Yt
                                                                Ct− 1         i /Y
                                                                            Yt− 1   t− 1



                                                               Correlation = −0.980
 Consumption Growth




                       1.1

                      1.05

                        1

                      0.95                                                                                                   Bottom 90
                                                                                                                             Top 10

                        1960   1965   1970   1975   1980       1985          1990                 1995     2000       2005    2010   2015
                                                                     Year
                                                                     5
                                                                         Yd
                                                                                    6
                                                                            i
                                                                Ct         t /Yt
                                                               Ct− 1     id
                                                                       Yt−  1/Yt− 1


                       1.1                                 Quarterly Correlation = −0.830
 Consumption Growth




                      1.05


                        1


                      0.95
                                Bottom 90
                                Top 10
                       0.9
                        1960   1965   1970   1975   1980       1985  1990                         1995     2000       2005    2010   2015
                                                                  Year

Figure 3: Growth in aggregate consumption times income share. The top panel reports annual
                                           h            i
                                               Y i =Y
observations on the annual value of CCt t 1 Y i t =Ytt 1 corresponding to the years for which the SZ data are
                                                      t    1

available. Yti =Yt is the shareholder’s income share for group i calculated from the SZ data. The bottom
                                                                                            Ct       Y\i
                                                                                                      t =Yt
panel reports quarterly observations on quarterly values of                                Ct 1                    using the mimicking income
                                                                                                   Yti \
                                                                                                       1 =Yt   1


share factor Y\i       i  b i KSt . The annual SZ data spans the period 1963 to 2012. The quarterly sample
              t =Yt = b +

spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.
                                                      Panel (a) All Assets, H = 4                                                                                             Panel (b) All Assets, H = 8
                                   4                                         OP10                                                                         4                                  OP10
                                                                                           SB6               S1B5                                                                                                        SB6              S1B5
                                                                           OP11                                                                                                               OP11
                                  3.5                                                                                                                    3.5
                                                                R2 = 0.79                     S3B5 S1I1
                                                                                                  S1B4
                                                                                                S2B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 R2 = 0.44             S1I1     S3B5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S1B4 S2B5
                                                                         OP12                     S1I2 S2O5                                                                                    OP12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S2O5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S1I2
                                                                                                         S1I3S1O4                                                                                                                 S1O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S1I3
                                                                                                   S1O2 REV1                                                                                                                             REV1
                                   3                                                     S2I3
                                                                                         S3I2
                                                                                                S3O5
                                                                                              S2B4
                                                                                                S2B3    S2I1
                                                                                                      S2I4
                                                                                                 S1I4 S1O3
                                                                                                                 S1O5                                     3                                                             S1O2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S3O5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S2B4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S2I3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S2B3 S1O5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S3I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S1I4 S2I2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S2I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S2I4
                                                                                           S3B4S2I2 S3I1                                                                                                                            S3I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S3B4 S1O3
                                                                                              S4B5   S1B3                                                                                                              S1B3S4B5
                                                                                           S2O3 S1B2
                                                                                         S4B4
                                                                                          S4O5
                                                                                        SB5                                                                                                                    S4O5 S2O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S1B2   S4B4        SB5
                                                                  OP13                  S3I4                                                                                            OP13                   S3I4
                                                                                           S3I3  S2O4                                                                                                                      S2O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S3I3
                                  2.5                                                                                                                    2.5
 Average Quarterly Return in %




                                                                                                                        Average Quarterly Return in %
                                                                                         S4I1S3B3
                                                                                               S3B2
                                                                                               S2O2                                                                                                                  S4I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S3B2   S3B3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S2O2
                                                                                            S3O2S3O4                                                                                                                       S3O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S3O2
                                                                                   S4I4       S2B2                                                                                                        S4I4     S2B2 S3O3
                                                                                    REV2S4I3
                                                                                    REV3   S3O3                                                                                                                 REV2 REV3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S4I3
                                                                                            S4I2                                                                                                                          S4I2
                                                                                     S5I1S4B3                                                                                                                 S5I1     S4B3
                                                                                       S4O4                                                                                                                       S4O4
                                                                  CDS20            S4O2                                                                                                                          S4O2         CDS20
                                   2                          OP14
                                                                  S5B5REV6 SB3
                                                                            REV7
                                                                                  REV5
                                                                                S4B1
                                                                                       REV4S4O3
                                                                                              S1O1
                                                                                           S2O1                                                           2                          OP14          S4B1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 REV6 S5B5 S2O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                   REV7 S4O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                REV4 S4O3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               REV5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            S1O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SB3
                                                                                     SB4
                                                                                      S4O1
                                                                                       S4I5 S4B2                                                                                                           S4I5        S4B2 SB4
                                                                       S5O5     B20  S3O1                                                                                                     S5O5     S3O1                            B20
                                                                          S5B4                                                                                                                         S5B4 S2B1S3I5
                                                            OP15         S5I2 REV8       S3B1S3I5S2B1
                                                                                              S2I5                                                                                  OP15                  S3B1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       REV8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    S5I2     S2I5
                                                                          S5B2                                                                                                                       S5B2
                                                                    S5I3 S5O4REV10                                                                                                        REV10 S5I3
                                  1.5                      OP16    S5I4  S5B3
                                                                        S5B1
                                                                   S5O3 REV9  S5I5                  S1I5
                                                                                                                                                         1.5                       OP16S5I4
                                                                                                                                                                                         S5B1
                                                                                                                                                                                            S5O3
                                                                                                                                                                                              REV9
                                                                                                                                                                                                    S5O4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     S5B3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               S1I5
                                                           OP17                                                                                                                     OP17 S5I5
                                                          OP18            S5O1                                                                                                     OP18      S5O1
                                                                        S5O2          S1B1                                                                                                     S5O2
                                                                                                                                                                                            S1B1
                                                                  SB2
                                                                CDS19                                                                                                                                         SB2 CDS19
                                   1                           B17
                                                                   B18
                                                                  B19                                                                                     1                                                      B17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B19B18
                                                               B15
                                                               B16                                                                                                                                                 B15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  B16
                                                             B13                                                                                                                                                 B13
                                                       B10 B14
                                                      B9        CDS18
                                                              B12SB1                                                                                                                                       B9   B14 B12
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CDS18
                                                                                                                                                                                                            B10SB1
                                                       B8
                                                       B7                                                                                                                                                  B8
                                                                                                                                                                                                          B7
                                                                 CDS17                                                                                                                                            CDS17
                                  0.5                OP1
                                                       B6
                                                    OP2B5 B11
                                                       B4
                                                              CDS16                                                                                      0.5                  OP1
                                                                                                                                                                              OP2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         B6
                                                                                                                                                                                                        B5 CDS16 B11

                                                   OP3B3                                                                                                                     OP3                      B3B4
                                                      B2                                                                                                                                             B2
                                                           CDS14
                                                            CDS15
                                                      B1 CDS12                                                                                                                                           CDS14
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CDS15
                                                                                                                                                                                                    B1 CDS12
                                                          CDS13
                                                          CDS11
                                                          CDS8                                                                                                                                           CDS13
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CDS11
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CDS8
                                                         CDS9
                                                   OP4 CDS10
                                                        CDS5                                                                                                                 OP4                        CDS9
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CDS10
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CDS5
                                   0                    CDS6
                                                        CDS7
                                                        CDS3
                                                       CDS4
                                                       CDS2
                                                 OP5 CDS1
                                                                                                                                                          0             OP5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS7
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CDS2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CDS1

                                                OP6                                                                                                                    OP6
                                              OP7                                                                                                                OP7
                                 −0.5     OP8                                                                                                           −0.5   OP8

                                        OP9                                                                                                                    OP9


                                  −1                                                                                                                     −1
                                        −1            0            1                2            3             4                                                 −2            −1                0            1              2        3
                                                              Capital Share Beta                                                                                                          Capital Share Beta



Figure 4: Capital share betas. Betas constructed from Fama-MacBeth regressions of average returns on
capital share beta using all assets (size/bm, REV, size/INV, size/OP equities plus bonds, sovereign bonds,
CDS and Options). H indicates the horizon in quarters over which capital share exposure is measured. The
sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.
                           Table I: Distribution of Stock Market Wealth

This table reports the percentage of the stock wealth owned by the percentile group reported in the …rst
column. Panel A is conditional on the household being a stockowner, while Panel B reports the distribution
across all households. SCF stock wealth ownership is based on direct and indirect holdings of public equity
where indirect holdings include annuities, trusts, mutual funds, IRA, Keogh Plan, other retirement accounts.
Stock ownership in SZ data is based on direct stock holdings only. Panel C reports stock market participation
rate. The wealth-weighted participation rate is calculated as Value-weighted ownership 5% w5% + (rpr
0:05)% 1 w5% + (1 rpr) % (0) where rpr is the raw participation rate (not in percentage point) in the
…rst row. w5% is the proportion of stock market wealth owned by top 5% .


             Panel A: Percent of Stock Wealth, sorted by Stock Wealth, Stockowners
                                               SCF (indirect + direct stock holdings)
             Percentile of Stock Wealth          1989        1998     2004       2013
                       < 70%                     7:80%      9:15%    8:86%      7:21%
                      70 85%                     11:76% 10:95% 12:08%          11:32%
                      85 90%                     8:39%      6:59%    7:88%      7:42%
                      90 95%                     12:52% 11:18% 13:33%          13:40%
                     95 100%                     59:56% 62:09% 57:95%          60:74%
                                                        SZ (direct stock holdings)
                                                   1989      1998     2004       2012
                       < 70%                     23:62% 15:50% 18:93%          16:51%
                     70 85%                       9:56%     9:37%    7:90%      6:91%
                     85 90%                       5:91%     6:09%    4:97%      5:10%
                     90 95%                       9:86% 10:69% 8:27%            8:06%
                     95 100%                     51:05% 58:35% 59:93%          63:43%
           Panel B: Percent of Stock Wealth, sorted by Stock Wealth, All Households
                                         SCF (indirect + direct stock holdings)
                     < 70%                  0:01%    1:30%    1:35%      0:84%
                    70 85%                  3:12%    7:42%    7:41%     5:92%
                    85 90%                  4:19%    6:45%    6:70%     6:17%
                    90 95%                 11:16% 11:28% 13:26%         12:67%
                   95 100%                 81:54% 73:93% 71:21%         74:54%
                                                 SZ (direct stock holdings)
                     < 70%                 11:32% 4:95%       8:48%     6:92%
                    70 85%                  4:22%    3:76%    4:68%     3:77%
                    85 90%                  4:20%    4:25%    3:86%     3:29%
                    90 95%                  8:81%    9:39%    7:43%     6:71%
                   95 100%                 71:44% 77:65% 75:55%         79:29%
                         Panel C: Stock Market Participation         Rates, SCF
                                             1989     1992            1995       1998          2001
              Raw Participation Rate        31:7%    36:9%           40:5%      49:3%         53:4%
         Wealth-weighted Participation Rate 13:8%    15:8%           16:4%      19:9%         23:9%
                                             2004     2007            2010       2013
              Raw Participation Rate        49:7%    53:1%           49:9%      48:8%
         Wealth-weighted Participation Rate 21:7%    21:1%           20:9%      20:2%
                   Table II: Regressions of Income Shares on the Capital Share

This table presents the regressions of income shares on the capital shares. The groups refer to the percentiles
of the stock wealth distribution. “ ” and “ ” indicate statistical signi…cance at the 10% and 5% level,
              Yi
respectively. Ytt is the income share for group i. KS is the capital share. OLS t-statistics are reported in
parenthesis. The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.


                                                      Yti
                              OLS Regression              = & i0 + & i1 KSt + "t
                                                      Yt
              All Households                                              Stockowners
        Group       b& i0    b& i1              R 2
                                                             Group             b& i0    b& i1        R2
        < 90%     1:18      1:13               0:61          < 90%           1:24      1:27         0:49
                 (23:60) ( 8:65)                                            (17:36) ( 6:82)
      95 100%      0:24    1:08                0:61        95    100%         0:28    1:20          0:53
                 ( 5:10) (8:65)                                            ( 4:47) (7:34)
      99 100%      0:24    0:82                0:62        99    100%         0:27    0:93          0:59
                 ( 6:71) (8:88)                                            ( 6:16) (8:25)
     99:9 100%     0:16    0:48                0:65       99:9    100%        0:17    0:54          0:63
                 ( 7:91) (9:41)                                            ( 7:61) (9:13)
      90 100%      0:18    1:13                0:61        90    100%         0:24    1:27          0:49
                 ( 3:54) (8:64)                                            ( 3:32) (6:82)
                                Expected Return-Beta Regressions
                     e                   0
                  E Rj;t =      0   +    H   H   + j , Estimates of Factor Risk Prices   H

                                              Equity Portfolios
           Panel A: Size/BM                       Panel B: REV                   Panel C: Size/INV
   H          4             8                      4            8                4                8
Constant     0:65         1:55                   0:83         1:73             0:92             1:70
         [0:01; 1:23] [1:39; 1:71]           [0:35; 1:32] [1:62; 1:84]     [0:20; 1:54]     [1:50; 1:90]
 KSt+H
  KSt
             0:74         0:68                   0:63         0:41             0:61             0:55
         [0:42; 1:08] [0:53; 0:83]           [0:33; 0:92] [0:30; 0:50]     [0:27; 0:96]     [0:37; 0:74]
  R2         0:51         0:80                   0:70         0:86             0:39             0:62
         [0:13; 0:77] [0:52; 0:91]           [0:17; 0:91] [0:68; 0:96]     [0:03; 0:70]     [0:29; 0:81]
 RMSE
 RMSR
             0:19         0:12                   0:11         0:08             0:19             0:16
                                                                                                     RMSE i
           Panel D: Size/OP                  Panel E: All Equities         Panel F: All Equities RMSR     i

   H          4             8                      4            8                             4      8
Constant      0:60           1:61                 0:74         1:65         Size/Bm          0:19   0.13
           [0:26; 0:94]   [1:46; 1:77]       [0:45; 1:01]   [1:56; 1:74]
 KSt+H
  KSt
               0:70           0:57               0:68           0:57         REV             0:12   0:11
           [0:54; 0:87]   [0:45; 0:71]       [0:54; 0:83]   [0:49; 0:66]
       2
   R           0:78           0:76               0:58           0:74       Size/INV          0:19   0:16
           [0:48; 0:89]   [0:42; 0:90]       [0:28; 0:73]   [0:51; 0:84]
  RMSE
  RMSR
               0:12           0:12               0:17           0:14        Size/OP          0:20   0:16

                                         Table III continued next page
                         Table III: (cont.) Expected Return-Beta Regressions

This table reports estimates of risk prices H . All estimates are multiplied by 100. Bootstrap 95% con…dence
intervals are reported in square brackets. Panel F reports the RMSEq i /RMSR      i attributable to the group i
                                                                        1
                                                                          PNi         e   2          e
named in the column. The pricing error is de…ned as RMSRi = Ni j=1 E Rji                     where Rji refers to
                                                     r
                                                          P  Ni              be where R   be = b0 + b 0ji;H c
the return of portfolio j in group i and RMSEi = N1i j=1          E Rjie     R ji           ji                H.

The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.


                                    Expected Return-Beta Regressions
                          e                 0
                     E   Rj;t   =   0   +   H   H   + j , Estimates of Factor Risk Prices   H

                                         Other Asset Classes
                 Panel G: Bonds              Panel H: Sovereign Bonds                      Panel I:    Options
   H            4                 8                 4              8                          4               8
Constant       0:43             0:23               0:32          0:16                       0:56            3:68
           [0:35; 0:51]     [0:13; 0:32]     [ 1:08; 0:34] [ 1:00; 1:62]                [0:10; 1:07]    [1:35; 6:11]
 KSt+H
  KSt
               0:82             0:57              1:41           1:18                       1:87            1:80
           [0:59; 1:03]     [0:40; 0:72]      [0:88; 1:93]   [0:20; 2:19]               [1:43; 2:35]    [0:83; 2:76]
    2
  R            0:86             0:89              0:79           0:32                       0:95            0:81
           [0:32; 0:96]     [0:34; 0:96]      [0:44; 0:99]   [0:20; 0:99]               [0:32; 0:99]    [0:01; 0:95]
 RMSE
 RMSR
               0:17             0:15              0:18           0:33                       0:18            0:34
                  Panel J: CDS                   Panel K: All Assets
   H            4                 8                 4              8
Constant        0:24             0:16             0:39           1:34
         [ 0:36; 0:11] [ 0:22; 0:09]         [ 0:91; 0:63]   [0:81; 1:72]
 KSt+H
  KSt
               1:26             0:77              0:83           0:63
           [0:84; 1:71]     [0:64; 0:89]      [0:71; 1:21]   [0:63; 0:96]
    2
  R            0:84             0:94              0:78           0:44
           [0:17; 0:97]     [0:68; 0:99]      [0:28; 0:79]   [0:42; 0:84]
 RMSE
 RMSR
               0:34             0:20              0:25           0:41
           Table IV: Fama-MacBeth Regressions of Average Returns on Factor Betas

This table reports estimates of risk prices H . All estimates are multiplied by 100. Bootstrap 95% con…dence
intervals are reported in square brackets. The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.


               Expected Return-Beta Regressions: Competing Models, Equities
                    e                   0
                 E Rj;t =      0   +    H     H   + j , Estimates of Factor Risk Prices   H; H     =8
                                                    Panel A: Size/BM
                 KSt+H                  e                                                           RMSE
 Constant         KSt
                                       Rm;t              SM Bt          HM Lt            R2         RMSR
                                                                                                           BIC
    1:55           0:68                                                                 0:80        0:12   283:41
[1:39; 1:71]   [0:53; 0:83]                                                         [0:52; 0:91]
    3:63                            1:96                   0:70           1:35          0:69        0:15   268:12
[1:19; 5:99]                   [ 4:30; 0:41]           [0:40; 1:01]    [0:76:1:90] [0:54; 0:89]
    3:57           0:50             2:04                   0:22           0:24          0:84        0:10   282:29
[1:91; 5:39]   [0:33; 0:74]   [ 4:01; 0:61]           [ 0:10; 0:45]   [ 0:37; 0:72] [0:67; 0:94]
                                                   Panel B: All Equities
                 KSt+H                  e                                                           RMSE
 Constant         KSt
                                       Rm;t              SM Bt          HM Lt            R2         RMSR
                                                                                                           BIC
    1:65           0:57                                                                 0:74        0:14   966:12
[1:56; 1:74]   [0:49; 0:66]                                                         [0:51; 0:84]
    3:02                         1:28                      0:67            1:37         0:68        0:15   943:11
[2:02; 4:06]                [ 2:30; 0:30]              [0:52; 0:83]    [1:00; 1:74] [0:58; 0:81]
    2:89           0:39          1:25                      0:25            0:40         0:78        0:12   970:29
[2:13; 3:94]   [0:28; 0:52] [ 2:45; 0:67]              [0:04; 0:39]   [ 0:10; 0:73] [0:60; 0:86]
                 Expected Return-Beta Regressions: Competing Models, Equities
                      e                   0
                   E Rj;t =      0   +    H     H   +   j,   Estimates of Factor Risk Prices      H; H   =8
                                                        Panel A: Size/BM
                   KSt+H                  e                                                                   RMSE
 Constant           KSt                  Rm;t                 LevF act         EqF act             R2         RMSR   BIC
    1:55            0:68                                                                          0:80        0:12   283:41
[1:39; 1:71]    [0:53; 0:83]                                                                  [0:52; 0:91]
    0:89                                                      13:91                               0:66        0:16   270:41
[1:39; 1:71]                                              [10:23; 17:67]                      [0:37; 0:90]
    1:24            0:50                                         4:96                             0:82        0:11   284:67
[0:49; 1:53]    [0:32; 0:70]                                 [1:36; 8:64]                     [0:62; 0:92]
    0:48                            1:19                                         6:88             0:49        0:20   258:63
[ 1:16; 2:05]                   [ 0:18; 2:59]                                [3:22; 10:53]    [0:19; 0:85]
    3:19            0:62             1:53                                         2:72            0:81        0:13   279:07
[1:85; 4:53]    [0:43; 0:82]    [ 2:68; 0:38]                                [ 5:91; 0:48]    [0:56; 0:92]
                                                             Panel B: REV
                   KSt+H                  e                                                                   RMSE
 Constant           KSt                  Rm;t                 LevF act         EqF act             R2         RMSR   BIC
    1:73            0:41                                                                          0:86        0:08   124:54
[1:62; 1:84]    [0:30; 0:50]                                                                  [0:68; 0:96]
    1:44                                                     6:53                                 0:01        0:21   104:63
[0:37; 2:69]                                             [ 3:52; 15:55]                       [ 0:12; 0:78]
    1:86            0:42                                          1:73                            0:85        0:07   122:80
[1:14; 2:13]    [0:26; 0:49]                                 [ 4:33; 2:86]                    [0:68; 0:97]
    0:71                             1:10                                         4:23            0:79        0:08   120:86
[ 0:05; 1:43]                    [0:41; 1:88]                                 [3:03; 5:70]    [0:54; 0:98]
    0:86            0:20            0:92                                         2:32             0:76        0:10   116:75
[ 0:32; 2:08]   [ 0:02; 0:42]   [ 0:15; 2:03]                                [ 0:91; 5:64]    [0:56; 0:98]
                                                        Panel C: Size/INV
                   KSt+H                  e                                                                   RMSE
 Constant           KSt                  Rm;t                 LevF act         EqF act             R2         RMSR   BIC
    1:70            0:55                                                                          0:62        0:16   272:08
[1:50; 1:90]    [0:37; 0:74]                                                                  [0:29; 0:81]
    0:59                                                      18:06                               0:52        0:16   272:03
[ 0:01; 1:20]                                             [13:29; 22:75]                      [0:40; 0:92]
    0:97            0:32                                         10:33                            0:70        0:13   276:07
[ 0:02; 1:34]   [0:08; 0:49]                                 [6:12; 16:45]                    [0:45; 0:92]
    1:35                            0:46                                         7:51             0:60        0:16   269:89
[0:17; 2:46]                    [ 0:55; 1:46]                                [4:56; 10:40]    [0:33; 0:92]
    2:28            0:30             0:58                                        2:37             0:73        0:14   277:09
[1:11; 3:38]    [0:12; 0:49]    [ 1:57; 0:43]                                [ 0:91; 5; 64]   [0:48; 0:92]

                                                Table V continued next page
       Table V: (cont.) Fama-MacBeth Regressions of Average Returns on Factor Betas

The table reports estimates of risk prices H . All estimates are multiplied by 100. Bootstrap 95% con…dence
intervals are reported in square brackets. The sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.



                Expected Return-Beta Regressions: Competing Models, Equities
                      e                  0
                   E Rj;t =      0   +   H   H   +   j,   Estimates of Factor Risk Prices     H; H   =8
                                                     Panel D: Size/OP
                   KSt+H              e                                                                   RMSE
  Constant          KSt              Rm;t                  LevF act        EqF act            R2          RMSR   BIC
     1:61            0:57                                                                    0:76         0:12   286:55
 [1:46; 1:77]    [0:45; 0:71]                                                            [0:42; 0:90]
     0:62                                                16:83                               0:58         0:16   272:43
 [0:02; 1:18]                                        [12:26; 21:47]                      [0:37; 0:91]
     1:42            0:50                                 2:69                               0:76         0:12   283:83
 [0:68; 1:88]    [0:34; 0:74]                         [ 2:89; 6:27]                      [0:44; 0:89]
    1:45                            0:36                                     4:60            0:11         0:23   255:09
[ 0:16; 3:02]                   [ 1:06; 1:77]                            [0:98; 8:29]    [ 0:05; 0:61]
     2:47            0:43            0:85                                     0:23           0:60         0:17   270:80
 [1:21; 3:73]    [0:24; 0:61]   [ 1:95; 0:26]                            [ 3:26; 2:77]   [0:23; 0:85]
                                                 Panel E: All Equities
                   KSt+H              e                                                                   RMSE
  Constant          KSt              Rm;t                  LevF act        EqF act            R2          RMSR   BIC
     1:65            0:57                                                                    0:74         0:14   966:12
 [1:56; 1:74]    [0:49; 0:66]                                                            [0:51; 0:84]
     0:80                                                15:03                               0:59         0:17   927:89
 [0:49; 1:12]                                        [12:77; 17:38]                      [0:44; 0:86]
     1:24            0:43                                     5:70                           0:77         0:13   975:12
 [0:70; 1:30]    [0:32; 0:52]                             [4:03; 8:25]                   [0:57; 0:87]
     1:20                           0:59                                     5:55            0:43         0:20   904:68
 [0:51; 1:87]                   [ 0:02; 1:19]                            [3:99; 7:09]    [0:26; 0:71]
     2:54            0:41            0:85                                     0:17           0:70         0:16   949:95
 [1:87; 3:20]    [0:31; 0:51]   [ 1:43; 0:27]                            [ 1:80; 1:50]   [0:48; 0:82]
                             Table VI: Expected Return-beta Regressions

This table reports estimates of risk prices H . All estimates are multiplied by 100. Bootstrap 95% con…dence
intervals are reported in square brackets. The sample spans the period 1970Q1 to 2012Q4.



 Expected Return-Beta Regressions: Competing Models, Other Asset Classes
                     e                0
                  E Ri;t =    0   +   H   + i , Estimates of Factor Risk Prices H , H = 8
                                          H
                                              Panel A: Bonds
                          KSt+H                               e                    RMSE
         Constant          KSt
                                        EqF act             Rm;t           R2      RMSR
                                                                                            BIC
            0:23           0:57                                           0:89     0:15     262:49
        [0:13; 0:32]   [0:40; 0:72]                                   [0:34; 0:96]
            0:41                           7:56             1:43          0:82     0:19     249:97
        [0:28; 0:54]                  [4:16; 10:94]    [ 0:25; 3:06] [0:43; 0:95]
            0:20           0:50             1:80            1:31          0:84     0:16     257:26
        [0:07; 0:33]   [0:18; 0:81] [ 5:34; 1:74]      [ 0:43; 2:97] [0:27; 0:95]
                                       Panel B: Sovereign Bonds
                          KSt+H                               e                    RMSE
         Constant          KSt
                                        EqF act             Rm;t           R2      RMSR
                                                                                            BIC
           0:16            1:18                                           0:32     0:33     54:91
       [ 1:00; 1:62]   [0:20; 2:19]                                   [0:20; 0:99]
           0:34                            7:05             1:24          0:68     0:20     59:45
       [ 0:58; 1:34]                  [2:77; 11:50]    [ 2:63; 5:37] [0:05; 0:99]
            1:33           1:11            4:07             3:44          0:74     0:15     62:84
       [ 2:73; 0:06]   [0:46; 1:73] [ 2:46; 10:49]      [0:61; 6:32]  [0:37; 0:99]
                                             Panel C: Options
                          KSt+H                               e                    RMSE
         Constant          KSt
                                        EqF act             Rm;t           R2      RMSR
                                                                                            BIC
            3:68           1:80                                           0:81     0:34     178:57
        [1:35; 6:11]   [0:83; 2:76]                                   [0:01; 0:95]
             1:11                         22:42             2:81          0:99     0:09     222:10
       [ 2:40; 0:29]                 [18:62; 26:62]     [1:18; 4:34]  [0:78; 0:99]
            5:36           0:73           15:08              4:40         0:98     0:10     221:04
        [2:52; 8:21]   [0:29; 1:24] [10:62; 19:60] [ 7:16; 1:61] [0:75; 0:99]
                                               Panel D: CDS
                          KSt+H                               e                    RMSE
         Constant          KSt
                                        EqF   ac t          Rm;t           R2      RMSR
                                                                                            BIC
            0:16           0:77                                           0:94     0:20     263:27
      [ 0:22; 0:09]    [0:64; 0:89]                                   [0:68; 0:99]
            0:39                          11:08             1:11          0:63     0:50     224:44
      [ 0:63; 0:12]                   [6:39; 16:61]    [ 2:94; 6:16] [0:20; 0:95]
            0:06           0:93             3:17             0:60         0:94     0:20     256:54
       [ 0:18; 0:06]   [0:66; 1:19] [ 6:61; 0:28]      [ 2:68; 1:46] [0:71; 0:99]
              Beta Spread –All Factors Standardized Unit Variance
                                              Equity
                                 Panel A: 25 Size/Bm Portfolios (Value Spread)
               KS(H = 4)       KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          HM L
S1B5   S1B1
                 0:043            0:129         0:015          0:041          0:056
              [ 0:00; 0:06]    [0:06; 0:15]  [0:00; 0:03]   [0:02; 0:06]   [0:04; 0:07]
                                  Panel B: 25 Size/Bm Portfolios (Size Spread)
              KS(H = 4)        KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          SM B
S1B5   S5B5
                 0:075            0:093         0:005          0:002          0:076
              [0:03; 0:09]     [0:02; 0:12] [ 0:01; 0:02] [ 0:02; 0:02]    [0:07; 0:09]
                                                    Panel C: REV
              KS(H = 4)        KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          SM B           HM L
High   Low
                 0:054            0:119         0:001          0:041          0:057          0:035
              [0:01; 0:07]     [0:06; 0:16] [ 0:02; 0:02] [0:01; 0:07]     [0:04; 0:07]   [0:02; 0:05]
                                                 Panel D: Size/INV
               KS(H = 4)       KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          SM B           HM L
High   Low
                 0:041            0:082         0:010          0:018          0:086          0:031
              [ 0:02; 0:07]   [ 0:00; 0:13] [ 0:01; 0:03] [0:01; 0:03]     [0:08; 0:10]   [0:02; 0:05]
                                                 Panel E: Size/OP
              KS(H = 4)        KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          SM B           HM L
High   Low
                 0:055            0:082         0:005           0:015         0:064           0:003
              [0:03; 0:07]     [0:03; 0:12] [ 0:01; 0:02] [ 0:04; 0:01]    [0:06; 0:07]   [ 0:02; 0:01]
                                               Panel F: All Equities
               KS(H = 4)       KS(H = 8)       LevF ac        EqF ac          SM B           HM L
High   Low
                 0:043            0:129         0:015          0:041           0:019         0:056
              [ 0:00; 0:06]    [0:06; 0:15]  [0:00; 0:03]   [0:02; 0:06] [ 0:03; 0:01]    [0:04; 0:07]

                                   Table VII continued next page
                                   Table VII: (cont.) Beta Spread

This table reports the spread in betas between the highest and lowest average return portfolio for each
                    High
portfolio group.         denotes the highest average return portfolio beta; and low denotes the lowest
average return portfolio beta. In the case of size/BM portfolios, these are separated into spreads along
the value dimension (value spread) and size dimension (size spread) where e.g., S1B5 denotes the highest
return portfolio along the value dimension, which is the portfolio is the smallest size category and largest
book-market category. Bootstrap 95% con…dence intervals are reported in square brackets.



                Beta Spread –All Factors Standardized Unit Variance
                                        Other Asset Classes
                                                    Panel G: Bonds
               KS(H = 4)      KS(H = 8)          LevF ac         EqF ac          SM B             HM L
High    Low
                  0:043          0:093            0:000           0:018          0:007            0:019
               [0:01; 0:06]   [0:02; 0:11]     [ 0:02; 0:01] [ 0:00; 0:04]    [ 0:00; 0:01]    [0:01; 0:03]
                                              Panel H: Sovereign Bonds
               KS(H = 4)       KS(H = 8)         LevF ac         EqF ac          SM B            HM L
High    Low
                 0:046           0:037            0:004           0:049          0:007           0:026
              [ 0:04; 0:13]   [ 0:11; 0:12]    [ 0:06; 0:06]   [0:00; 0:08]   [ 0:02; 0:03]   [ 0:00; 0:06]
                                                   Panel I: Options
               KS(H = 4)       KS(H = 8)         LevF ac         EqF ac          SM B            HM L
High    Low
                 0:057           0:071              0:01          0:022          0:004           0:018
              [ 0:00; 0:09]   [ 0:04; 0:12]    [ 0:05; 0:02] [ 0:01; 0:05]    [ 0:01; 0:02]   [ 0:00; 0:03]
                                                     Panel J: CDS
               KS(H = 4)      KS(H = 8)          LevF ac         EqF ac          SM B            HM L
High    Low
                  0:030          0:075             0:013          0:015          0:003           0:006
               [0:00; 0:05]   [0:03; 0:09]    [ 0:03; 0:00] [ 0:00; 0:03]     [ 0:01; 0:02]   [ 0:01; 0:02]
                         Table VIII: Top Income Shares and the Cross Section

The table reports estimates of risk prices        H.   All estimates are multiplied by 100. Bootstrap 95% con…dence
                                                                                  \=Y
                                                                               Yt>10%
                                                                      Ct               t
intervals are reported in square brackets. The factor is             Ct 1                      using the mimicking SZ data
                                                                              Y \
                                                                               >10%
                                                                               t   1=Y t   1

                      \=Y = b& >10% +b& >10% KS for the top 10% of shareholder wealth distribution. The
income share factor Yt>10%  t   0       1      t
sample spans the period 1963Q3 to 2013Q4.


                   Expected Return-Beta Regressions Using Top Income Shares
                         e                  0
                      E Rj;t =     0   +    H     H   + j , Estimates of Factor Risk Prices           H

                                             Equity Portfolios
                      Panel A: Size/BM                Panel B: REV                               Panel C: Size/INV
      H                  4              8              4            8                                4             8
   Constant             0:39          1:11           0:65         1:46                             0:70          1:22
                    [ 0:31; 1:05] [0:91; 1:30]   [0:07; 1:23] [1:32; 1:61]                     [ 0:10; 1:44] [0:93; 1:48]
         \
       >10%
Ct+H Yt+H =Yt+H
 Ct      \
                        1:47               1:24               1:25             0:82                1:21           1:15
      Yt>10% =Yt
                     [0:89; 2:05] [1:01; 1:47]            [0:64; 1:84] [0:61; 1:02]             [0:58; 1:85]   [0:82; 1:49]
          2
      R                  0:55         0:85                    0:66         0:84                     0:42           0:69
                     [0:16; 0:81] [0:64; 0:93]            [0:19; 0:91] [0:68; 0:96]             [0:05; 0:75]   [0:36; 0:88]
     RMSE
     RMSR
                         0:18         0:11                    0:12         0:08                     0:19           0:14
                       Panel D: Size/OP                   Panel E: All Equities
      H                   4             8                       4            8
   Constant              0:34         1:13                    0:63         1:43
                    [ 0:11; 0:82] [0:88; 1:38]            [0:33; 0:93] [1:32; 1:53]
         \
       >10%
Ct+H Yt+H =Yt+H
 Ct      \
                        1:41               1:18               1:37             1:16
      Yt>10% =Yt
                    [1:01; 1:78]   [0:86; 1:50]           [1:10; 1:65]      [1:01; 1:31]
          2
      R                 0:71           0:74                   0:59              0:78
                    [0:38; 0:87]   [0:39; 0:89]           [0:31; 0:77]      [0:57; 0:87]
     RMSE
     RMSR
                        0:13           0:13                   0:17              0:12
