                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PARETO AND PIKETTY:
        THE MACROECONOMICS OF TOP INCOME AND WEALTH INEQUALITY

                                          Charles I. Jones

                                       Working Paper 20742
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20742


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




Prepared for a symposium in the Journal of Economic Perspectives. I am grateful to the editors, Jess
Benhabib, Xavier Gabaix, Jihee Kim, Pete Klenow, Ben Moll, and Chris Tonetti for helpful conversations
and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Pareto and Piketty: The Macroeconomics of Top Income and Wealth Inequality
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 20742
December 2014
JEL No. E0

                                            ABSTRACT

Since the early 2000s, research by Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and their coathors has revolutionized
our understanding of income and wealth inequality. In this paper, I highlight some of the key empirical
facts from this research and comment on how they relate to macroeconomics and to economic theory
more generally. One of the key links between data and theory is the Pareto distribution. The paper
describes simple mechanisms that give rise to Pareto distributions for income and wealth and considers
the economic forces that influence top inequality over time and across countries. For example, it is
in this context that the role of the famous r-g expression is best understood.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
                                     PARETO AND PIKETTY                                          1


       Since the early 2000s, research by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez (and their
coathors, including Anthony Atkinson and Gabriel Zucman) has revolutionized our
understanding of income and wealth inequality. The crucial point of departure for
this revolution is the extensive data they have used, based largely on administrative tax
records. Piketty’s (2014) Capital in the Twenty-First Century is the latest contribution in
this line of work, especially with the new data it provides on capital and wealth. Piketty
also proposes a framework for describing the underlying forces that affect inequality
and wealth, and unlikely as it seems, a bit of algebra that plays an important role in
Piketty’s book has even been seen on T-shirts: r > g.
       In this paper, I highlight some of the key empirical facts from this research and
describe how they relate to macroeconomics and to economic theory more generally.
One of the key links between data and theory is the Pareto distribution. The paper ex-
plains simple mechanisms that give rise to Pareto distributions for income and wealth
and considers the economic forces that influence top inequality over time and across
countries.
       To organize what follows, recall that GDP can be written as the sum of “labor in-
come” and “capital income.” This split highlights several kinds of inequality that we
can explore. In particular, there is within inequality for each of these components:
How much inequality is there within labor income? How much inequality within cap-
ital income — or, more appropriately here, among the wealth itself for which capital
income is just the annual flow? And there is also between inequality related to the
split of GDP between capital and labor. This between inequality takes on particular
relevance given the “within” inequality fact that most wealth is held by a small fraction
of the population; anything that increases between inequality therefore is very likely to
increase overall inequality.1 In the three main sections of this paper, I consider each
of these concepts in turn. I first highlight some of the key facts related to each type of
inequality. Then I use economic theory to shed light on these facts.
       The central takeaway of the analysis is summarized by the first part of the title of
the paper, “Pareto and Piketty.” In particular, there is a tight link between the share of
income going to the top 1 percent or top 0.1 percent and the key parameter of a Pareto
distribution. Understanding why top inequality takes the form of a Pareto distribution
   1
    One could also productively explore the correlation of the two within components: are people at the
top of the labor income distribution also at the top of the capital income and wealth distributions?
    2                                         CHARLES I. JONES



and what economic forces can cause the key parameter to change is therefore central
to understanding the facts. As just one example, the central role that Piketty assigns
to r − g has given rise to some confusion, in part because of its familiar presence in
the neoclassical growth model, where it is not obviously related to inequality. The
relationship between r − g and inequality is much more easily appreciated in models
that explicitly generate Pareto wealth inequality.
    Capital in the Twenty-First Century, together with the broader research agenda of
Piketty and his coauthors, opens many doors by assembling new data on top income
and wealth inequality. The theory that Piketty develops to interpret these data and
make predictions about the future is best viewed as a first attempt to make sense of
the evidence. Much like Marx, Piketty plays the role of provocateur, forcing us to think
about new ideas and new possibilities. As I explain below, the extent to which r − g
is the fundamental force driving top wealth inequality, both in the past and in the
future, is unclear. But by encouraging us to entertain these questions and by providing
a rich trove of data in which to study them, Piketty and his coauthors have made a
tremendous contribution.
    Before we begin, it is also worth stepping back to appreciate the macroeconomic
consequences of the inequality that Piketty and his coauthors write about. For exam-
ple, consider Figure 1. This figure is constructed by merging two famous data series:
one is the Piketty-Saez top inequality data (about which we’ll have more to say shortly)
and the other is the long-run data on GDP per person for the United States that comes
from Angus Maddison (pre-1929) and from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    To set the stage, note that GDP per person since 1870 looks remarkably similar
to a straight line when plotted on a log scale, exhibiting a relatively constant average
growth rate of around 2 percent per year. Figure 1 applies the Piketty-Saez inequality
shares to average GDP per person to produce an estimate of GDP per person for the
top 0.1% and the bottom 99.9%.2 Two key results stand out. First, until recently, there is
remarkably little growth in the average GDP per person at the top: the value in 1913 is
actually lower than the value in 1977. Instead, all the growth until around 1960 occurs
in the bottom 99.9%. The second point is that this pattern changed in recent decades.

  2
    It is important to note that this estimate is surely imperfect. GDP likely does not follow precisely the
same distribution as Adjusted Gross Income: health benefits are more equally distributed, for example.
However, even with these caveats, the estimate still seems useful.
                                   PARETO AND PIKETTY                                          3



                  Figure 1: GDP per person, Top 0.1% and Bottom 99.9%

        Thousands of 2009 chained dollars
          5120
                                                                                6.86%
           2560
           1280
                                                                           Top 0.1%
           640                                       0.72%
           320
           160
            80
                                                                           Bottom 99.9%
            40
            20                                                                  1.83%

            10                                       2.30%

             5
                    1920   1930    1940    1950   1960    1970   1980    1990    2000   2010
                                                                                        Year
      Note: This figure displays an estimate of average GDP per person for the top 0.1% and
      the bottom 99.9%. Average annual growth rates for the periods 1950–1980 and 1980–2007
      are also reported. Source: Aggregate GDP per person data are taken from the Bureau
      of Economic Analysis (since 1929) and Angus Maddison (pre-1929). The top income
      share used to divide the GDP is from the October 2013 version of the world top incomes
      database, from http://g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/topincomes/.



For example, average growth in GDP per person for the bottom 99.9% declined by
around half a percentage point, from 2.3% between 1950 and 1980 to only 1.8% between
1980 and 2007. In contrast, after being virtually absent for 50 years, growth at the
top accelerated sharply: GDP per person for the top 0.1% exhibited growth more akin
to China’s economy, averaging 6.86% since 1980. Changes like this clearly have the
potential to matter for economic welfare and merit the attention they’ve received.



1. Labor Income Inequality

1.1. Basic Facts

One of the key papers documenting the rise in top income inequality is Piketty and Saez
(2003), and it is appropriate to start with an updated graph from their paper. Figure 2
shows the share of income going to the top 0.1 percent of families in the United States,
   4                                            CHARLES I. JONES




                    Figure 2: The Composition of U.S. Income Inequality

       Top 0.1 percent income share
             14%

              12%

              10%
                                                                            Capital gains
              8%

              6%

                                                                                               Business
              4%        Capital income
                                                                                               income


              2%
                                                                                   Wages and Salaries
              0%
                    1920    1930         1940   1950   1960   1970   1980      1990         2000    2010

                                                                                                   Year
       Note: The figure shows the composition of the top 0.1 percent income share. Source:
       These data are taken from the “data-Fig4B” tab of the September 2013 update of the
       spreadsheet appendix to Piketty and Saez (2003).



along with the composition of this income. Piketty and Saez emphasize three key facts
seen in this figure. First, top income inequality follows a U-shaped pattern in the long
term: high prior to the Great Depression, low and relatively steady between World War
II and the mid-1970s, and then rising since then, ultimately reaching similar levels
today to the high levels of top income inequality experienced in the 1910s and 1920s.
Second, much of the decline in top inequality in the first half of the 20th century was
associated with capital income. Third, much of the rise in top inequality during the last
several decades is associated with labor income, particularly if one includes “business
income” in this category.


1.2. Theory

The next section of the paper will discuss wealth and capital income inequality. Here,
motivated by the facts just discussed for the period since 1970, I’d like to focus on labor
income inequality. In particular, what are the economic determinants of top labor
income inequality, and why might they change over time and differ across countries?
                                 PARETO AND PIKETTY                                    5


   At least since Pareto (1896) first discussed income heterogeneity in the context of
his eponymous distribution, it has been appreciated that incomes at the top are well
characterized by a power law. That is, apart from a proportionality factor to normalize
units, Pr [Income > y] = y −1/η — the fraction of people with incomes greater than
some cutoff is proportional to the cutoff raised to some power. This is the defining
characterisic of a Pareto distribution.
   We can easily connect this distribution to the Piketty and Saez “top share” numbers.
In particular, for the Pareto distribution just given, the fraction of income going to the
top p percentiles equals ( 100
                            p )
                                η−1 . In other words, the top share varies directly with the

key exponent of the Pareto distribution, η. With η = 1/2, the share of income going to
the top 1 percent is 100−1/2 = .10, or 10 percent, while if η = 2/3, this share is 100−1/3 ≈
0.22, or 22 percent. An increase in η leads to a rise in top income shares. Hence this
parameter is naturally called a measure of Pareto inequality. In the U.S. economy today,
η is approximately 0.6.
   A theory of top income inequality, then, needs to explain two things: (i) why do top
incomes obey a Pareto distribution, and (ii) what economic forces determine η? The
economics literature in recent years includes a number of papers that ask related ques-
tions. For example, Gabaix (1999) studies the so-called Zipf’s Law for city populations:
why does the population of cities follow a Pareto distribution, and why is the inequality
parameter very close to 1? Luttmer (2007) asks the analogous question for firms: why
is the distributon of employment in U.S. firms a Pareto distribution with an inequality
parameter very close to 1? Here, the questions are slightly different: Why might the
distribution of income be well-represented by a Pareto distribution, and why does the
inequality parameter change over time and differ across countries? Interestingly, it
turns out that there is a lot more inequality among city populations or firm employment
than there is among incomes (their η’s are close to 1.0 instead of 0.6). Also, the size
distribution of cities and firms is surprisingly stable when compared to the sharp rise
in U.S. top income inequality.
   From this recent economics literature as well as from an earlier literature on which
it builds, we learn that the basic mechanism for generating a Pareto distribution is
surprisingly simple: exponential growth that occurs for an exponentially-distributed
       6                                     CHARLES I. JONES



amount of time leads to a Pareto distribution.3
       To see how this works, we first require some heterogeneity. Suppose people are
exponentially distributed across some variable x, which could denote age or experience
or talent. For example, Pr [Age > x] = e−δx , where δ denotes the death rate in the
population. Next, we need to explain how income varies with age in the population.
A natural assumption is exponential growth: suppose income rises exponentially with
age (or experience or talent) at rate µ: Income = eµx . In this case, the log of income
is just proportional to age, so the log of income obeys an exponential distribution with
parameter δ/µ.
       Next, we use an interesting property: if the log of income is exponential, then the
level of income obeys a Pareto distribution:4


                                      Pr [Income > y] = y −δ/µ .


Recall from our earlier discussion that the Pareto inequality measure is just the inverse
of the exponent in this equation, which gives

                                                          µ
                                             η income =     .                                          (1)
                                                          δ

The Pareto exponent is increasing with µ, the rate at which incomes grow with age
and decreasing in the death rate δ. Intuitively, the lower is the death rate, the longer
some lucky people in the economy can benefit from exponential growth, which widens
Pareto inequality. Similarly, faster exponential growth across ages (which might be
interpreted as a higher return to experience) also widens inequality.
       This simple framework can be embedded in a richer model to produce a theory
of top income inequality. For example, Jones and Kim (2014) build a model along
these lines in which both µ and δ are endogenous variables that respond to changes
in economic policy or technology. In their setup, x corresponds to the human capital
of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs who put forth more effort cause their incomes to grow
more rapidly, corresponding to a higher µ. The death rate δ is an endogenous rate of
   3
     Excellent introductions to Pareto models can be found in Mitzenmacher (2004), Gabaix (2009),
Benhabib (2014), and Moll (2012b). Benhabib traces the history of Pareto-generating mechanisms and
attributes the earliest instance of a simple model like that outlined here to Cantelli (1921).
   4
     This derivation is explained in more detail in the appendix at the end of the paper, also available at
http://www.stanford.edu/∼chadj/SimpleParetoJEP.pdf.
                                 PARETO AND PIKETTY                                   7


creative destruction by which one entrepreneur is displaced by another. Technological
changes that make a given amount of entrepreneurial effort more effective, such as
information technology or the world wide web, will increase top income inequality.
Conversely, exposing formerly closed domestic markets to international competition
may increase creative destruction and reduce top income inequality. Finally, the model
also incorporates an important additional role for luck: the richest people are those
who not only avoid the destruction shock for long periods, but also those who benefit
from the best idiosyncratic shocks to their incomes. Both effort and luck play central
roles at the top, and models along these lines combined with data on the stochastic
income process of top earners can allow us to quantify their comparative importance.



2. Wealth Inequality

2.1. Basic Facts

Up until this point, we’ve focused on inequality in labor income. Piketty’s (2014) book,
in contrast, is primarily about wealth, which turns out to be a more difficult subject.
Models of wealth are conceptually more complicated because wealth accumulates grad-
ually over time. In addition, data on wealth are more difficult to obtain. Income data
are “readily” (in comparison only!) available from tax authorities, while wealth data
are gathered less reliably. For example, common sources include estate taxation, which
affects an individual infrequently, or surveys, in which wealthy people may be reluctant
to share the details of their holdings. With extensive effort, Piketty assembles the wealth
inequality data shown in Figure 3, and several findings stand out immediately.
   First, wealth inequality is much greater than income inequality. The top 1 percent of
families possess around 35 or 40 percent of wealth in the United States in 2010, versus
around 17 percent of income. Put another way, the income cutoff for the top 1 percent
is about $330,000 — in the ballpark of the top salaries for academics. In contrast,
according to the latest data from Saez and Zucman (2014), the wealth cutoff for the
top 1 percent is an astonishing $4 million! Note that both groups include about 1.5
million families.
   Second, wealth inequality in France and the United Kingdom is dramatically lower
today than it was at any time between 1810 and 1960. The share of wealth going to the
   8                                      CHARLES I. JONES




                                 Figure 3: Wealth Inequality

            Wealth share of top 1%
             70%


              60%
                                                              U.K.

              50%
                                      France

              40%
                                                                                 U.S.

              30%


              20%
                1800         1840         1880         1920          1960       2000
                                                                                        Year
       Note: The figure shows the share of aggregate wealth held by the richest 1 percent of
       the population. Source: Supplementary Table S10.1 for Chapter 10 of Piketty (2014),
       http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/en/capital21c2.




top 1 percent is around 25 or 30 percent today, versus peaks in 1910 of 60 percent or
more. Two world wars, the Great Depression, the rise of progressive taxation — some
combination of these and other events led to an astonishing drop in wealth inequality
both there and in the United States between 1910 and 1965.
   Third, wealth inequality has increased during the last 50 years, although the in-
crease seems small in comparison to the declines just discussed. An important caveat
to this statement applies to the United States: the data shown are those used by Piketty
in his book, but Saez and Zucman (2014) have recently assembled what they believe to
be superior data in the United States, and these data show a rise to a 40 percent wealth
share for the top 1 percent by 2010, much closer to the earlier U.S. peak in the first part
of the 20th century.
                                       PARETO AND PIKETTY                                           9


2.2. Theory

A substantial and growing body of economic theory seeks to understand the determi-
nants of wealth inequality.5 Pareto inequality in wealth readily emerges through the
same mechanism we discussed in the context of income inequality: exponential growth
that occurs over an exponentially-distributed amount of time. In the case of wealth
inequality, this exponential growth is fundamentally tied to the interest rate, r: in a
standard asset accumulation equation, the return on wealth is a key determinant of the
growth rate of an individual’s wealth. On the other hand, this growth in an individual’s
wealth occurs against a backdrop of economic growth in the overall economy. To obtain
a variable that will exhibit a stationary distribution, one must normalize an individual’s
wealth level by average wealth per person or income per person in the economy. If
average wealth grows at rate g — which in standard models will equal the growth rate
of income per person and capital per person — the normalized wealth of an individual
then grows at rate r − g. This logic underlies the key r − g term for wealth inequality
that makes a frequent appearance in Piketty’s book. Of course, r and g are potentially
endogenous variables in general equilibrium so — as we will see — one must be careful
in thinking about how they might vary independently.
       To be more specific, imagine an economy of heterogeneous people. The details of
the model we describe next are given in the appendix at the end of the paper.6 But the
logic is straightforward to follow. To keep it simple, assume there is no labor income
and that individuals consume a constant fraction α of their wealth. As discussed above,
wealth earns a basic return r. However, wealth is also subject to a wealth tax: a fraction
τ is paid to the government every period. With this setup, the individual’s wealth grows
exponentially at a constant rate r − τ − α. Next, assume that average wealth per person
(or capital per person) grows exogenously at rate g, for example in the context of some
macro growth model. The individual’s normalized wealth then grows exponentially at
rate r − g − τ − α > 0. This is the basic “exponential growth” part of the requirement for
a Pareto distribution.
       Next, we obtain heterogeneity in the simplest possible fashion: assume that each
   5
     References include Wold and Whittle (1957), Stiglitz (1969), Huggett (1996), Quadrini (2000), Cas-
taneda, Diaz-Gimenez and Rios-Rull (2003), Benhabib and Bisin (2006), Cagetti and Nardi (2006), Nirei
(2009), Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011), Moll (2012a), Piketty and Saez (2012), Aoki and Nirei (2013), Moll
(2014), and Piketty and Zucman (2014).
   6
     See also http://www.stanford.edu/∼chadj/SimpleParetoJEP.pdf.
   10                                  CHARLES I. JONES



                                              ¯ in each period. Because Piketty (2014)
person faces a constant probability of death, d,
emphasizes the role played by changing rates of population growth, we’ll also include
population growth, assumed to occur at rate n̄. Each new person born in this economy
inherits the same amount of wealth, and the aggregate inheritance is simply equal
to the aggregate wealth of the people who die each period. It is straightforward to
show that the steady-state distribution of this birth-death process is an exponential
                                                                     ¯
distribution, where the age distribution is Pr [Age > x] = e−(n̄+d)x . That is, the age
                                                         ¯ The intuition behind this
distribution is governed by the (gross) birth rate, n̄ + d.
formulation is that a fraction n̄ + d¯ of new people are added to the economy each
instant.
   We now have exponential growth occurring over an exponentially-distributed amount
of time. The model we presented in the context of the income distribution suggested
that the Pareto inequality measure equals the ratio of the “growth rate” to the “expo-
nential distribution parameter” and that logic also holds for this model of the wealth
distribution. In particular, wealth has a steady-state distribution that is Pareto with

                                             r−g−τ −α
                                η wealth =             .                                  (2)
                                               n̄ + d¯

An equation like this is at the heart of many of Piketty’s statements about wealth in-
equality, for example as measured by the share of wealth going to the top 1 percent.
Other things equal, an increase in r − g will increase wealth inequality: people who are
lucky enough to live a long time — or are part of a long-lived dynasty — will accumulate
greater stocks of wealth. Also, a higher wealth tax will lower wealth inequality. In richer
frameworks that include stochastic returns to wealth, the super-rich are also those who
benefit from a lucky run of good returns, and a higher variance of returns will increase
wealth inequality.
   Can this class of models explain why wealth inequality was so high historically in
France and the United Kingdom relative to today? Or why wealth inequality was his-
torically much higher in Europe than in the United States? Qualitatively, two of the key
channels that Piketty emphasizes are at work in this framework: either a low growth rate
income per person, g, or a low rate of population growth, n̄ — both of which applied in
the 19th century — will lead to higher wealth inequality.
   Piketty (2014, p. 232) summarizes the logic underlying models like this with char-
                                        PARETO AND PIKETTY                                           11


acteristic eloquence: “[I]n stagnant societies, wealth accumulated in the past takes on
considerable importance.” On the role of population growth, for example, Piketty notes
that an increase means that inherited wealth gets divided up by more offspring, re-
ducing inequality. Conversely, a decline in population growth will concentrate wealth.
A related effect occurs when the economy’s per capita growth rate rises. In this case,
inherited wealth fades in value relative to new wealth generated by economic growth.
Silicon Valley in recent decades is perhaps an example worth considering. Reflections
of these stories can be seen in the factors that determine η for the distribution of wealth
in the equation above.


2.3. General Equilibrium

Whether changes in the parameters of models in this genre can explain the large changes
in wealth inequality that we see in the data is an open question. However, one caution-
ary note deserves mention: the comparative statics just provided ignore the important
point that arguably all the parameters considered so far are endogenous. For example,
changes in the economy’s growth rate g or the rate of the wealth tax τ can be mirrored by
changes in the interest rate itself, potentially leaving wealth inequality unchanged.7 To
take another example, the fraction of wealth that is consumed, α, will naturally depend
on the rate of time preference and the death rate in the economy.
       Because the parameters that determine Pareto wealth inequality are interrelated, it
is unwise to assume that the direction of changing any single parameter will have an
unambiguous effect on the distribution of wealth. General equilibrium forces matter
and can significantly alter the fundamental determinants of Pareto inequality.
       As one example, if tax revenues are used to pay for government services that en-
ter utility in an additively separable fashion, the formula for wealth inequality in this
                               n̄
model reduces to η wealth = n̄+   d¯
                                    ; see the appendix for the details.8 Remarkably, in
this formulation the distribution of wealth is invariant to wealth taxes. In addition,
   7
     This relationship can be derived from a standard Euler equation for consumption with log utility,
which delivers the result that r − g − τ = ρ, where ρ is the rate of time preference. With log utility, the
substitution and income effects from a change in growth or taxes offset and change the interest rate one
for one.
   8
     There are two key reasons that deliver this result. The first is the Euler equation point made earlier,
that r − g − α will be pinned down by exogenous parameters. The second is that the substitution and
income effect from taxes cancel each other out with log utility, so the tax rate does not matter. For these
two reasons, the numerator of the Pareto inequality measure for wealth, r − g − τ − α, simplifies to just n̄.
   12                                  CHARLES I. JONES



the effect of population growth on wealth can actually go in the opposite direction
from what we’ve seen so far. The intuition for this result is interesting: while in partial
equilibrium, the growth rate of normalized wealth is r−g−τ −α, in general equilibrium,
the only source of heterogeneity in the model is population growth. Newborns in this
economy inherit the wealth of the people who die. Because of population growth, there
are more newborns than people who die, so newborns inherit less than the average
amount of wealth per capita. This dilution of the inheritance via population growth
is the key source of heterogeneity in the model, and this force ties the distribution of
wealth across ages at a point in time to population growth. Perhaps a simpler way of
making the point is this: if there were no population growth in the model, newborns
would each inherit the per capita amount of wealth in the economy. The accumulation
of wealth by individuals over time would correspond precisely to the growth in the per
capita wealth that newborns inherit, and there would be no inequality in the model
despite the fact that r > g!
   More generally, other possible effects on the distribution of wealth need to be con-
sidered in a richer framework. Examples include bequests, social mobility, progres-
sive taxation, transition dynamics, and the role of both macroeconomic and microeco-
nomic shocks. The references cited earlier make progress on these fronts.
   To conclude this section, I think two points are worth appreciating. First, in a way
that is easy to overlook because of our general lack of familiarity with Pareto inequality,
Piketty is right to highlight the link between r − g and top wealth inequality. That
connection has a firm basis in economic theory. On the other hand, as I’ve tried to
show, the role of r − g, population growth, and taxes is more fragile than this partial
equilibrium reasoning suggests. For example, it is not necessarily true that a slowdown
in either per capita growth or population growth in the future will increase inequality.
There are economic forces working in that direction in partial equilibrium. But from a
general equilibrium standpoint, these effects can easily be washed out depending on
the precise details of the model. Moreover, these research ideas are relatively new, and
the empirical evidence needed to sort out such details is not yet available.
                                  PARETO AND PIKETTY                                  13


3. “Between” Inequality: Capital vs Labor

We next turn to “between” inequality: how is income to capital versus income to la-
bor changing, and how is the wealth-income ratio changing? This type of inequality
takes on particular importance given our previous fact about within inequality: most
of wealth is held by a small fraction of the population, which means that changes in the
share of national income going to capital (e.g. rK/Y ) or in the aggregate capital-output
ratio also contribute significantly to inequality. Whereas Pareto inequality describes
how inequality at the top of the distribution is changing, this between inequality is
more about inequality between the top 10 percent of the population (who hold around
3/4 of the wealth in the United States according to Saez and Zucman (2014)) and the
bottom 90 percent.



3.1. Basic Facts

At least since Kaldor (1961), a key stylized fact of macroeconomics has been the relative
stability of factor payments to capital as a share of GDP. Figure 4 shows the long his-
torical time series for France, the United Kingdom, and the United States that Piketty
(2014) has assembled. A surprising point emerges immediately: prior to World War II,
the capital share exhibits a substantial negative trend, falling from around 40 percent
in the mid-1800s to below 30 percent. By comparison, the data since 1940 show some
stability, though with a notable rise between 1980 and 2010. In Piketty’s data, the labor
share is simply one minus the capital share, so the corresponding changes in labor’s
share of factor payments can be read from this same graph.
   Before delving too deeply into these numbers, it is worth appreciating another pat-
tern documented by Piketty (2014). Figure 5 shows the capital-output ratio — the ratio
of the economy’s stock of machines, buildings, roads, land, and other forms of physical
capital to the economy’s gross domestic product — for this same group of countries,
back to 1870. The movements are once again striking. France and the United Kingdom
exhibit a very high capital-output ratio around 7 in the late 1800s. This ratio falls sharply
and suddenly with World War I, to around 3, before rising steadily after World War
II to around 6 today. The destruction associated with the two World Wars and the
subsequent transition dynamics as Europe recovers are an obvious interpretation of
   14                                        CHARLES I. JONES




                                      Figure 4: Capital Shares

              Capital share of factor payments (percent)
                45

                 40
                                                U.K.
                 35

                 30
                                                                                  U.S.
                 25

                 20
                                                                    France
                 15

                 10
                 1820     1840   1860    1880    1900   1920    1940    1960   1980      2000
                                                                                             Year
        Note: Capital shares (including land rents) for each decade are averages over the
        preceding ten years. Source: Supplementary tables for Chapter 6 of Piketty (2014),
        http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/en/capital21c2 for France and the U.K. The U.S. shares are taken
        from Piketty and Zucman (2014).



these facts. The capital-output ratio in the United States appears relatively stable in
comparison, though still showing a decline during the Great Depression and a rise from
3.5 to 4.5 in the post-World War II period. These are wonderful new facts that were not
broadly known prior to Piketty’s efforts.
   Delving into the detailed data underlying these graphs — which Piketty (2014) gen-
erously and thoroughly provides — highlights an important feature of the data. By
focusing on only two factors of production, capital and labor, Piketty includes land as
a form of capital. Of course, the key difference between land and the rest of capital is
that the quantity of land is fixed, while the quantity of other forms of capital is not. For
the purpose of understanding inequality between the top and the rest of the distribu-
tion, including land as a part of capital is eminently sensible. On the other hand, for
connecting the data to macroeconomic theory, one must be careful.
   For example, in the 18th and early 19th centuries, Piketty notes that rents paid to
landlords averaged around 20 percent of national income. His capital income share for
the United Kingdom before 1910 is taken from Allen (2007), with some adjustments,
                                    PARETO AND PIKETTY                                                15



                            Figure 5: The Capital-Output Ratio

            Capital−Output Ratio
                8

                7
                               U.K.
                                                                                   France
                6

                5
                                                        U.S.
                4

                3

                2

                1
               1860     1880       1900   1920     1940        1960       1980       2000
                                                                                             Year
      Source:      Supplementary Table S4.5       for    Chapter      4   of     Piketty    (2014),
      http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/en/capital21c2.




and shows a sharp decline in income from land rents (down to only 2 percent by 1910),
which masks a rise in income from reproducible capital.
   Similarly, much of the large swing in the European capital-output ratios shown in
Figure 5 are due to land as well. (In Piketty’s book, Figures 3.1 and 3.2 make this clear.)
For example, in 1700 in France, the value of land equals almost 500 percent of national
income versus only 12 percent by 2010. Moreover, the rise in the capital-output ratio
since 1950 is to a great extent due to housing, which rises from 85 percent of national
income in 1950 to 371 percent in 2010. Bonnet, Bono, Chapelle and Wasmer (2014) doc-
ument this point in great detail, going further to show that the rise in recent decades is
primarily due to a rise in housing prices rather than to a rise in the quantity of housing.
   As an alternative, consider what is called reproducible, non-residential capital, that
is the value of the capital stock excluding land and housing. This concept corresponds
much more closely to what we think of when we model physical capital in macro mod-
els. Data for this alternative are shown in Figure 6.
   In general, the movements in this measure of the capital-output ratio are more
muted — especially during the second half of the 20th century. There is a recovery
   16                                        CHARLES I. JONES




             Figure 6: The Capital-Output Ratio, Excluding Land and Housing

              Capital−Output Ratio (excluding land and housing)
                  8

                   7

                   6

                   5
                                            U.K.
                   4

                   3
                                                                     U.S.
                   2
                                                                                      France
                   1
                  1800          1840         1880          1920             1960       2000
                                                                                          Year
        Source: Supplementary Tables S3.1, S3.2, and S4.2 for Chapters 3 and 4 of Piketty (2014),
        http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/en/capital21c2.




following the destruction of capital during World War II, but otherwise the ratio seems
relatively stable in the latter period. In contrast, it is striking that the value in 2010 is
actually lower than the value in several decades in the 1800s for both France and the
United Kingdom. Similarly, the value in the United States is generally lower in 2010
than it was in the first three decades of the 20th century. I believe this is something of a
new fact to macroeconomics — it strikes me as surprising and worthy of more careful
consideration. I would have expected the capital-output ratio to be higher in the 20th
century than in the 19th.
   Stepping back from these discussions of the facts, an important point related to the
“fundamental tendencies of capitalist economies,” to use Piketty’s language, needs to
be appreciated. From the standpoint of overall wealth inequality, the declining role of
land and the rising role of housing is not necessarily relevant. The inequality of wealth
exists independent of the form in which the wealth is held. In the Pareto models of
wealth inequality discussed in the preceding section, it turns out not to matter whether
the asset that is accumulated is a claim on physical capital or a claim on a fixed aggre-
gate quantity of land: the role of r − g in determining the Pareto inequality measure
                                          PARETO AND PIKETTY                                            17


η, for example, is the same in both setups.9 However, if one wishes to fit Piketty’s
long-run data to macroeconomic growth models — to say something about the shape
of production functions — then it becomes crucial to distinguish between land and
physical capital.



3.2. Theory

The macroeconomics of the capital-output ratio is arguably the best-known theory
within all of macroeconomics, with its essential roots in the analysis of Solow (1956)
and Swan (1956). The familiar formula for the steady-state capital-output ratio is s/(n+
g + δ), where s is the (gross) investment share of GDP, n denotes population growth, g
is the steady-state growth rate of income per person, and δ is the rate at which capital
depreciates. Notice that this expression pertains to the ratio of reproducible capital —
machines, buildings, and highways — and therefore is not strictly comparable to the
graphs that Piketty reports, which include land.
       In this framework, a higher rate of investment s will raise the steady-state capital-
output ratio, while increases in population growth n, a rise in the growth rate of income
per person g, or a rise in the capital depreciation rate δ would tend to reduce that
steady-state ratio. Partly for expositional purposes, Piketty simplifies this formula to
another that is mathematically equivalent: s̃/g̃, where g̃ = n + g and s̃ now denotes
the investment rate net of depreciation, s̃ = s − δK/Y . This more elegant equation is
helpful for a general audience and gets the qualitative comparative statics right: in par-
ticular, Piketty emphasizes that a slowdown in growth — whether in per capita terms or
in population growth — will raise the capital-output ratio in the long-run. Piketty occa-
sionally uses the simple formula to make quantitative statements, e.g. if the growth rate
falls in half, then the capital-output ratio will double (for example, see the discussion
beginning on page 170). This statement is not correct and takes the simplification too
far.10
       It is plausible that some of the decline in the capital-output ratio in France and the
United Kingdom since the late 1800s is due to a rise in the rate of population growth
and the growth of income per person — that is, to a rise in n + g — and it is possible

   9
       The background models in the appendix provide the details supporting this claim.
  10
       In particular, it ignores the fact that s̃ will change when the growth rate changes, via the δK/Y term.
    18                                       CHARLES I. JONES



that a slowing growth rate of aggregate GDP in recent decades and in the future could
contribute to a rise in the capital-output ratio. However, the quantitative magnitude
of these effects is significantly mitigated by taking depreciation into account. These
points are discussed in detail in Krusell and Smith (2014).
    To see an example, consider a depreciation rate of 7 percent, a population growth
rate of 1 percent, and a growth rate of income per person of 2 percent. In this case, in
the extreme event that all growth disappears, the n + g + δ denominator of the Solow
expression falls from 10 percent to 7 percent, so that the capital-output ratio increases
by a factor of 10/7, or around 40 percent. That would be a large change, but it is nothing
like the changes we see for France or the United Kingdom in Figure 5.
    One may also worry that these comparative statics hold the saving rate s constant.
Fortunately, the case with optimizing saving is also easy to analyze and gives similar
results. For example, with Cobb-Douglas production, (r + δ)K/Y = α, where α is the
exponent on physical capital. With log utility, the Euler equation for consumption gives
r = ρ + g. Therefore the steady state for the capital-output ratio is α/(ρ + g + δ), which
features similarly small movements in response to changes in per capita growth g. The
bottom line from these examples is that qualitatively it is plausible that slowdowns in
growth can increase the capital-output ratio in the economy, but the magnitudes of
these effects should not be exaggerated.
    The effect on between inequality — i.e. on the share of GDP paid as a return to
capital — is even less clear. In the Cobb-Douglas example, of course, this share is
constant. How then do we account for the empirical rise in capital’s share since the
1980s? The research on this question is just beginning and there are not yet clear
answers.11
    Piketty himself offers one possibility, suggesting that the elasticity of substitution
between capital and labor may be greater than one (as opposed to equaling one in the
Cobb-Douglas case outlined above).12 To understand this claim, look back at Figures 4
and 5. The fact that the capital share and the capital-output ratio move together, at least
broadly over the long swing of history, is taken as suggestive evidence that the elasticity
of substitution between capital and labor is greater than one. Given the importance of

  11
     Recent papers studying the rise in the capital share in the last two decades include Karabarbounis and
Neiman (2013), Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2013), and Bridgman (2014).
  12
     For example, see the discussion starting on page 220.
                                       PARETO AND PIKETTY                                           19


land in both of these time series, however, I would be hesitant to make too much of
this correlation. The state-of-the-art in the literature on this elasticity is inconclusive,
with some papers arguing for an elasticity greater than one but others arguing for less
than one; for example, see Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013) and Oberfield and Raval
(2014).



4. Conclusion

Through extensive data work, particularly with administrative tax records, Piketty and
Saez and their coauthors have shifted our understanding of inequality in an important
way. To a much greater extent than we’ve appreciated before, the dynamics of top
income and wealth inequality are crucial. Future research combining this empirical
evidence with models of top inequality is primed to shed light on this phenomenon.13
    In Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Piketty suggests that the fundamental dy-
namics of capitalism will create a strong tendency toward greater inequality of wealth
and even dynasties of wealth in the future, unless this tendency is mitigated by the
enactment of policies like a wealth tax. This claim is inherently more speculative. Al-
though the concentration of wealth has risen in recent decades, the causes are not en-
tirely clear and include a decline in saving rates outside the top of the income distribu-
tion (as discussed by Saez and Zucman, 2014), the rise in top labor income inequality,
and a general rise in real estate prices. The theoretical analysis behind Piketty’s predic-
tion of rising wealth inequality often includes a key simplification in the relationships
between variables: for example, assuming that changes in the growth rate g will not be
mirrored by changes in the rate of return r, or that the saving rate net of depreciation
won’t change over time. If these theoretical simplifications do not hold — and there are
reasons to be dubious — then the predictions of a rising concentration of wealth are
mitigated. The future evolution of income and wealth, and whether they are more or
less unequal, may turn on a broader array of factors.
    I’m unsure about the extent to which r − g will be viewed a decade or two from
now as the key force driving top wealth inequality. However, I am certain that our
  13
     In this vein, it is worth noting that the Statistics of Income division of the Internal Revenue Service
makes available random samples of detailed tax records in their public use microdata files, dating back to
the 1960s (for more information on these data, see http://users.nber.org/∼taxsim/gdb/).
   20                                 CHARLES I. JONES



understanding of inequality will have been enhanced enormously by the impetus —
both in terms of data and in terms of theory — that Piketty and his coauthors have
provided.




Appendix: Simple Models of Pareto Inequality
   This appendix seeks to illustrate the simplest models of Pareto inequality. The model
for income is about as simple as it can get and is quite useful for intuition and for
understanding where Pareto distributions come from. The model for wealth builds on
the key insight of the income model. However, it is more complicated, partly by nature
and partly so that it can speak to the roles of “r − g” and population growth that Piketty
(2014) highlights in his book.



A Income Inequality

The simplest models of Pareto inequality are surprisingly easy to understand. Pareto in-
equality emerges from exponential growth that occurs for an exponentially-distributed
amount of time. Excellent introductions to Pareto models can be found in Mitzen-
macher (2004), Gabaix (2009), Benhabib (2014), and Moll (2012b). Benhabib traces
the history of Pareto-generating mechanisms and attributes the earliest instance of a
simple model like that outlined here to Cantelli (1921).
   To see how this works, we first require some heterogeneity. Suppose people are
exponentially distributed across some variable x, which could denote age or experience
or talent. For example, Pr [Age > x] = e−δx , where δ denotes the death rate in the
population.
   Next, we need to explain how income varies with age in the population. A natural
assumption is exponential growth: suppose income y rises exponentially with age (or
experience or talent) at rate µ: y = eµx . Inverting this assumption gives us the age at
which an individual earns income y: x(y) = 1/µ · log y.
                                PARETO AND PIKETTY                                 21


   That’s it, and the Pareto distribution then emerges easily:

                           Pr [Income > y] = Pr [Age > x(y)]

                                            = e−δx(y)                                   (3)
                                                  δ
                                                 −µ
                                            =y

Recall that the Pareto inequality index is just the inverse of the exponent in this equa-
tion, which gives
                                                  µ
                                     η income =     .                                   (4)
                                                  δ
The Pareto exponent is increasing with µ, the rate at which incomes grow with age (or
experience or talent) and decreasing in the death rate δ. Intuitively, the lower is the
death rate, the longer some lucky people in the economy can benefit from exponential
growth, which widens Pareto inequality. Similarly, faster exponential income growth
across age (a higher return to experience?) also widens inequality. Jones and Kim (2014)
build a richer model of labor income inequality along these lines that endogenizes µ
and δ.




B Wealth Inequality

A Pareto distribution of wealth can be obtained using a similar logic. Richer mod-
els of wealth inequality that motivate the simple model below can be found in Wold
and Whittle (1957), Stiglitz (1969), Huggett (1996), Quadrini (2000), Castaneda, Diaz-
Gimenez and Rios-Rull (2003), Benhabib and Bisin (2006), Cagetti and Nardi (2006),
Nirei (2009), Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011), Moll (2012a), Piketty and Saez (2012),
Aoki and Nirei (2013), Moll (2014), and Piketty and Zucman (2014).




B1. Individual wealth

Let a denote an individual’s wealth, which accumulates over time according to


                                    ȧ = ra − τ a − c                                   (5)
       22                                        CHARLES I. JONES



where r is the interest rate, τ is a wealth tax, and c is the individual’s consumption.
Assume consumption is a constant fraction α of wealth (e.g. as it will be with log utility),
which yields
                                             ȧ = (r − τ − α)a.                                          (6)

       With this law of motion, the wealth of an individual of age x at date t is


                                        at (x) = at−x (0) e(r−τ −α)x                                     (7)


where at−x (0) is the initial wealth of a newborn at date t − x, described further below.



B2. Heterogeneity through a birth-death process

The simple birth-death process here is a canonical model of the demography literature;
for example, see Tuljapurkar (2008) or do a google search for “stable population theory”.
The number of people born at date t is


                                                 Bt = B0 en̄t .                                          (8)

                                             ¯ As shown at the end of this note, the
Death is a Poisson process with arrival rate d.
stationary distribution for this birth-death process is exponential:

                                                                  ¯
                                         Pr [Age > x] = e−(n̄+d)x .                                      (9)


To see the intuition behind thid equation, notice that the (long-run) birth rate for this
                     ¯ 14 That is, a fraction b̄ of the population is newly born at each
process is b̄ ≡ n̄ + d.
instant, some to compensate for deaths and some representing net population growth.
The age distribution then declines exponentially at rate b̄.




  14
       The law of motion for the population is

                                                 Ṅt   Bt   ¯
                                                     =    − d.
                                                 Nt    Nt
So population growth is constant if and only if N grows at the same rate as B, i.e. at rate n̄. In this case,
            ¯
B/N = n̄ + d.
                                      PARETO AND PIKETTY                            23


B3. The wealth distribution in partial equilibrium




Newborns equally inherit the wealth of the people who die in this economy:

                                                        ¯ t
                                                        dK
                                         at (0) =         ¯ t
                                                    (n̄ + d)N                         (10)
                                               = ākt

           ¯
where ā ≡ d/(n̄   ¯ and kt ≡ Kt /Nt is capital (wealth) per person in the economy. To
                 + d)
understand this equation, consider the first line. The numerator in the first part of this
          ¯ t , equals aggregate wealth of the people who die, and the denominator is
equation, dK
the number of newborns. In the second line, notice that because of population growth,
newborns inherit less than the average amount of capital per person in the economy,
and this fraction is given by ā.
    Assume that the macroeconomy is in steady state, so that capital per person grows
at a constant and exogenous rate, g, over time: kt = k0 egt . Equation (10) can be used
to help characterize the cross-section distribution of wealth at date t. In particular, the
amount of wealth that a person of age x at date t inherited when they were born (at date
t − x) is
                                    at−x (0) = ākt−x = ākt e−gx .                   (11)

And substituting this expression into (7), we obtain the cross-section of wealth at date
t by age:
                                      at (x) = ākt e(r−g−τ −α)x                      (12)

This is the exponential growth process that is one of the two key ingredients that deliv-
ers a Pareto distribution for normalized wealth, and one can already see that r − g plays
a role. The other key ingredient is the exponential age distribution in equation (9), pro-
viding the heterogeneity. Together, these two building blocks give us our requirement:
exponential growth occurs over an exponentially-distributed amount of time.
    Inverting equation (12) gives the age at which a person in the cross-section achieves
wealth a:                                                            
                                        1                          a
                              x(a) =          log                       .             (13)
                                     r−g−τ −α                    ākt
   24                                       CHARLES I. JONES



Then the wealth distribution is

                             Pr [Wealth > a] = Pr [Age > x(a)]
                                                               ¯
                                                    = e−(n̄+d)x(a)
                                                                                     (14)
                                                                   n̄+d¯
                                                          a − r−g−τ −α
                                                            
                                                    =                    .
                                                        ākt

   Recall that Pareto inequality is measured by the inverse of the exponent in the ex-
pression above, which gives our first main result for wealth inequality:

                                                    r−g−τ −α
                                  η wealth =                  .                      (15)
                                                      n̄ + d¯

B4. The consumption share of wealth, α

If expected lifetime utility is     Z       ∞
                                                      ¯
                                                e−(ρ+d)t log ct dt                   (16)
                                        0
                                                  ¯ t . That is, consumption is a constant
then it is straightforward to show that ct = (ρ + d)a
fraction of wealth, and we have α = (ρ + d).  ¯ The linearity of consumption in wealth

applies more generally, delivering a richer formula for α; see Moll (2014), for example.
   It is worth pausing here to address a natural question: why is there no Nt or Bt in the
utility function? The answer is that leaving Nt out is the simplest approach. This case
corresponds to the assumption that individuals do not care about their offspring, and
this is consistent with the structure of the rest of the model — namely, that newborns
equally inherit the wealth of the people who die. It would be useful to consider altruism,
where newborns inherit wealth from parents who care about their well-being, and such
structures have been considered in the literature cited earlier.


B5. The wealth distribution in general equilibrium

We close the model in two different ways, which turn out to yield the same result for
Pareto inequality in general equilibrium. Consider an “AK” production function:


                                                Yt = At Kt .                         (17)


Our two cases are
                                       PARETO AND PIKETTY                                          25


   1. Capital model: Here, At = Ā is constant over time, and capital accumulates
         endogenously: K̇t = Yt − Ct − Tt − δKt , where C denotes aggregate consumption
         and Tt = τ Kt denotes aggregate tax revenue. The fact that tax revenue enters
         the budget constraint (rather than being rebated lump sum) leads to substitution
         and income effects canceling. This case corresponds to the tax revenue being
         thrown away or alternatively being spent on a public good that enters utility in an
         additively separable fashion.

   2. Land model: Alternatively, suppose At = A0 eḡt and let Kt = K̄ denote a fixed
         supply of land.

Both interpretations generate economic growth. The fact that they lead to identical
Pareto wealth inequality highlights the fact that whether wealth is capital that accumu-
lates or just land that does not does not matter from the standpoint of wealth inequality.
       Because the details are somewhat involved, we’ll just report the main result first. In
both cases, we assume that taxes are taken out of the economy and thrown away. In
each, the interest rate in general equilibrium satisfies:


                                          r − g − τ − α = n̄,                                         (18)


so wealth inequality in general equilibrium is

                                                           n̄
                                           η wealth =          .                                      (19)
                                                        n̄ + d¯

       What is going on here? The first intuition comes from the standard Euler equation
for the standard neoclassical growth model with log utility, e.g. r − g = ρ. In particular,
the interest rate moves one-for-one with the growth rate, and r − g is just a constant.
Another feature of log utility is that substitution and income effects offset. This, to-
gether with the fact that we are throwing away the tax revenue in this setup, delivers
the result that the tax rate does not matter for long-run inequality. If taxes are rebated
lump sum, the tax parameter will matter once again for inequality in general; I suspect
that the progressivity of the tax on wealth could also matter more generally.15
  15
    The lump-sum rebate case makes the model more complicated, in that a lump sum rebate adds a
form of income that is not directly proportional to wealth, so we lose the simple exponential growth that
makes this model so easy, though results should still go through asymptotically. Heathcote, Storesletten
and Violante (2014) highlight a related point and note that similar issues arise with progressive taxation.
   26                                   CHARLES I. JONES



   A second intuition is even more appropriate here. Recall that r − g − τ − α is the
growth rate of an individual’s normalized wealth. It is this growth rate that turns out to
equal the rate of population growth, n̄. To see why, look back at equation (10) and recall
that each newborn inherits less than the average amount of capital per person in the
                                          d¯
economy; in fact, they get the fraction n̄+ d¯
                                              . Apart from this cohort effect, each person in
this economy is essentially the same. In particular, in this setup, the size of each cohort
grows at rate n̄, so that the per capita wealth of each generation falls at rate n̄ as we look
at younger and younger cohorts. But this is just another way of saying that normalized
wealth — i.e. taking out macroeconomic growth at rate g — grows over time at rate n̄.
This is why the general equilibrium requires r − g − τ − α = n̄.
   An important implication of this reasoning can now be seen: if there were no pop-
ulation growth in the model, newborns would each inherit the per capita amount of
wealth in the economy. The accumulation of wealth by individuals over time would
correspond precisely to the growth in the per capita wealth that newborns inherit, and
there would be no inequality in the model!
   This section illustrates very nicely an important point about models of Pareto in-
equality: the general equilibrium of the model must be considered, and it can change
the comparative statics. For example, we already noted that in partial equilibrium, an
increase in the population growth rate n̄ lowers Pareto inequality, as the concentration
of wealth gets diluted by more offspring. In general equilibrium, the effect works in
the opposite direction for the reasons discussed above. Similarly, r − g and τ no longer
matter for inequality in general equilibrium.



B6. Details of the Capital Model

Since individual consumption is proportional to wealth, aggregate consumption is as
well: C = αK. For the baseline case, we assume that tax revenue is used to pay for
government services that enter utility in an additively separable way, so the aggregate
resource constraint for this economy is Y = C + I + T , where I is gross investment. The
capital accumulation equation then implies that aggregate growth is gY = A − δ − τ − α,
and therefore per capita growth is g = A − δ − τ − α − n̄.
   The equilibrium interest rate in this model is just the net marginal product of capi-
tal: r = A − δ. Combining these last two equations gives the key result needed above:
                                        PARETO AND PIKETTY                         27


r − g − τ − α = n̄.
       Lump-sum rebate of tax revenue: The case in which the wealth tax is rebated lump
sum is different, however. In this case, the exponential growth of normalized wealth
across ages breaks down, except at the very top for the wealthiest people: the lump sum
rebate is a vanishing fraction of the wealth for the richest households. So the partial
equilibrium equation for η continues to apply, but only at the very top of the wealth
distribution. Now, however, the aggregate resource constraint is Y = C + I, so that all
of the tax revenue comes back into the economy as consumption or investment. In this
case, aggregate growth is gY = A − δ − α, which is invariant to the tax rate in the log
utility case. Now r − g − τ − α = n̄ − τ , and top wealth inequality is given by

                                          lumpsum         n̄ − τ
                                         η wealth     =          .                  (20)
                                                          n̄ + d¯

So what happens to the tax revenue matters crucially for the effect of wealth taxes on
top wealth inequality.16




B7. Details of the Land Model

For the land model, let Pt denote the price (measured in units of output) of one unit
of land. Aggregate wealth is then Wt = Pt K̄. The price of land satisfies a standard
arbitrage equation:
                                                    At Ṗt
                                            r=         + .                          (21)
                                                    Pt  Pt
That is, one can invest P units of output in the bank and earn interest on it, or one can
buy a unit of land, earn the dividend At , and then sell it, pocketing the capital gain.
Along a balanced growth path (no bubbles), this equation implies the capital gain term
equals the growth rate of A, ḡ, so the price of land is pinned down by

                                                      At
                                             Pt =           .                       (22)
                                                     r − ḡ

       Aggregate consumption in this economy can be computed in two ways, and this


  16
       This analsis requires n̄ ≥ τ .
   28                                    CHARLES I. JONES



allows us to solve for the interest rate. First,

                                                 α                α
                       C = αW = αPt K̄ =              · At K̄ =        · Yt .          (23)
                                               r − ḡ           r − ḡ

Alternatively,

                         Ct = Yt − Tt = Yt − τ Wt = Yt − τ Pt K̄
                                     τ
                                                   
                                                          τ
                                                                                      (24)
                            = Yt −        · At K̄ = 1 −          Yt
                                   r − ḡ               r − ḡ

   Equating these two expressions for consumption and noting that gY = ḡ so that
g = ḡ − n̄ gives the required solution for the interest rate: r − g − τ − α = n̄. Wealth
inequality is therefore given by equation (15).
   Lump-sum rebate: If tax revenues are rebated lump sum, then C = Y . Then from
(23), we must have r − ḡ = α, so that r − g − α = n̄ and therefore r − g − τ − α = n̄ − τ ,
and inequality with lump sum rebates is also given by equation (20) in the land version
of the model.



B8. The stationary distribution of the simple birth-death process

Let G(x, t) = Pr [Age > x] denote the complementary form of the age distribution at
                                                      ¯ the distribution evolves over a
time t. With population growth rate n̄ and death rate d,
small time interval ∆t as

                                       ¯
                                  1 − d∆t
                 G(x, t + ∆t) =            · G(x, t) + G(x − ∆x, t) − G(x, t).         (25)
                                  1 + n̄∆t

The first term captures the change from deaths and population growth (to keep the
distribution proper), while the last two terms capture the inflow of younger people into
the higher ages.
                                      1
   Using a Taylor expansion for     1+n̄∆t   ≈ 1 − n̄∆t and ignoring the higher order terms
leads to

           G(x, t + ∆t) − G(x, t)          ¯           G(x, t) − G(x − ∆x, t)
                                  = −(n̄ + d)G(x, t) −                        ,        (26)
                    ∆t                                           ∆x

where we’ve also used the fact that ∆x = ∆t.
                                    PARETO AND PIKETTY                                     29


   Taking the limits as ∆t → 0 gives

                           ∂G(x, t)          ¯            ∂G(x, t)
                                    = −(n̄ + d)G(x, t)) −                                    (27)
                             ∂t                             ∂x

   Setting the time derivative equal to zero and solving for the stationary distribution
yields the desired result:
                                                      ¯
                                       G(x) = e−(n̄+d)x .                                    (28)



References
Allen, Robert C., “Engel’s Pause: A Pessimist’s Guide to the British Industrial Revolution,”
  Economics Series Working Papers 315, University of Oxford, Department of Economics April
  2007.

Aoki, Shuhei and Makoto Nirei, “Pareto Distributions and the Evolution of Top Incomes in the
  U.S,” MPRA Paper 47967, University Library of Munich, Germany July 2013.

Benhabib,    Jess,   “Wealth   Distribution   Overview,”    2014.        NYU    teaching    slides
  http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/benhabib/wealth%20distribution%20theories%20overview3.pdf.

  , Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu, “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal Policy in
  Economies With Finitely Lived Agents,” Econometrica, 01 2011, 79 (1), 123–157.

   and    , “The distribution of wealth and redistributive policies,” 2006 Meeting Papers 368,
  Society for Economic Dynamics December 2006.

Bonnet, Odran, Pierre-Henri Bono, Guillaume Chapelle, and Etienne Wasmer, “Does housing
  capital contribute to inequality? A comment on Thomas Pikettys Capital in the 21st Century,”
  Sciences Po Economics Discussion Papers 2014-07, Sciences Po Departement of Economics
  April 2014.

Bridgman, Benjamin, “Is Labor’s Loss Capital’s Gain? Gross versus Net Labor Shares,” June 2014.
  Bureau of Economic Analysis manuscript.

Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi, “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth,” Journal
  of Political Economy, October 2006, 114 (5), 835–870.

Cantelli, F.P., “Sulle applicazioni del calcolo delle probabilita alla fisica molecolare,” Metron,
  1921, 1 (3), 83–91.
   30                                    CHARLES I. JONES



Castaneda, Ana, Javier Diaz-Gimenez, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, “Accounting for the U.S.
  Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2003, 111 (4), 818–857.

Elsby, Michael WL, Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin, “The Decline of the U.S. Labor Share,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013, 2013 (2), 1–63.

Gabaix, Xavier, “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
  1999, 114 (3), 739–767.

  , “Power Laws in Economics and Finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 255–294.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Optimal Tax Progressivity:
  An Analytical Framework,” NBER Working Papers 19899, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc February 2014.

Huggett, Mark, “Wealth Distribution in Life-Cycle Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  December 1996, 38 (3), 469–494.

Jones, Charles I. and Jihee Kim, “A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income Inequality,” October
  2014. Stanford University manuscript.

Kaldor, Nicholas, “Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth,” in F.A. Lutz and D.C. Hague,
  eds., The Theory of Capital, St. Martins Press, 1961, pp. 177–222.

Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Neiman, “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2013, 129 (1), 61–103.

Krusell, Per and Tony Smith, “Is Piketty’s ‘Second Law of Capitalism’ Fundamental?,” June 2014.
  Institute for International Economic Studies manuscript.

Luttmer, Erzo G.J., “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 08 2007, 122 (3), 1103–1144.

Mitzenmacher, Michael, “A Brief History of Generative Models for Power Law and Lognormal
  Distributions,” Internet Mathematics, 2004, 1 (2).

Moll, Benjamin, “Inequality and Financial Development: A Power-Law Kuznets Curve,” 2012.
  Princeton University working paper.

  , “Lecture 6:    Income and Wealth Distribution,” 2012.              Princeton teaching slides
  http://www.princeton.edu/∼moll/ECO521Web/Lecture6 ECO521 web.pdf.

  , “Why Piketty Says r − g Matters for Inequality,” 2014.             Princeton teaching slides
  http://www.princeton.edu/∼moll/piketty      notes.pdf.
                                   PARETO AND PIKETTY                                   31


Nirei, Makoto, “Pareto Distributions in Economic Growth Models,” IIR Working Paper 09-05,
  Institute of Innovation Research, Hitotsubashi University July 2009.

Oberfield, Ezra and Devesh Raval, “Micro Data and Macro Technology,” manuscript, Princeton
  2014.

Pareto, Vilfredo, Cours d’Economie Politique, Geneva: Droz, 1896.

Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-first Century, Harvard University Press, 2014.

  and Emmanuel Saez, “Income Inequality In The United States, 1913–1998,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, February 2003, 118 (1), 1–39.

   and    , “A Theory of Optimal Capital Taxation,” NBER Working Papers 17989, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc April 2012.

  and Gabriel Zucman, “Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich Countries, 1700-2010,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming 2014, pp. xxx–xxx.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, “Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, January 2000, 3 (1), 1–40.

Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman, “Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913,” July
  2014. U.C. Berkeley slides.

Solow, Robert M., “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, February 1956, 70 (1), 65–94.

Stiglitz, Joseph E, “Distribution of Income and Wealth among Individuals,” Econometrica, July
  1969, 37 (3), 382–97.

Swan, Trevor W., “Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation,” The Economic Record, Novem-
  ber 1956, 32, 334–361.

Tuljapurkar, Shripad, “Stable Population Theory,” in Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume,
  eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, second edition ed., Palgrave MacMillan,
  2008.

Wold, Herman OA and Peter Whittle, “A Model Explaining the Pareto Distribution of Wealth,”
  Econometrica, 1957, pp. 591–595.
