NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOSTERING AND MEASURING SKILLS:
IMPROVING COGNITIVE AND NON-COGNITIVE SKILLS TO PROMOTE LIFETIME SUCCESS
Tim Kautz
James J. Heckman
Ron Diris
Bas ter Weel
Lex Borghans
Working Paper 20749
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20749
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

This report was commissioned by the OECD through its project on Education and Social Progress.
We thank Linor Kiknadze and Edward Sung for valuable research assistance. We received helpful
comments from Richard Boyle, Zidi Chen, Maryclare Griffin, Robert Lerman, Seong Hyeok Moon,
Dan Moran, Maria Rosales, and Indra Wechsberg. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Tim Kautz, James J. Heckman, Ron Diris, Bas ter Weel, and Lex Borghans. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fostering and Measuring Skills: Improving Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills to Promote
Lifetime Success
Tim Kautz, James J. Heckman, Ron Diris, Bas ter Weel, and Lex Borghans
NBER Working Paper No. 20749
December 2014, Revised April 2015
JEL No. D01,I20,J24
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the recent literature on measuring and boosting cognitive and noncognitive skills.
The literature establishes that achievement tests do not adequately capture character skills|personality
traits, goals, motivations, and preferences that are valued in the labor market, in school, and in many
other domains. Their predictive power rivals that of cognitive skills. Reliable measures of character
have been developed. All measures of character and cognition are measures of performance on some
task. In order to reliably estimate skills from tasks, it is necessary to standardize for incentives, effort,
and other skills when measuring any particular skill. Character is a skill, not a trait. At any age, character
skills are stable across different tasks, but skills can change over the life cycle. Character is shaped
by families, schools, and social environments. Skill development is a dynamic process, in which the
early years lay the foundation for successful investment in later years. High-quality early childhood
and elementary school programs improve character skills in a lasting and cost-effective way. Many
of them beneficially affect later-life outcomes without improving cognition. There are fewer long-term
evaluations of adolescent interventions, but workplace-based programs that teach character skills are
promising. The common feature of successful interventions across all stages of the life cycle through
adulthood is that they promote attachment and provide a secure base for exploration and learning for
the child. Successful interventions emulate the mentoring environments offered by successful families.
Tim Kautz
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago IL 60637
tkautz@uchicago.edu
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and University College Dublin and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
Ron Diris
Naamsestraat 69 - Box 3565
3000 Leuven Belgium
ron.diris@kuleuven.be

Bas ter Weel
CPB Netherlands Bureau
for Economic Policy Analysis
P.O.Box 80510
2508 GM Den Haag
The Netherlands
b.ter.weel@cpb.nl
Lex Borghans
Department of Economics and ROA
Maastricht University
P.O. Box 616
NL-6200 MD Maastricht
The Netherlands
lex.borghans@maastrichtuniversity.nl

Executive Summary
This paper reviews the recent literature on measuring and fostering cognitive and
non-cognitive skills. IQ tests and achievement tests do not adequately capture noncognitive skills—personality traits, goals, character, motivations, and preferences that
are valued in the labor market, in school, and in many other domains. For many
outcomes, their predictive power rivals or exceeds that of cognitive skills.
Evidence from the General Educational Development (GED) testing program in the
United States shows the importance of non-cognitive skills. The GED is an achievement
test which dropouts can take to certify that they are equivalent to secondary school
graduates. The program is based on the widely held belief that tests capture the
important skills learned in school. On the surface, the program is successful. Based
on test scores, GED recipients are just as smart as high school graduates. When it
comes to outcomes that matter, such as college completion and labor market success,
GED recipients perform much worse in the labor market and in a variety of other
life domains than traditional secondary school graduates. Achievement tests like the
GED do not adequately capture valuable non-cognitive skills. This evidence should
cause policymakers to think twice about relying on achievement tests to evaluate the
effectiveness of educational systems.
Reliable measures of non-cognitive skills are available, and they are discussed in this
paper. In developing any measure of non-cognitive skills, it is essential to recognize that
all measures of skill are based on performance on some task. Traditional personality
tests are based on the performance of the task of self-description. Performance on
any task depends on multiple skills as well as the effort expended on it. Effort, in
turn, depends on the incentives offered to exert the effort to perform the task. Since
all measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skill are measures of performance on some
task, it is necessary to standardize for incentives, effort, and other skills that determine
performance on the task in measuring any skill, yet this is rarely done in conducting
skill assessments. Standard measures of cognitive skill have been shown to be sensitive
to incentives and levels of other skills. Test scores for young children can be improved

2

by one standard deviation by offering candy for correct answers. The responsiveness
to incentives in turn depends on a child’s levels of conscientiousness. Using measured
behaviors to capture non-cognitive skill is a promising approach that has been shown
to be empirically effective. Such measures are available in administrative data that are
collected routinely by schools and government agencies.
Skills are stable across situations with different incentives, although manifestations
of skills vary with incentives. Though stable at any age, skills are not immutable
traits that are set in stone over the life cycle. They have a genetic basis but are also
shaped by environments, including families, schools, and peers. Skill development is
a dynamic process. The early years are important in shaping all skills and in laying
the foundations for successful investment and intervention in the later years. During
the early years, both cognitive and noncognitive skills are highly malleable. During
the adolescent years, non-cognitive skills are more malleable than cognitive skills. The
differential plasticity of different skills by age has important implications for the design
of effective policies.
This paper reviews a variety of interventions targeted to different stages of the
life cycle. We interpret all of the studies we examine within an economic model of
skill development. While it is difficult to compare different interventions because they
are often multifaceted and target different populations, nonetheless, four conclusions
emerge.
First, the evidence base is larger on the long-term effectiveness of interventions that
start in early childhood and elementary school compared to their adolescent counterparts. Many evaluations of early programs measure a diverse set of outcomes and have
follow-ups lasting more than 20 years. Evidence on adolescent interventions is more
scarce. Follow-ups for them are typically shorter and fewer outcomes are analyzed over
shorter horizons. For this reason, we can draw stronger conclusions about the long-run
efficacy of early programs and how they work.
Second, when evaluating skill enhancement programs it is vital to consider outcomes
other than IQ or achievement test scores. Only interventions that start long before

3

kindergarten begins have been shown to have long-term effects on IQ. If IQ were the
only measure of success, most intervention programs would seem futile. Using a diverse
set of outcomes presents a more optimistic point of view. Many early programs improve
later-life outcomes, even though they do not improve IQ.
These programs work because they foster non-cognitive skills. Some have annual
rates of return that are comparable to those from investments in the stock market.
Parental involvement is an important component of successful early interventions just
as successful adolescent mentoring is an age-appropriate version of parental involvement.
Third, the available evidence suggests that the most successful adolescent remediation programs are not as effective as the most successful early childhood and elementary
school programs, although adolescent mentoring and the provision of information can
be very effective. Building an early base of skills that promote later-life learning and
engagement in school and society is often a better strategy than waiting for problems to occur. Prevention is more effective than remediation if at-risk populations are
sufficiently well targeted.
Fourth, adolescent remediation is possible for children who grow up in disadvantaged environments in their early years. The available evidence suggests that the most
promising adolescent interventions are those that target non-cognitive skills as well as
programs that offer mentoring, guidance and information. Many adolescent programs
that focus on academic skills or temporarily change a participant’s environment are
only successful in the short run although the short-term results can often appear to
be spectacular. Workplace-based programs that teach non-cognitive skills appear to
be effective remedial interventions for adolescents. They motivate acquisition of workrelevant skills and provide for disadvantaged youth the discipline and guidance which
is often missing in their homes or high schools. Successful interventions at any age
emulate the mentoring and attachment that successful families give their children.
Skills enable people. They are capacities to function. Greater levels of skill foster
social inclusion and promote economic and social mobility. They generate economic

4

productivity and create social well-being. Skills give agency to people to shape their
lives, to create new skills and to flourish.

5

1

Introduction

Modern societies rely on written tests to sift and sort people, to evaluate students and schools,
and to assess the performance of entire nations.1 Achievement tests play a prominent role.
The OECD actively promotes PISA tests. In the US, high school dropouts can take a 7and-a-half hour achievement test—the General Educational Development (GED) exam—to
certify that they are equivalent to high school graduates.2
Despite their widespread use, achievement tests are not well understood and their creators were well aware of their limitations (see the discussion in Heckman et al., 2014a).
Achievement tests were developed in the mid-twentieth century as a way to measure a new
concept— “general knowledge”—in an attempt to measure skills that are useful inside and
outside of the classroom.3 Their developers thought that they had designed pencil-and-paper
tests that would predict success in the labor market, in education, and in many other aspects
of life.
Evaluation of the benefits of these tests is circular. Achievement tests are typically validated using IQ tests and grades, and not by their ability to predict important life outcomes.
Fortunately, a recent literature has conducted more meaningful evaluations of these tests
and we report its findings here.
Achievement test scores predict only a small fraction of the variance in later-life success.
For example, adolescent achievement test scores only explain at most 17% of the variability
1

The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) evaluates student performance in math,
science, and reading across countries, and its results attract a lot of media attention and influence policy.
Scores from the year 2000 PISA test led Germany to reevaluate its educational system and introduce a
variety of reforms (Grek, 2009). The creators of the original PISA tests called them literacy tests, not
achievement tests, because PISA was designed to capture how knowledge can be applied to other contexts
(OECD, 2013a). However, this was also the goal of the original achievement tests. We are unable to find any
studies establishing that the original PISA measures were fundamentally different skills from those measured
by achievement tests. Recently, however, PISA 2012 has added some component tests designed to capture
aspects of non-cognitive skills including openness, locus of control, and motivation (OECD, 2013b).
2
See Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014a) for a detailed discussion of the GED program and an
evaluation of its benefits.
3
For histories of achievement tests see Heckman and Kautz (2014c); Quinn (2014).

1

in later-life earnings.4,5 Measurement error accounts for at most 30% of the remaining
variability (see Bound et al., 2001).
Achievement tests do not adequately capture non-cognitive skills such as perseverance
(“grit”), conscientiousness, self-control, trust, attentiveness, self-esteem and self-efficacy, resilience to adversity, openness to experience, empathy, humility, tolerance of diverse opinions,
and the ability to engage productively in society, which are valued in the labor market, in
school, and in society at large. Until recently these skills have largely been ignored in evaluations of schools and interventions. However, in recent research economists and psychologists
have constructed measures of these skills and provide evidence that they are stable across
situations and predict meaningful life outcomes.6
Skills are not traits set in stone at birth and determined solely by genes. They can be
fostered. Cognitive and non-cognitive skills change with age and with instruction. Interventions to improve skills are effective to different degrees for different skills at different ages.
Importantly, non-cognitive skills are more malleable at later ages than cognitive skills.
This paper reviews the recent evidence from economics and personality psychology on
the predictive power of cognitive and non-cognitive skills and how to foster them. A growing
body of empirical research shows that non-cognitive skills rival IQ in predicting educational
attainment, labor market success, health, and criminality.7 Both IQ and non-cognitive skills
predict scores on achievement tests but non-cognitive skills predict outcomes above and
beyond their effects in predicting scores on achievement tests.8 Non-cognitive skills are
universally valued across all cultures, religions and societies.
4

See Heckman and Kautz (2012). IQ tests alone explain at most 7% of this variability.
See Bound, Brown, and Mathiowetz (2001).
6
See the studies by Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman, and ter Weel (2008) and Almlund, Duckworth,
Heckman, and Kautz (2011). The modern literature traces back to Bowles and Gintis (1976), and Bowles,
Gintis, and Osborne (2001). An important study in sociology is the work of Peter Mueser reported in Jencks
(1979). Work in psychology going back to Terman, Baldwin, Bronson, DeVoss, Fuller, Lee Kelley, Lima,
Marshall, Moore, Raubenheimer, Ruch, Willoughby, Benson Wyman, and Hazeltine Yates (1925) shows that
personality skills predict life outcomes (see also Murray, 1938; Terman, Oden, Bayley, Marshall, McNemar,
and Sullivan, 1947; and the analysis in Gensowski, 2014).
7
See Heckman and Kautz (2012, 2014a,c), Almlund et al. (2011), Borghans et al. (2008), and Roberts,
Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, and Goldberg (2007) for reviews.
8
See Kautz and Zanoni (2014).
5

2

Because both cognitive and non-cognitive skills can be shaped, and change over the life
cycle, they are properly called skills. An older terminology in psychology refers to them as
“traits,” conveying a sense of immutability or permanence, possibly due to their heritable
nature. The distinction between skills and traits is not just a matter of semantics. It suggests
new and productive avenues for public policy.
Skills enable people. They are capacities to function. Greater levels of skill foster social
inclusion and promote economic and social mobility, economic productivity and well-being.
Skills give agency to people to shape their lives, to create new skills and to flourish.
There are reliable ways to measure skills, and there are proven ways to enhance them
and to evaluate efforts to foster them. Recent research establishes the existence of critical
and sensitive periods in the formation of skills over the life cycle. Sensitive periods are those
periods where investment is especially productive; critical periods are those periods when
investment is essential. Critical and sensitive periods differ across skills. Investments should
target those periods.
Effective strategies for promoting human development are based on three guiding principles:
1. The powerful role of families and general social environments in shaping skills;
2. The multiplicity of skills required for successful functioning in society. A core set of
skills promotes success in many aspects of life. Different tasks require different skills in
different levels and proportions. Successful people pursue the tasks where their skills give
them comparative advantage along with personal satisfaction;
3. The technology of skill formation: that skills together with investments beget further
skills (Cunha and Heckman, 2007, 2008; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2010).
Effective policies to promote skills straddle the missions of cabinet agencies and draw
on the wisdom of many academic disciplines. They require broad thinking and recognition
that both cognitive and non-cognitive skills are important ingredients of successful lives and
3

are malleable to different degrees at different stages of the life cycle. They recognize that
different skills cross-fertilize each other. Focusing on one dimension of human skills to the
exclusion of other dimensions or on one stage of the life cycle to the exclusion of others misses
fundamental aspects of human performance and development. Narrowly focused policies fail
to capture synergisms in the expression and development of skills.
Policymakers in the OECD share a common desire to develop human potential. However,
current discussions focus on promoting skills by improving schools. Within this very narrow
purview, the success of schools is measured by scores on the exams of the students in them.
This mindset is a consequence of very limited conceptualizations of human capabilities that
assumes that achievement tests capture the important life skills. It misses important dimensions of human flourishing. While schools are important, they are far from being the
principal source of the skills that matter.

1.1

Discarding Obsolete Notions and Embracing the Findings of
Recent Research

In designing effective human development strategies, it is essential to discard obsolete views
about the origin and malleability of “traits.” What used to be regarded as traits fixed at
conception are now understood to be skills that can be augmented through guidance and
instruction. Raw intelligence is not fixed solely by parental genes, although heritability
plays an important role in shaping it. It is boosted by quality parenting and by caring
environments. It becomes solidified around the time of puberty.
Non-cognitive skills can also be shaped. Compared to raw intelligence, they are more
malleable until later ages. Neuroscience shows that this malleability is associated with the
slow development of the prefrontal cortex.9 When attempted, adolescent remediation should
focus on boosting non-cognitive skills by effective mentoring and guidance.
Skill development is a dynamic process. Boosting non-cognitive skills early in life in9

Walsh (2005).

4

creases the benefits of education later in life. More persistent students learn more. The
levels of cognitive and non-cognitive skills at any age depend in part on levels of those skills
at younger ages which depend on earlier investments.10
Inequality among families in parenting and lack of support given to children in schools are
major contributors to inequality in adult skills. In light of this evidence, it is of great concern
that so many children around the world are being born into disadvantage as measured by
the quality of parenting and that the trend appears to be accelerating. Everywhere, the
traditional family with its secure environment for rearing children is under challenge.11 A
major casualty of this trend is the quality of parenting available to disadvantaged children. It
is unreasonable to expect schools to take on the huge burden of supplementing compromised
family environments in addition to their traditional job of educating children.
Evidence from the social and biological sciences establishes the importance of the early
years in fostering the skills that promote human flourishing. Families do much more than
pass on their genes or put food on the table.
Human development is a dynamic process that starts in the womb. Environments and
skills interact to foster the development of later life skills and create who we are and what we
become. The foundations for adult success are laid down early in life. Many children raised
in disadvantaged environments start behind and stay behind. Poverty has lasting effects on
brain development, health, and cognitive and non-cognitive skills.12 Gaps in skills emerge
early, before formal schooling begins. Waiting until kindergarten to address these gaps is
a poor strategy. It creates achievement gaps for disadvantaged children that are costly to
close.
Family disadvantage is poorly assessed by conventional measures of poverty that focus
on family income, wealth, and parental education. The absence of parental guidance, nourishment, and encouragement is the most damaging condition for child development. Quality
10

Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2008); Cunha et al. (2010).
See McLanahan (2004) and Heckman (2008) for American data and OECD (2011) for evidence around
the world.
12
See, e.g., the evidence in Shonkoff and Phillips (2000) and Heckman (2008).
11

5

parenting—stimulation, attachment, encouragement, and support—is the true measure of
child advantage, and not the traditional measures of poverty commonly used in policy discussions.
Children from disadvantaged homes are much more likely to drop out of high school.
Single-parent families, compared to two-parent families, often give less cognitive and emotional stimulation to their children (see, e.g., the evidence in Moon, 2012, 2014a), and as
a consequence their children have diminished cognitive and non-cognitive skills.13 The evidence summarized in this paper suggests that skill deficits can be prevented by improving
the early lives of disadvantaged children.
Yet, while important and often neglected in American public policy, the early years do
not fully determine adult success. Children are resilient and quality parenting throughout
childhood fosters the development and expression of skills. Schooling shapes both cognitive
and non-cognitive skills. Certain adolescent remediation programs appear to be effective.
A variety of adolescent interventions attempt to remediate early-life skill deficits. Alternatives to the traditional high school curriculum provide potential dropouts with training
suitable to their interests and skills. Such programs can mold non-cognitive skills, even if it
is not their primary goal. Other interventions attempt to directly remediate non-cognitive
deficits after students drop out of school.
Heckman and Kautz (2014a,c) provide a sober account of what is known. They compare
different skill enhancement strategies and consider the features that make some programs
more successful than others. We summarize and update their analysis in this document.
Unfortunately, the field of human development is marred by overzealous advocates who
claim miracle fixes from their favored programs. The advocates focus on one slice of the life
cycle to the exclusion of others. Slogans often replace hard evidence. Most evaluations of
interventions have only short-term follow-ups. Many differ in their measures of outcomes
and skills and target different demographic groups, so it is difficult to compare alternative
13

See, e.g., Carneiro and Heckman (2003), Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), and Cunha
and Heckman (2009).

6

programs. Despite these limitations, several studies suggest that interventions during the
preschool years or in kindergarten improve non-cognitive skills in a lasting way, some with
annual rates of return that are comparable to those from investments in the stock market
in normal times.14 Several adolescent interventions are promising, particularly those that
combine education with work-related experience.15 There is also some hint that programs
that provide information to adolescents can be effective.

1.2

The Organization of the Rest of the Paper

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines cognitive and noncognitive skills and discusses how they are measured. Section 3 summarizes the evidence on
the predictive power of non-cognitive skills. Section 4 presents an analysis of the skills needed
in the workforce, as garnered from surveys of employers. Section 5 presents a framework
for analyzing investment in skills over the life cycle. Sections 6 – 11 review evidence about
the efficacy of education, parental investment, and interventions in improving non-cognitive
skills from preschool, elementary school, and adolescence. Section 12 concludes.

2

Measures of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills

2.1

Cognitive Skills

Measures of cognition have been developed and refined over the past century. Cognitive
ability has multiple facets.16 Psychologists distinguish between fluid intelligence (the rate at
which people learn) and crystallized intelligence (acquired knowledge).17 Achievement tests
are designed to capture crystallized intelligence,18 whereas IQ tests like Raven’s progressive
14

See Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010a). The rates of return incorporate the benefits
to individuals and to society.
15
See, e.g., Kemple and Willner (2008) and Roder and Elliot (2011).
16
See Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) for discussions.
17
See, e.g., Nisbett, Aronson, Blair, Dickens, Flynn, Halpern, and Turkheimer (2012).
18
Roberts, Goff, Anjoul, Kyllonen, Pallier, and Stankov (2000).

7

matrices (1962) are designed to capture fluid intelligence.19,20
This new understanding of cognition is not widely appreciated. Many use IQ tests,
standardized achievement tests, and even grades as interchangeable measures of “cognitive
ability” or intelligence.21 Scores on IQ tests and standardized achievement tests are strongly
correlated with each other and with grades.22 However, these general indicators of “cognition” measure different skills and capture different facets of cognitive ability.23,24 In the
following section we show that scores on these tests are also influenced by effort and noncognitive skills.

2.2

Measuring Non-cognitive Skills

Throughout this paper we use the term non-cognitive skills to describe the personal attributes not thought to be measured by IQ tests or achievement tests. These attributes
go by many names in the literature, including soft skills, personality traits, non-cognitive
abilities, character skills, and socio-emotional skills. These different names connote different properties.25 “Traits” suggests a sense of permanence and possibly also of heritability.
“Skills” suggests that these attributes can be learned. In reality, the extent to which these
personal attributes can change lies on a spectrum. Both cognitive and non-cognitive skills
can change and be changed over the life cycle, but through different mechanisms and with
different ease at different ages. We use the term skill throughout this paper because all
19

Raven, Raven, and Court (1988). The high correlation between scores on intelligence tests and scores on
achievement tests is in part due to the fact that both require intelligence and knowledge. Fluid intelligence
promotes the acquisition of crystallized intelligence. Common developmental factors affect the formation of
both skills.
20
Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) discuss more disaggregated facets of cognitive
ability.
21
This practice is true even among leading professional psychologists. For example, all of these measures
are assumed to capture intelligence in Flynn (2007), Nisbett (2009), and Nisbett et al. (2012).
22
See Heckman and Kautz (2012).
23
See Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Humphries (2011a).
24
It is an irony of the testing literature that high school grades are more predictive of first-year college
performance than SAT scores (Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson, 2009). The SAT and related tests were
once thought to be a more objective measure of student quality than high school grades (Lemann, 1999).
25
See Almlund et al. (2011) and Borghans et al. (2008) for comparisons of some of these different taxonomies.

8

attributes can be shaped.
Although non-cognitive skills are overlooked in most contemporary policy discussions
and in economic models of choice behavior, personality psychologists have studied these
skills for the past century. Psychologists primarily measure non-cognitive skills by using
self-reported surveys or observer reports. They have arrived at a relatively well-accepted
taxonomy of non-cognitive skills called the Big Five, with the acronym OCEAN, which
stands for: Openness to Experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and
Neuroticism. Table 1 defines these skills and their multiple facets.26 Some argue that the
Big Five are the “longitude and latitude” of non-cognitive skills, by which all more narrowly
defined skills may be categorized.27
While the Big Five measures are now widely used in psychology, there are several other
taxonomies, including the Big Three, the MPQ, and the Big Nine. They are conceptually
and empirically related to the Big Five.28 Other taxonomies, including psychopathology
as measured by the DSM-IV and measures of temperament, have also been related to the
Big Five.29 Almlund et al. (2011) and Becker, Deckers, Dohmen, Falk, and Kosse (2012)
summarize evidence showing that economic preference parameters are not closely related to
the Big Five measures and apparently represent different attributes. Preference parameters
along with the non-cognitive skills measured by psychologists govern behavior.30

26

See, e.g., Borghans et al. (2008).
Costa and McCrae (1992a).
28
See Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011) for comparisons of these taxonomies.
29
See, e.g., Cloninger, Svrakic, Bayon, and Przybeck (1999).
30
A deeper question, as yet not systematically investigated in the literature in economics or psychology, is
whether the “traits” captured by the alternative measurement systems are the expression of a more basic set
of preferences or goals. McAdams (2006) adds goals to the list of possible traits. Almlund et al. (2011) and
Heckman and Kautz (2012) develop a model in which preferences and endowments of skills determine the
effort applied to tasks. As shown in the next section, performance on tasks is the source of any measurement
of a trait. Hence, in their framework, measures of skills are determined, in part, by preferences.
27

9

10

“The tendency to be
organized, responsible, and
hardworking”

“An orientation of one’s
interests and energies toward
the outer world of people
and things rather than the
inner world of subjective
experience; characterized by
positive affect and
sociability”

“The tendency to act in a
cooperative, unselfish
manner”

Conscientiousness

Extraversion

Agreeableness

Trust (forgiving), Straight-forwardness
(not demanding), Altruism (warm),
Compliance (not stubborn), Modesty
(not show-off), and
Tender-mindedness (sympathetic)

Warmth (friendly), Gregariousness
(sociable), Assertiveness
(self-confident), Activity (energetic),
Excitement seeking (adventurous),
and Positive emotions (enthusiastic)

Competence (efficient), Order
(organized), Dutifulness (not careless),
Achievement striving (ambitious),
Self-discipline (not lazy), and
Deliberation (not impulsive)

Fantasy (imaginative), Aesthetic
(artistic), Feelings (excitable), Actions
(wide interests), Ideas (curious), and
Values (unconventional)

Facets (and correlated skill adjective)

Empathy, Perspective
taking, Cooperation, and
Competitiveness

Grit, Perseverance, Delay of
gratification, Impulse
control, Achievement
striving, Ambition, and
Work ethic

Related Skills

Childhood

Temperament

Irritability∗ , Aggressiveness, and Willfulness

Surgency, Social dominance, Social vitality, Sensation seeking, Shyness*, Activity*, Positive emotionality, and Sociability/affiliation

Attention/(lack of) distractibility, Effortful control, Impulse control/delay of
gratification, Persistence, Activity∗

Sensory sensitivity, Pleasure in lowintensity activities, Curiosity

Analogous
Skills

Neuroticism/
Emotional
Stability

Internal versus External, LoEmotional stability is
Fearfulness/behavioral
inhibition,
Anxiety (worrying), Hostility
cus of control, Core self“Predictability and
Shyness∗ , Irritability∗ , Frustration,
(irritable), Depression (not contented),
evaluation,
Self-esteem, Self-efficacy,
(Lack of) soothability, Sadness
consistency in emotional
Self-consciousness (shy), Impulsiveness
Optimism, and Axis I
reactions, with absence of
(moody), Vulnerability to stress (not
psychopathologies (mental
rapid mood changes.”
self-confident)
disorders) including
Neuroticism is “a chronic
depression and anxiety
level of emotional instability
disorders
and proneness to
psychological distress”
Notes: ∗ These temperament attritbutes may be related to two Big Five factors. Facets specified by the NEO-PI-R personality inventory (Costa and McCrae, 1992b). Adjectives
in parentheses from the Adjective Check List (Gough and Heilbrun, 1983).
Source: Table adapted from John and Srivastava (1999).

Openness to
Experience

American Psychology
Association Dictionary
Description
“The tendency to be open to
new aesthetic, cultural, or
intellectual experiences”

Big Five
Personality Factor

Table 1 The Big Five Domains and Their Facets

2.3

A Task-Based Framework for Identifying and Measuring Skills

A leading personality psychologist defines personality (non-cognitive) traits (skills) as follows:
Personality traits are the relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors that reflect the tendency to respond in certain ways under certain circumstances. (Roberts, 2009, 140)
Roberts’ definition of personality (“non-cognitive” skills) and the one favored by Almlund
et al. (2011) suggests that all psychological measurements are calibrated on measured behavior or “tasks” broadly defined. A task could be taking an IQ test, answering a personality
questionnaire, performing a job, attending school, completing secondary school, participating in crime, or performing in an experiment run by a social scientist. Figure 1 depicts
how performance on a task can depend on incentives, effort, and cognitive and non-cognitive
skills. Performance on different tasks depends on these components to different degrees.
People can compensate for their shortfalls in one dimension by having strengths in other
dimensions.
Figure 1 Determinants of Task Performance



 





 


  


11


  



Many believe that personality skills can only be assessed by self-reported questionnaires
that elicit skills like the Big Five (see John, 2000; John and Srivastava, 1999 for one widely
used questionnaire). However, performance on any task or any observed behavior can be
used to measure personality and other skills.31 For example, completing high school requires
many other skills besides those measured by achievement tests, including showing up in
school, paying attention, and behaving in class.32
Inferring skills from performance on tasks requires standardizing all of the other contributing factors that produce the observed behaviors. The inability to parse and localize
behaviors that depend on a single skill or ability gives rise to a fundamental problem of
assessing the contribution of any particular skill to the successful performance on any task
(or measure). This problem is commonly ignored in empirical research that studies how
cognitive and non-cognitive skills affect outcomes.33
There are two distinct issues that need to be addressed in designing measures of skills
based on performance of any task. First, behavior depends on incentives created by situations. Different incentives elicit different amounts of effort on the tasks used to measure
skills. Accurately measuring non-cognitive skills requires standardizing for the effort applied
in any task. Second, performance on most tasks depends on multiple skills. Not standardizing for incentives and other relevant skills that determine performance on a particular task
used to measure a particular skill can produce misleading estimates of that particular skill.
These issues are empirically relevant. For example, incentives partly determine scores
on IQ tests. Studies conducted over the past 40 years show that incentives, like money or
candy, can increase IQ scores, particularly among low-IQ individuals. The black–white gap
31

See Almlund et al. (2011).
The idea of using behaviors to measure non-cognitive is old. Ralph Tyler suggested using measures
of behavior to capture non-cognitive skills in his first proposal for the National Assessment of Educational
Progress tests. See Tyler (1973) and Rothstein, Jacobsen, and Wilder (2008). This idea is being been
pursued in the recent literature (Heckman, Humphries, Urzúa, and Veramendi, 2011; Jackson, 2013). See
Kautz and Zanoni (2014) for a recent application of this idea. We discuss this approach more extensively in
Section 2.5.
33
See Borghans et al. (2011a), Almlund et al. (2011), and Heckman and Kautz (2012) for discussions of
this problem.
32

12

in IQ can be completely eliminated by giving M&M candies for correct answers.34 However,
there is no evidence that this incentive-induced performance persists. It has yet to be shown
that creating incentives for performance on one test improves performance on subsequent
tests, or in any other life task. Indeed, there is some evidence that such incentives, in fact,
may worsen subsequent performance (Deci and Ryan, 1985; Ryan and Deci, 2000).
Not all persons respond with equal strength to incentives. Research by Borghans et al.
(2008) and Segal (2012) shows that the responsiveness of persons to incentives on IQ and
achievement tests depends on their non-cognitive skills. Duckworth, Quinn, Lynam, Loeber,
and Stouthamer-Loeber (2011) show motivation of test takers predicts IQ scores.
The recent literature shows that non-cognitive skills predict standardized achievement
test scores, which some psychologists assume are good measures of intelligence.35 Figure 2
(based on Dutch data) shows how the variability across persons in the scores on one achievement test, the Differential Aptitudes Test (DAT),36 are determined by IQ and non-cognitive
measures. Non-cognitive skills explain a substantial portion of the variability across persons in DAT scores. Non-cognitive skills explain the variance in achievement scores above
and beyond the variance that IQ explains when both measures of non-cognitive skill and
IQ are included in a regression. These findings caution the interpretation that standardized
achievement tests only measure cognitive ability. They also capture non-cognitive skills.37
Ironically, The Bell Curve by Herrnstein and Murray, which uses an achievement test (the
Armed Forces Qualification Test, AFQT) as a measure of intelligence, implicitly shows the
power of both cognitive and non-cognitive in shaping life outcomes in the United States.
34

See Ayllon and Kelly (1972); Borghans, Meijers, and ter Weel (2008); Breuning and Zella (1978);
Clingman and Fowler (1976); Edlund (1972); Holt and Hobbs (1979); Larson, Saccuzzo, and Brown (1994);
Segal (2008). This evidence is summarized in Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011).
35
See, e.g., Nisbett (2009).
36
The correlation between DAT and the widely used Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores
in the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) is 0.75 (Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and
Humphries, 2011b). Friedman and Streicher (1985) estimate correlations between 0.65 and 0.82 in a sample
of high school sophomores and juniors. Kettner (1976) estimates correlations between DAT and the AFQT
subtests of 0.76 to 0.89 in a sample of juniors and seniors.
37
In the Stella Maris data, Openness to Experience is strongly correlated with IQ. See Borghans et al.
(2011b).

13

However, measures of non-cognitive skills beyond achievement tests are predictive in explaining outcomes beyond the predictions based on achievement tests (see Heckman, Humphries,
and Veramendi, 2014; Kautz and Zanoni, 2014).
Figure 2 Decomposing Variance Explained for Achievement Tests and Grades into IQ and
Non-Cognitive Skills: Stella Maris Secondary School, Maastricht, Holland

Source: Borghans et al. (2011a).
Note: Grit is a measure of persistence on tasks (Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews, and Kelly, 2007).

14

2.4

Reference Bias

Answers from self-reports can be misleading when comparing levels of personality skills across
different groups of people. Most personality assessments do not anchor their measurements
in any objective outcome.38 For example, the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP) asks
respondents to rate themselves on the following statement:“I see myself as someone who
tends to be lazy” (Lang, John, Lüdtke, Schupp, and Wagner, 2011). The scale ranges from
1 = “strongly disagree” to 7 = “strongly agree.” In answering this question, people must
interpret the definition of “lazy,” which likely involves comparing themselves to other people.
If different groups have different standards or reference points, comparing traits across groups
can be highly misleading. Laziness may mean different things to different groups of people.
This measurement problem—sometimes called reference bias—is empirically important.39
Schmitt, Allik, McCrae, and Benet-Martı́nez (2007) administer a Big Five personality questionnaire to groups of people in a variety of different countries. Using their estimates, Figure 3
shows how Organization of Economic Cooperation of Development (OECD) countries rank
(from high to low) in Conscientiousness – the tendency to be hard-working and persistent.
The bars display the average number of hours that people work in the country.
At first glance the results are surprising. South Korea ranks second to last in terms
of Conscientiousness but also ranks first in the number of hours worked. South Korea is
not an anomaly. Country-level reports of Big Five Conscientiousness are unrelated to the
number of hours worked. The rank correlation between hours worked and Conscientiousness
across countries is negative, though statistically insignificant.40 This finding contrasts with
studies showing that non-cognitive skills tend to be positively related with labor supply
within individual countries.41
38

These are called Likert scales (Likert, 1932).
Reference bias is also problematic in health surveys that use self-reported, subjective health assessments.
See Groot (2000).
40
r = −0.07 (p = 0.73).
41
See the studies summarized in Almlund et al. (2011).
39

15

Rank in Big Five Conscientiousness
(High to Low)

Figure 3 National Rank in Big Five Conscientiousness and Average Annual Hours Worked

Finland 1
United States 2
Chile 3
France 4
Slovenia 5
Canada 6
Turkey 7
Italy 8
Portugal 9
Greece 10
United Kingdom 11
Spain 12
Austria 13
Germany 14
Poland 15
Australia 16
Estonia 17
Mexico 18
Switzerland 19
New Zealand 20
Netherlands 21
Belgium 22
Czech Republic 23
Slovakia 24
South Korea 25
Japan 26
1300

1500

1700

1900

2100

2300

2500

Annual Hours Worked

Source: The Conscientiousness ranks come from Schmitt et al. (2007). These measures were taken in 2001 (Schmitt, 2002).
The hours worked estimates come from Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).
Note: Several countries are omitted due to lack of data.

These findings are relevant for constructing measures of non-cognitive skills. Granting
that achievement tests miss important skills, would the self-reported Big Five be a useful
supplement to school evaluations? The possibility of reference bias suggests that it might
not. Self-reports of Conscientiousness might measure different things for different schools.
Psychologists have attempted to address this problem.42 Some surveys include vignettebased questions that attempt to standardize for aspects of the culture or situation. They
attempt to frame questions so that the people in the survey answer within a common situation. However, this approach might not work well for evaluating schools, especially if
teachers have incentives to coach children on taking these tests so that they score better and
give answers perceived to be positive. Direct use of standard psychological measures can be
42
For further discussion of reference bias, see Duckworth (2012); Goldammer (2010); Heine, Buchtel, and
Norenzayan (2008); Heine, Kitayama, Lehman, Takata, Ide, Leung, and Matsumoto (2001); Heine, Lehman,
Peng, and Greenholtz (2002); Naumann and John (2011); Peng, Nisbett, and Wong (1997); and Schmitt
et al. (2007).

16

problematic.43 We consider next a different strategy based on observations of behavior and
not on responses to questionnaires administered by psychologists.

2.5

Measuring Skills Using Behaviors

Ralph Tyler, one of the two scholars credited with developing achievement tests, recognized
their limitations.44 He suggested using measures of behavior such as performance, participation in student activities, and other observations by teachers and school administrators to
complement achievement tests when evaluating students and schools. Several recent papers
demonstrate that this is a promising approach. Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) show
that teacher ratings of elementary schoolchildren’s behaviors are strong predictors of adult
outcomes and that early childhood interventions promote the non-cognitive skills measured
by these ratings. Heckman et al. (2014) estimate the causal effect of cognitive and socioemotional (non-cognitive) skills on a variety of outcomes. They measure socio-emotional
(non-cognitive) skills using risky and reckless behaviors measured in the adolescent years.45
They develop and apply methods to use high school grades to measure both cognitive and
non-cognitive skills. They show that non-cognitive skills promote educational attainment,
beneficial labor market outcomes, and health.
Jackson (2013) studies the effect of teachers on student cognitive and non-cognitive skills.
In a fashion similar to Heckman et al. (2011, revised 2014), Jackson measures cognitive skills
using achievement test scores, while measuring noncognitive skills using absences, suspensions, grades, and grade progression. These measures of non-cognitive skills predict adult
outcomes with a strength similar to measures of cognitive ability. His measures of non43

In an attempt to address reference bias, some psychologists measure skills using behaviors. Heine
et al. (2008) examine cross-country differences in Conscientiousness using objective measures, including
walking speed, postal workers’ speed, and the accuracy of clocks in public banks. To measure walking speed,
researchers timed how long it took for a random sample of people to walk 60 feet in public areas. Postal
workers’ speed was assessed by measuring how long it took for postal workers to sell stamps.
44
See Heckman and Kautz (2014c).
45
The measure of risky and reckless behavior is based on whether adolescents engaged in any of the
following behaviors: stealing from a store, purposefully damaging property, taking something worth less
than $50, or conning someone.

17

cognitive skills are commonly available from the administrative records of schools. Kautz
and Zanoni (2014) use early measures of behavior in school to predict graduation and college
attendance.
Similar to Ralph Tyler’s suggestion of using participation in extracurricular activities to
measure noncognitive skills, Lleras (2008) measures noncognitive skills in part by using tenth
grade participation in sports, academic clubs, and fine arts activities. Participation in these
activities predicts educational attainment 10 years later, even after controlling for cognitive
ability as measured by achievement tests.
Criminologists have debated about whether it is better to measure self-control with selfreported psychological scales or with objective behaviors. Gottfredson and Hirschi (1990)
launched a series of studies on the link between self-control and crime. They claim that a
single factor, self-control, predicts much of the variance in criminal outcomes.
There is a sharp divide in this literature. Subsequent studies have measured self-control
using psychological scales, while others have used behavioral measures. A meta-analysis by
Pratt and Cullen (2000) finds that behavioral measures are at least as good at predicting
crime as are measures based on self-reported taxonomies. In a similar vein, Benda (2005)
uses both types of measures in the same study and finds that behavioral measures predict
crime better than psychological scales.
Hirschi and Gottfredson (1993) suggest that objective behavioral measures might be
preferred to self-reports, partly because the act of filling out a survey requires some level of
self-control. Answering survey questions is in itself a task that relies on skills beyond the
ones targeted by the survey.
Some criticize this approach and argue that it is tautological to use measures of behavior
to predict other behaviors even though the measures are taken early in life to predict later
life behaviors.46 As suggested by Figure 1, all tasks or behaviors can be used to infer a
skill as long as the measurement accounts for other skills and aspects of the situation. In
46

See the discussion in Pratt and Cullen (2000) and Benda (2005).

18

addition, many of the recent studies in economics use early measures of behaviors to predict
behaviors in adulthood. (See, e.g., Heckman et al., 2014, 2013). Self-reported scales should
not be assumed to be more reliable than behaviors, although personality psychologists often
assume so. The question is which measurements are most predictive and which can be
implemented in practice. The literature suggests that there are objective measurements of
non-cognitive skills that are not plagued by reference bias.

2.6

Are Non-Cognitive Skills Stable?

Many have questioned whether there are stable non-cognitive skills, i.e., whether people
exhibit the same non-cognitive skills across different situations at a fixed point in time.
The publication of Walter Mischel’s 1968 book, Personality and Assessment, gave rise to a
heated “personality–situation” debate within psychology, which pitted social psychologists
who favored situational factors as primary determinants of behavior against personality
psychologists who considered stable personality (non-cognitive) traits (skills) as more consequential. Mischel argued that aspects of situations overshadow any effect of personality
(non-cognitive) traits (skills) on behavior. Ironically, Mischel himself later demonstrated
the stability of non-cognitive skills (as measured by the performance of subjects in demonstrating self-control in early childhood) over the life cycle in his celebrated “marshmallow
experiment.”47 Oblivious to this evidence, behavioral economists continue to echo Mischel’s
1968 claim. (See, e.g., Thaler, Mullainathan, and Kahneman, 2008).
A large body of evidence reviewed in Almlund et al. (2011) shows that stable noncognitive skills exist and are predictive of many behaviors.48 An early paper by Epstein
(1979) presents compelling evidence that, averaging over tasks and situations, people act
47

A participant (usually a child) was given a marshmallow. The experimenter left the room and told
the participant that he or she would receive a second marshmallow if he or she resisted consuming the
marshmallow until the experimenter returns. The length of time that the participant waits is a measure
of short-term discounting. The children who could wait had much better lifetime outcomes. (For a recent
discussion of this study, see Mischel, Ayduk, Berman, Casey, Gotlib, Jonides, Kross, Teslovich, Wilson,
Zayas, and Shoda, 2011.)
48
See the special issue of Journal of Research in Personality (2009) entitled “Personality and Assessment
at Age 40 ” for a recent discussion.

19

in a predictable fashion with a high level of reliability of average behavior (“measured noncognitive skills”) across situations.49
In addition, measures of non-cognitive skills tend to be about 30%–60% heritable, suggesting that something tied to the person, rather than the situation, influences behavior
(Bouchard and Loehlin, 2001).50 Evidence from neuroscience suggests that expression of different skills is linked to different regions of the brain (see Canli, 2006, and DeYoung, Hirsh,
Shane, Papademetris, Rajeevan, and Gray, 2010). Non-cognitive skills are not epiphenomena.

3

The Predictive Power of Non-Cognitive Skills

3.1

Correlational Evidence

A substantial body of evidence shows that non-cognitive skills predict a wide range of life
outcomes, including educational achievement, labor market outcomes, health, and criminality. For many outcomes, the predictive power of non-cognitive skills rivals that of measures
of cognitive ability. Of the Big Five, Conscientiousness—the tendency to be organized, responsible, and hardworking—is the most widely predictive across a variety of outcomes.
(See Almlund et al., 2011; Borghans et al., 2008; Heckman and Kautz, 2012; Roberts et al.,
2007). Conscientiousness predicts years of schooling with the same strength as measures of
intelligence (Almlund et al., 2011).
Aspects of job performance are also related to academic performance. Both require completing work on a schedule and involve intelligence to varying degrees. As with academic
performance, numerous studies and meta-analyses have found that Conscientiousness is associated with job performance and wages (Barrick and Mount, 1991; Hogan and Holland,
49

R2 of 0.6–0.8, where R2 is a measure of variance explained.
Devlin, Daniels, and Roeder (1997) suggest that traditional estimates of the heritability of IQ may be
inflated because they fail to take into account the effect of the environment on conditions in the maternal
womb. See also Rutter (2006) and an emerging literature on epigenetics (Jablonka and Raz, 2009).
50

20

2003; Nyhus and Pons, 2005; Salgado, 1997). Figure 4 presents correlations of the Big Five
and IQ with job performance. Of the Big Five factors, Conscientiousness is the most strongly
associated with job performance but is about half as predictive as IQ. Conscientiousness,
however, may play a more ubiquitous role than IQ. The importance of IQ increases with job
complexity (the information processing requirements of the job). Cognitive skills are more
important for professors, scientists, and senior managers than for semiskilled or unskilled
laborers (Schmidt and Hunter, 2004). The importance of Conscientiousness does not vary
much with job complexity (Barrick and Mount, 1991); this suggests that it applies to a wider
spectrum of jobs.
Figure 4 Associations with Job Performance

Emotional stability
Agreeableness
Extraversion
Conscientiousness
Openness
Intelligence
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Correlation
Source: The correlations reported for personality traits come from a meta-analysis conducted by Barrick and Mount (1991).
The correlation reported for intelligence comes from Schmidt and Hunter (2004).
Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring, and measurement error. Job
performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data, and training proficiency. The authors do report the timing
of the measurements of personality relative to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on Conscientiousness is the only
one statistically significant, with a lower bound on the 90% credibility value of 0.10. The value for intelligence is a raw correlation.

21

Measures of non-cognitive skills rival IQ and measures of socioeconomic status in predicting longevity.51 Roberts et al. (2007) review evidence from 34 different studies on the
predictive validity of the Big Five personality measures, relative to that of cognitive ability
and socioeconomic status. Most studies they survey control for relevant background factors,
including gender and severity of disease. Roberts and colleagues convert the results of each
study into correlation coefficients that can be compared across studies. Figure 5 presents
results from their analyses. Conscientiousness is a stronger predictor of longevity than any
other Big Five trait and a stronger predictor than either IQ or socioeconomic status.52 In
general, skills related to Conscientiousness, Openness to Experience, and Agreeableness are
associated with longer lives.53 The magnitudes of the relationships vary across studies.
51

For a recent study, see Friedman and Martin (2011).
The timing of the measurements of non-cognitive skill relative to the outcomes varies by study.
53
See Boyle, Williams, Mark, Brummett, Siegler, and Barefoot (2005); Friedman and Martin (2011); Kern
and Friedman (2008); Kubzansky, Sparrow, Vokonas, and Kawachi (2001); Martin, Friedman, and Schwartz
(2007); Mroczek and Spiro (2007); Schulz, Bookwala, Knapp, Scheier, and Williamson (1996) .
52

22

Figure 5 Correlations of Mortality with Non-Cognitive Skills, IQ, and Socioeconomic Status
(SES)

0.30

0.25

Correlation

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0
SES

IQ

C

E/PE

N

A

Source: Roberts et al. (2007).
Notes: The figure represents results from a meta-analysis of 34 studies. Average effects (in the correlation metric) of low
socioeconomic status (SES), low IQ, low Conscientiousness (C), low Extraversion/Positive Emotion (E/PE), Neuroticism (N),
and low Agreeableness (A) on mortality. Error bars represent standard errors. The lengths of the studies represented vary
from 1 year to 71 years.

Of the Big Five, Conscientiousness and Agreeableness are most predictive of criminality.
In a sample of at-risk youth, boys who committed severe delinquent behaviors were more
than three quarters of a standard deviation lower in Agreeableness and Conscientiousness,
as measured by mothers’ reports at age 12 or 13, than boys who had minor or no delinquent
behaviors up to that age (John, Caspi, Robins, and Moffitt, 1994).
As with most studies in personality psychology, the evidence presented in Figures 4– 5
and most of the literature do not address the question of causality; that is, do measured
skills cause (rather than just predict) outcomes? Empirical associations are not a reliable
basis for policy analysis. As previously noted (see Figure 1), multiple skills and effort all
generate performance in a given task. Many studies in personality psychology do not control
for all of the factors that produce performance on measured tasks. They equate measures
23

of outcomes with the skill being measured.54 This practice can lead to a substantial bias in
inference about the importance of any particular skill. Our discussion of the GED program
and survey of the intervention literature in the following sections presents evidence on the
causal relationship between skills and outcomes.

3.2

Evidence from the General Educational Development (GED)
Program

Evaluations of the General Educational Development (GED) program in the United States
provide causal evidence on the importance of non-cognitive skills. The GED is an extreme
application of the philosophy of achievement testing. It is a seven-and-a-half hour achievement test that secondary school dropouts can take to certify to employers and schools that
they have the knowledge and skills of secondary school graduates.
On the surface, the GED program appears to be successful. Figure 6 shows the distribution of cognitive skill for secondary school graduates, GED recipients, and other secondary
school dropouts. As measured by scores on other achievement tests, GED recipients are as
smart as secondary school graduates who do not go on to college.
However, test scores are not intrinsically valuable. On outcomes that matter, GED
recipients are not equivalent to traditional graduates. Figure 7 shows the wages of GED
recipients and secondary school graduates relative to those of dropouts both in the raw data
and when adjusted for cognitive ability. At each age, the first set of bars shows the effect
when adjusting for basic demographics (age, race, and region of residence). The second set
shows the effect after additionally adjusting for cognitive skill as measured by scores on the
Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT). After adjusting for cognitive skill, GED recipients
are indistinguishable from dropouts, whereas secondary school graduates outperform both.
Similar patterns arise across a wide range of outcomes. Compared to traditional secondary
54

Selecting measures and verifying them is part of the mysterious and inherently subjective process of
“construct validity” in psychology. For a discussion, see Borghans et al. (2008)

24

school graduates, GED recipients have shorter spells of employment, get divorced at higher
rates, have worse health, and are more likely to become incarcerated.55
If GED recipients are as smart as secondary school graduates, why do they perform worse
in the labor market after adjusting for cognitive skill? The GED test misses non-cognitive
skills. Figure 8 shows the distribution of non-cognitive skills as measured by risky behaviors
during adolescence. By this measure, GED recipients are much more like other dropouts
than secondary school graduates. Deficits in non-cognitive skills cause GED recipients to
dropout of high school and underperform later in life.56 Success in high school and in the
labor market requires showing up on time, persistence, and organization.
Evidence from the GED program teaches broader lessons about the pitfalls of relying
on achievement tests. Faith in tests can conceal major social problems. Heckman and
LaFontaine (2010) show that if GED recipients are counted as high school dropouts, then
the black-white gap in high school graduation for males has declined substantially over the
last 30 years. If GED recipients are not counted as high school graduates, there has been
virtually no change in the gap.
Evaluating social programs based on test scores alone can mislead policy-makers. Counting GEDs as high school graduates has artificially inflated the perceived performance of many
social programs.57 Job Corps is a telling example. It is a national job training program in
the United States that costs over 1 billion dollars per year. Early evaluations found that
Job Corps was successful, because it produced GEDs and it was assumed that GED recipients would earn as much as traditional graduates.58 As discussed further in Section 9, later
evaluations showed that there were no long-term effects of Job Corps on earnings or other
outcomes. Relying on achievement testing to evaluate social programs can divert funding to
ineffective programs.
55

See the evidence surveyed and presented in Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014b).
See Heckman, Humphries, and Kautz (2014c) for more evidence on the differences between dropouts,
GED recipients, and secondary school graduates.
57
See Humphries (2014) for a discussion of social programs that are evaluated based on the number of
GEDs produced.
58
See Schochet, Burghardt, and Glazerman (2001).
56

25

Figure 6 Distribution of Cognitive Ability by Educational Status (No College Sample, All
Ethnic Groups)
     

GED



Dropout

 

    

*(''URSRXW





 

Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2011), based on data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979
(NLSY79).
Notes: The distributions represent cognitive factors, estimated using a subset of the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude
Battery (ASVAB). The factors are adjusted for educational attainment, as laid out in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004).
The sample is restricted to the cross-sectional subsample for both males and females. Distributions show only those with no
postsecondary educational attainment. The cognitive factors are normalized by gender to be mean zero, standard deviation
one.

26













Figure 7 Hourly Wage Differences of GED Recipients and Traditional Graduates Compared
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
to Uncertified Dropouts—Ages 20–39
í

í

í

í

(b) (Females)
Hourly Wage

í

í

í

G (PSOR\PHQW




0





2



4



6



8





F +RXUV:RUNHG

í

5DZ $ELO

í

5DZ $ELO
Abil

í

5DZ $ELO
Raw Abil

í
20−24

í
25−29

í
30−34

í
35−39

5DZ $ELO

5DZ $ELO

í

í

(Males)Wage I 8QHPSOR\HG*LYHQLQ/DERU)RUFH
(b) Hourly

5DZ $ELO

í

5DZ
Abil $ELO

í

5DZ
Raw $ELO
Abil

í
20−24

5DZ
Raw $ELO
Abil

í



0

2



í

4



í

6



8

10




5DZ $ELO
5DZ $ELO
Raw Abil
Raw Abil



H ,Q/DERU)RUFH

5DZ $ELO
Raw Abil

Raw 5DZ
Abil $ELO Raw 5DZ
Abil $ELO

í
25−29

í
30−34

*('

*UDG

í
35−39

5DZ $ELO

5DZ $ELO

í

í

í6(

Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2014b), which uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979
(NLSY79).
Notes: Controls: “Raw”—age and region or state of residence; “Abil”—AFQT adjusted for schooling at time of test. The
intervals around each bar are standard errors centered around the mean—a measure of sampling variability.

27

Figure 8 Distribution of Non-Cognitive Skills by Education Group



*(

'URSRXW





     

*(''URSRXW



 

Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2011), which uses data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1979
(NLSY79).
Notes: The distributions represent non-cognitive factors, estimated using measures of early violent crime, minor crime, marijuana use, regular smoking, drinking, and early sexual intercourse. Sample restricted to the cross-sectional subsample for both
males and females. Distributions show only those with no postsecondary educational attainment. The non-cognitive factors
are normalized to be mean zero, standard deviation one.

28

The Skills Needed for Success in the Labor Market59

4

Another perspective on the importance of non-cognitive skills comes from surveys of employers and workers. In a 1991 American report, the Secretary’s Commission on Achieving
Necessary Skills (SCANS) conducted an extensive analysis of which skills workers needed
in the American workforce.60 The Commission researched the literature, consulted with experts, and conducted detailed interviews with workers and/or supervisors in 50 occupations.
The interviews rated the importance of various skills in the context of illustrative tasks and
tools on the job. Using these sources, the Commission categorized necessary skills into basic
skills, thinking skills, personal qualities, and a set of workplace competencies. In addition to
reading, writing, and math skills, basic skills include listening and speaking. The thinking
skills cover creative thinking, decision making, problem solving, reasoning, and the ability to
learn. SCANS specifies that personal qualities include responsibility, self-esteem, sociability,
self-management, integrity, and honesty. SCANS identifies five groups of workplace competencies: the ability to allocate resources (time, money, facilities), interpersonal skills (such
as teamwork, teaching others, leadership), the ability to acquire and to use information, the
ability to understand systems, and the ability to work well with technology.
Employer surveys reinforce the importance of skills that go well beyond academic skills.
In a survey of 3,200 employers in four large metropolitan areas in the Unites States, employers reported that such personal qualities as responsibility, integrity, and self-management
are as important as or more important than basic skills (Holzer, 1997). In another employer
survey undertaken in the mid-1990s of 3,300 businesses (the National Employer Survey),
employers ranked attitude, communication skills, previous work experience, employer recommendations, and industry-based credentials above years of schooling, grades, and test
scores as part of the skills needed for success in the workplace (Zemsky, 1997).
Non-cognitive skills are especially critical for entry level and hourly workers. Of employers
59

We have benefitted from the commentary of Robert Lerman in preparing this section. See Lerman
(2013).
60
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).

29

drawn from a national sample in the United States in 1996, 69% reported rejecting hourly
applicants because they lacked basic employability skills, such as showing up every day,
coming to work on time, and having a strong work ethic. This percentage is more than
double the percentage of rejecting applicants due to inadequate reading and writing skills.
Rejections for not passing a drug test were almost as common as rejections for lack of
literacy skills.61 In a 2007 survey of employers in Washington State, about 60% reported
difficulty in hiring. They experienced less difficulty finding workers with adequate reading,
writing, and math skills than with appropriate occupational, problem solving, teamwork,
communication, and adaptability skills as well as positive work habits and a willingness to
accept supervision.62
Evidence from the United Kingdom supports these findings. A 1998 survey of 4,000
employers found that the four skills found most lacking in 16 to 24-year-olds were technical
and practical skills, general communication skills, customer handling skills, and teamwork
skills.63 At the bottom of the list were numeracy and literacy skills. In a 2002 survey of 4,000
employers in the UK, 23% of employers reported a significant number of their staff were less
than fully proficient at their jobs. Skill shortfalls were most common in communication,
teamwork, other technical and practical skills, customer handling, and problem solving and
least common in numeracy and literacy.64
Consistent with these findings, the Confederation of British Industry defines employability as (1) values and attitudes compatible with the work, including a desire to learn, to
apply that learning, to improve, and to take advantage of change; (2) basic skills (literacy
and numeracy); (3) key skills (communication, application of numbers, information technology, improving one’s own learning and performance, working with others, problem solving)
sufficient for the needs of the work; (4) other generic skills such as modern language and
customer service skills; and (5) job-specific skills and the ability to manage one’s own career.
61

Barton (2006).
Washington Workforce Training Board (2008).
63
Westwood (2004).
64
Hillage, Regan, Dickson, and McLoughlin (2002).
62

30

An ethnographic approach provides some revealing examples of how skills are used in
context and how nonacademic skills are often developed and used as part of a “community
of practice”.65 In addition to formal knowledge, Nelsen (1997) points out that workplaces
require facts, principles, theories, and math and writing skills, but also informal knowledge
embodied in heuristics, work styles, and contextualized understanding of tools and techniques. In her revealing case study of auto repair workers, Nelsen argues that social skills of
new workers are very important for learning the informal knowledge of experienced workers,
as captured in stories, advice, and guided practice.

5

A Framework for Understanding Interventions

A variety of strategies have been advocated for promoting the development of non-cognitive
and cognitive skills. Different advocates press their favorite strategies. Policymakers have
limited resources, so it is important to identify which programs are most effective. The rate
of return—the per-period yield of an investment—provides a convenient and interpretable
summary of the efficacy of competing programs. An alternative to funding an early education
program might be to invest the resources in the stock market and to use these resources plus
the accrued interest to fund a program for adolescents or to invest in social infrastructure.
In this section, we present a conceptual scheme for understanding the dynamics of skill
development.66 Figure 9 illustrates the basic framework. In it cognitive and non-cognitive
skills are produced by investments at different stages of the life cycle. Skills at birth depend
on prenatal investments and inherited traits. Skill formation at later ages depends on the
stock of skills acquired earlier as well as prior investments. For example, in a given classroom,
a child who has a better attention span more easily acquires more cognitive skills. This
concept is called self-productivity and is summarized by the motto “skills beget skills.”
Investments (parenting, environment, and schools) also affect skills. The efficacy of in65
66

Stasz (2001).
These ideas are formalized in Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2008); Cunha et al. (2010).

31

vestment is moderated by the stock of skills at any age. The benefits of an investment
depend on the current level of skills—a phenomenon that economists call static complementarity. More motivated children benefit the most from additional investments. In addition,
investment today increases the stock of future skills, which in turn increases the return
to future investments. Economists call this phenomenon dynamic complementarity. This
channel increases the returns to early investments because it makes future investments more
productive. For this reason, Cunha et al. (2010) show that it is economically efficient to
invest in the most disadvantaged young children because it raises their payoffs from future
investments. Heckman and Mosso (2014) present a more complete discussion of static and
dynamic complementarity and a formal proof of when early investment is more effective
compared to later investment.
Figure 9 Framework for Understanding Skill Development

Prenatal

Inherited
Traits

Prenatal Investments

Skills

Birth

Skills

Childhood

Skills

Adulthood

Parenting,
Environment, School

Parenting,
Environment, School

Higher Education

Earnings

Crime

32

Health

This framework recognizes that different skills might be relatively easy to shape at different stages of the life cycle. Sensitive periods for a given skill are periods when investments are
relatively more productive. Critical periods for a particular skill are periods when investment
during any other period is not productive.
Figure 9 illustrates why understanding the effects attributable to specific interventions
is such a challenging task. Most of the empirical studies that we review only investigate the
interventions aimed at one slice of the life cycle. They do not connect the links in the figure
or correct for the effects of later investment in producing the outcomes attributed to early
investments. One important area for future research on skill formation is to better document
how early interventions influence the efficacy of later interventions.

6

Summary of Empirical Evidence on the Efficacy of
Interventions

This section summarizes the empirical evidence from a variety of interventions ranging from
targeting prenatal infants to targeting young adults. Heckman and Kautz (2014a,c) discuss
these programs in greater detail. In our analysis, we focus on programs that have been
well studied, have long-term follow-ups, have been widely adopted, or offer unique insights.
Although there are some important exceptions, most of the programs that they review
are based in the United States, primarily because more high-quality evaluations have been
conducted there. Descriptions and discussions of other programs can be found in Heckman
and Kautz (2014a) and the adjoining Web Appendix.67
For four reasons, evaluating and comparing the evidence from intervention programs is
challenging. First, many interventions are only evaluated with short-term follow-ups, which
in practice can lead to upward-biased estimates of returns if the benefits eventually dissipate
or to downward-biased estimates of the returns if the effects of the programs appear later
67

See https://cehd.uchicago.edu/page/web-appendix_fostering_skills_oecd.

33

in life. Second, not all studies measure the same outcomes. Ideally, all studies would report
outcomes in terms of the rate of return of the program. Reported outcomes often differ across
studies. Many studies only consider the effect of an intervention on a few outcomes. Without
knowing the range of outcomes affected, it is difficult to calculate a rate of return. Third,
many programs target specific demographic groups and most of them target disadvantaged
populations. Applying the findings from one group to another might be problematic if
groups differentially benefit from programs. Fourth, different programs use different, often
incompatible, measurement schemes.
Table 2 summarizes the effects of many of the studies discussed in this report.68 The
table displays information about the nature of the intervention, the quality of the evaluation,
the effects on later life outcomes, and estimates of the rate of return and cost-benefit ratio
when available. The squares in the “Components” columns indicate the extent to which the
program and the evaluation of it have the features defined in the table. The dots in the
“Effects on Outcomes” columns indicate the extent to which the program influenced skills
and outcomes. (The notes at the bottom of the table define the symbols and abbreviations
used.)
Three striking patterns emerge about the nature of the programs and the quality of the
available evaluations of them. First, as a group, programs targeting early childhood and
elementary school have longer follow-ups. All of the early childhood or elementary school
programs in Table 2 have evaluations that follow participants for at least 10 years and many
follow them more than 20 years, whereas only two evaluations of adolescent programs follow
participants for at least 10 years (the longest is 12).
Second, early childhood programs tend to measure cognitive and non-cognitive skills
in addition to a variety of later-life outcomes, whereas many of the adolescent evaluations
focus solely on labor market outcomes. Because of these features of data availability, we can
68

Note that there are several programs that appear in Table 2 but do not appear later in the text of this
paper. The Web Appendix appendix to Heckman and Kautz (2014a) details these other programs and can
be found here: https://cehd.uchicago.edu/page/web-appendix_fostering_skills_oecd.

34

better understand the sources of the effects on adult outcomes of early childhood programs
by considering how these interventions produce skills. Due to the absence of measures of
skills for many adolescent interventions, understanding these programs requires examining
the curricula of the programs themselves, for example, whether the program seeks to foster
cognitive or non-cognitive skills.
Third, selection into programs differs by the age of intervention. In most early childhood
evaluations, the programs first contact parents to participate and then parents opt into the
program. In contrast, in most adolescent evaluations, participants themselves chose to enter
the program.
Table 2 also suggests certain features of effective programs. Only very early interventions
(before age 3) improve IQ in a lasting way, consistent with the evidence that early childhood is
a critical period for cognitive development (see Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron, and Shonkoff,
2006). The most successful interventions target preschoolers (after age 3) and primary school
children. They improve later-life outcomes by developing non-cognitive skills.
Programs that target adolescents have not been established to be as effective as programs that target children at earlier ages, in part because there have been fewer long-term
evaluations of them. Several of the successful adolescent mentoring or residential programs
improve labor market and social outcomes, but have relatively short follow-ups. The two
programs with the longest follow-ups improve outcomes in the short run, but the benefits
fade after a few years. These programs alter participants’ environments and incentives during the intervention, which could influence their behavior in the short term without having
a lasting effect.
The most promising adolescent programs integrate aspects of work into traditional education. Such programs break down the rigid separation between school and work that
characterizes the American high school. In addition, a nascent literature reports substantial
benefits from giving information to adolescents.
High schools create an adolescent society with values distinct from those of the larger

35

society and removed from the workplace.69 Even in affluent communities, the adolescent
society has an anti-academic, anti-achievement bias. It was not until 1940 that more than
half of each birth cohort graduated from high school in the United States.70 In earlier
times, adolescents took apprenticeships and jobs where they were supervised and mentored
by adults. Mentoring involved teaching valuable non-cognitive skills—showing up for work,
cooperating with others, and persevering on tasks. These skills could be fostered in high
schools, but with the relaxation of discipline in the schools, it is more difficult to do so.71
The apparent success of apprenticeship programs might arise in part from their cultivation
of non-cognitive skills. The attachment of a supervisor to an apprentice helps create noncognitive skills in a version of the attachment bond between parent and child.72

7

Early-Life Interventions that Begin Before Formal
Schooling

This section summarizes the interventions listed in Table 2 that start before children enroll
in kindergarten. We divide the early interventions into two categories: (1) infant programs
and model preschools that target infants by directly providing cognitive and socio-emotional
stimulation to children, by instructing young mothers or by providing center-based care to
specific populations and (2) large-scale programs that have been implemented in schools
and are relatively less expensive than center-based care. Many early interventions have
successfully boosted cognitive skills, non-cognitive skills, or both.
Given that there are more differences among evaluations than there are evaluations,
it is difficult to understand exactly why some programs are more successful than others.
Nevertheless, some patterns emerge. Only programs that start before the age of 3 have had
69

See
See
71
See
72
See
70

Coleman (1961).
Goldin and Katz (2008).
Arum (2005).
Bowlby (1951); Sroufe (1997); Sroufe, Egeland, Carlson, and Collins (2005).

36

37

3–4
3,5
5–6

CPC
TEEP
STAR

10-16
11–12
13–15
14

14–15
14–15
14–15
13–16

16–18
16–24
16–29
18–24

19+

BBBS
IHAD
EPIS
xl club

SAS
STEP
QOP
Academies

ChalleNGe
Job Corps
Dominican
Year-Up

SSP

Adolescence

LA’s Best
CSP
SSDP

5–6
5–13
6–7

1
1–2
3
3

PCDC
JSS
Perry
Head Start

Elementary

<0
0
0
0

NFP
ABC
IHDP
FDRP

Early

Program

e

Ag

ion
r at

3Y

1Y
1Y
1Y
1Y

5Y
2Y
5Y
4Y

1Y
7Y
3Y
2Y

6Y
5Y
6Y

2Y
2Y
4Y

2Y
2Y
2Y
2Y

2Y
5Y
3Y
5Y

Du

et

SES

Dropout
SES
SES
SES

Schl, SES
Schl, SES
Schl
Schl, SES

SES
SES
Schl
Schl

SES
Behav
Crime

SES
SES
SES

SES
Health
SES, IQ
SES

SES
SES
Health
SES

Tar
g

tion

Prgrm

Self
Self
Self
Self

Schl
Self
Prgrm
Self

Self
Prgrm
Schl
Schl

Schl
Refer
Prgrm

Prnt
Prgrm
Prgrm

Prgrm
Prgrm
Prgrm
Prnt

Prgrm
Refer
Prgrm
Prgrm

S el
ec

4Y

3Y
9Y
2Y
4Y

6Y
4Y
10Y
12Y

1Y
8Y
2Y
2Y

12Y
35Y
21Y

25Y
22Y
22Y

15Y
22Y
37Y
23Y

19Y
30Y
18Y
15Y

4,960

1,200
15,300
9,410
200

430
4,800
1,070
1,460

960
180
45,070
261,420

19,320
510
610

1,470
260
11,000

170
160
120
4,170

640
90
640
110

Components
Effects on Outcomes
Sch
o ol
No
n -C
og
E
d
u ca
tion
He
al t h
Cr i
me
E
a
r
ni n
gs

IQ

Ho
me
He
al t h
P
a
r
ent
al
O
n
Si t
e
Gro
up

Participant/Evaluation Characteristics
p
Fol
low
-U

e
Si z
mp
le
Sa

Return/Benefits

urn

6.4

6.2

18

7–10

Re t

Table 2 Summary of Effects for Main Interventions

2.67

2.66
0.22

0.42

0.9–3.0

1.0

3.1

0.9

10.8

7.1–12.2

2.9
3.8

Be n
efi
Co t
st

38

Sources: Nurse Family Partnership (NFP) – Eckenrode, Campa, Luckey, Henderson, Cole, Kitzman, Anson, Sidora-Arcoleo, and Olds
(2010); Kitzman, Olds, Cole, Hanks, Anson, Arcoleo, Luckey, Knudtson, Henderson, and Holmberg (2010); Olds (2006); Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Hanks,
Arcoleo, Anson, Luckey, Knudtson, Henderson, Bondy, and Stevenson (2010); Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Robinson, Sidora, Luckey, Henderson, Hanks,
Bondy, and Holmberg (2004); Olds, Kitzman, Hanks, Cole, Anson, Sidora-Arcoleo, Luckey, Henderson, Holmberg, Tutt, Stevenson, and Bondy
(2007); Olds, Robinson, Pettitt, Luckey, Holmberg, Ng, Isacks, Sheff, and Henderson (2004). Abecedarian Project (ABC) – Breitmayer and
Ramey (1986); Heckman, Moon, and Pinto (2014); Ramey, Collier, Sparling, Loda, Campbell, Ingram, and Finkelstein (1976); Temple and Reynolds
(2007). Infant Health and Development Program (IHDP) – McCormick, Brooks-Gunn, Buka, Goldman, Yu, Salganik, Scott, Bennett, Kay,
Bernbaum, Bauer, Martin, Woods, Martin, and Casey (2006). Syracuse Family Development Research Program (FDRP) – Lally, Mangione,
and Honig (1987). Houston Parent-Child Development Center (PCDC) – Besharov, Germanis, Higney, and Call (2011); Bridgeman,
Blumenthal, and Andres (1981); Johnson and Walker (1991); Walker and Johnson (1988). Jamaican Supplementation Study (JSS) – Gertler,
Heckman, Pinto, Zanolini, Vermeersch, Walker, Chang, and Grantham-McGregor (2013); Grantham-McGregor, Powell, Walker, and Himes (1991);
Walker, Chang, Powell, and Grantham-McGregor (2005); Walker, Chang, Powell, Simonoff, and Grantham-McGregor (2007). Perry Preschool
Program (Perry) – Heckman et al. (2010a); Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev, and Yavitz (2010b); Heckman et al. (2013); Schweinhart, Barnes,
and Weikart (1993). Head Start – Carneiro and Ginja (2012); Currie and Thomas (1995); Deming (2009); Garces, Thomas, and Currie (2002);
Ludwig and Miller (2007); Westat (2010). Chicago Child-Parent Center Program (CPC) – Niles, Reynolds, and Nagasawa (2006); Reynolds
(1994); Reynolds and Temple (1998); Reynolds, Temple, Ou, Arteaga, and White (2011); Reynolds, Temple, Robertson, and Mann (2002); Reynolds,
Temple, White, Ou, and Robertson (2011). Turkish Early Enrichment Project (TEEP) – Kagitcibasi, Sunar, and Bekman (2001); Kagitcibasi,
Sunar, Bekman, Baydar, and Cemalcilar (2009). Project STAR (STAR) – Chetty, Friedman, Hilger, Saez, Diane, and Yagan (2011); Krueger
(2003). LA’s BEST – Goldschmidt and Huang (2007); Huang, Gribbons, Kim, Lee, and Baker (2000); Huang, Kim, Marshall, and Pérez (2005).
Cambridge Somerville Program (CSP) – McCord (1978). Seattle Social Development Project (SSDP) – Aos, Lieb, Mayfield, Miller,
and Pennucci (2004); Hawkins, Catalano, Kosterman, Abbott, and Hill (1999); Hawkins, Kosterman, Catalano, Hill, and Abbott (2005, 2008). Big
Brothers Big Sisters (BBBS) – Aos et al. (2004); Tierney, Baldwin-Grossman, and Resch (1995). I Have a Dream (IHAD) – Kahne and
Bailey (1999). Empresários Pela Inclusão Social (EPIS) – Martins (2010). xl Club – Holmlund and Silva (2009). Sponsor a Scholar (SAS)
– Johnson (1999). Summer Training and Education Program (STEP) – Walker and Vilella-Velez (1992). Quantum Opportunity Program
(QOP) – Aos et al. (2004); Rodrı́guez-Planas (2010, 2012). Career Academies (Academies) – Kemple and Snipes (2000); Kemple and Willner
(2008). National Guard ChalleNGe Program (ChalleNGe) – Bloom, Gardenhire-Crooks, and Mandsager (2009); Millenky, Bloom, and Dillon
(2010); Millenky, Bloom, Muller-Ravett, and Broadus (2011); Perez-Arce, Constant, Loughran, and Karoly (2012). Job Corps – Schochet et al.
(2001); Schochet, Burghardt, and McConnell (2006, 2008). Dominican Youth Employment Program (Dominican) – Gertler and Martinez
(2012). Year Up – Roder and Elliot (2011); Roder and Elliott (2014). Self-Suffciency Project (SSP) – Card and Hyslop (2009); Gottschalk
(2005); Michalopoulos, Tattrie, Miller, Robins, Morris, Gyarmati, Redcross, Foley, and Ford (2002); Zabel, Schwartz, and Donald (2010, 2013).

Notes:
– Does not include intervention component.
– Includes intervention component.
– No effects.
– Positive effects.
– Weakly
positive effects.
– Mixed effects (either different studies find different results or only particular sub-populations benefited).
– Negative
effects.“ ” – Not measured. “Age” – The age at which participants entered the program. For programs that targeted grades, rather than ages,
it was assumed that children entered kindergarten at ages 5–6 and the age range advanced one year for each subsequent grade. “Duration” –
Length of the treatment. In cases where the treatment length varied for participants, the longest duration was presented. “Target” – Population
that was targeted by the program. SES – socioeconomic status or disadvantage. Behav – Behavior. Schl – School Performance. Crime – local
crime rates. IQ – low IQ. “Selection” – The party that acted first in joining the sample. Prgrm – Evaluation program contacted participants.
Refer – Other party referred participants to program. Prnt – Parent applied to program. Self – Participant applied to program. Schl – School
selected participants. “Follow-Up” – Duration of longest follow-up evaluation in years. “Sample” – Largest sample size from the studies examined
(rounded to nearest 10). “Home” – Included home visits. “Health” – Included a nutritional component. “Parental” – Involved parents. “On
Site” – Took place at an on site location. “Group” – Whether the intervention combined participants in groups. “IQ” – IQ score. “School” –
school performance. “Non-cog” – measured non-cognitive skills. “Education” – educational attainment. “Health” – health (including drug use).
“Crime” – crime. “Earnings” – earnings or related outcomes. “Return” – Annual rate of return. “Benefit/Cost” – Estimated benefits divided by costs.

lasting impacts on IQ. Some of the most successful programs have had no long-term impact
on IQ but have improved later-life outcomes by improving non-cognitive skills.
As a general rule, large-scale programs have been less successful than smaller-scale programs, but the large-scale programs differ from small-scale programs in important ways.
For example, small-scale programs tend to be more intensive and also involve parents more
actively.
The evidence suggests that involving parents is an important component of successful
interventions. While most interventions are temporary, parents are a lasting fixture in the
lives of children. The parents with children in these interventions have responded by investing
more in their children in later years.73

7.1
7.1.1

Infant Programs and Model Preschools
Nurse-Family Partnership

Evidence from the Nurse-Family Partnership (NFP) program shows how improving prenatal
conditions and early parenting can improve child skills and outcomes. NFP aims at firsttime, low-income, unmarried, and/or adolescent mothers without previous births. In the
program, nurses visit young mothers from the first or second trimester of the mother’s
pregnancy until the second birthday of her first child. The program encourages mothers
to reduce smoking, teaches mothers how to care for their children, and helps mothers to
pursue education and find jobs. It was introduced, as a pilot, at Elmira, New York. Later,
the program was introduced at Memphis, Tennessee, and Denver, Colorado.74 At Elmira
and Memphis, mothers receive around 30 to 35 visits of around 75–90 minutes each. It is
evaluated by the method of randomized assignment (Howard and Brooks-Gunn, 2009; Olds,
2006).
NFP reduces risky behaviors of mothers and their children (see Table 3). Children exhibit
73

See Heckman and Mosso (2014) and Moon (2014b) for summaries of the evidence on this issue.
Our discussion will focus on the effects of the program up to age 12 for the Memphis sample and the
effects at age 19 for the Elmira sample.
74

39

persistently higher IQ scores through age 6 (Olds, Kitzman, Cole, Robinson, Sidora, Luckey,
Henderson, Hanks, Bondy, and Holmberg, 2004).75 At age 12, the children in the treatment
group have lower rates of substance abuse and exhibit lower levels of internalizing behavior
(e.g. anxiety, depression, and withdrawal).76 When the children are 12, mothers are much
less dependent on welfare.77 By age 19, children are less likely to engage in crime, even
though there are only weak effects on achievement test scores or grades in the long run.78,79
These results suggest that the program works by improving non-cognitive skills. NFP might
have had long term effects on these skills because parents responded to the intervention by
improving the home environments of their children in a lasting way.80
75

Measured by the mental processing domain of the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (KABC).
Kitzman et al. (2010). The measure of internalizing behavior is based on self-reports from the Achenbach
Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001). See Almlund et al. (2011) for a discussion of the
relationship between internalizing behavior and the Big Five.
77
Olds et al. (2010).
78
Eckenrode et al. (2010).
79
Illustrated by the strong discrepancy in Table 3 between estimates for “Ever Arrested” versus “Arrested
in Last Year.”
80
See Heckman and Mosso (2014) and Moon (2014b) for summaries.
76

40

Table 3 Summary of Effects of the Nurse-Family Partnership

Outcome

Treatment

Control

Treatment
Effect

Age 6(1)
Vocabulary Skills(ES)
Internalizing Disorders(%)
Externalizing Disorders(%)

14.7
20.2

0.17∗∗∗
−2.1∗∗∗
−2.8∗∗∗

12.4

0.09∗∗∗
−0.03∗∗∗
3.6∗∗∗

24.9
22.1
19.7
1.7
3.1
8772

20.8
30.9
17.8
5.1
3.1
9797

0.08∗∗∗
1.09∗∗∗
4.1∗∗∗
−8.8∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
−3.4∗∗∗
0.0∗∗∗
−1025∗∗∗

21.3
8.2
48.7
70.6
71.4

37.4
5.5
51.9
74.5
68.3

−16.1∗∗∗
2.7∗∗∗
−3.2∗∗∗
−3.9∗∗∗
3.1∗∗∗

12.6
17.4

Age 9(2)
GPA(ES)
Antisocial Behavior(%)
Grade Retention(%)
Age 12

16.0

(3)

GPA
Achievement Tests(a)
Grade Retention(%)
Internalizing Disorders(%)(b)
Externalizing Disorders(%)(c)
Used Substance Last 30 Days(%)
Ever Arrested(%)
Welfare Benefits Mother(d)
Age 19(4)
Ever Arrested(%)
Arrested in Last Year(%)
Illicit Drug Use(%)
Has HS Diploma(%)
Economically Productive(%)(e)

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics. %
refers to treatment effects in terms of changes in prevalence in outcome variable in percentage points. ES
indicates Effect Size, reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of the outcome variable. The
Age 6–12 estimates come from the Memphis site. The Age 19 estimates come from the Elmira site. (a)
Is based on group reading and math achievement test scores and is in percentile units. (b) Uses student
self-reports on domains such as anxiety, depression, somatization, and withdrawal to assess if students pass
a clinical threshold, based on the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001).
(c) Uses student, teacher, and parent reports on domains such as conduct problems, aggression, and total
problems to assess if students pass a clinical threshold, based on the Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist.
(d) Measures the average yearly receipt of welfare during the child’s first 12 years of life, in US$. (e) Measures
if someone is involved in education, a job, the military, or job training.
∗∗
Attains 5% significance level.
Sources:(1) The estimates at Age 6 come from Olds et al. (2004). (2) The estimates at Age 9 come from
Olds et al. (2007). (3) The estimates at Age 12 come from Kitzman et al. (2010). (4) The estimates at Age
19 come from Eckenrode et al. (2010).

41

7.1.2

Jamaican Study

Many childhood programs have been introduced in less developed countries. The Jamaican
Supplementation Study (JSS) was one of the few with a long-term follow-up.81 Like NFP,
JSS targeted health and parenting skills. This randomized program consisted of a two-year
nutritional and stimulation program for stunted children (low height for age), aged 9-24
months at the start of the program. Participants either received supplementation (milk
formula), stimulation (encouraged mother to play with kids in an effective manner), or both
(Grantham-McGregor et al., 1991).
In general, the stimulation intervention outperformed the supplementation intervention.
Both interventions improved early cognitive development in the short-term, but only the
stimulation had long-term effects on skills. The stimulation intervention improved cognitive
and non-cognitive skills at age 17-18 by about half a standard deviation (Gertler et al., 2013;
Grantham-McGregor et al., 1991). As with the NFP program, the stimulation program
improved internalizing behavior (Walker et al., 2005). The stimulation intervention also
improved earnings by 33% at age 22 (Gertler et al., 2013; Gertler, Heckman, Pinto, Zanolini,
Vermeersch, Walker, Chang, and Grantham-McGregor, 2014).82 This intervention supports
the findings of NFP that relatively small interventions that teach parenting skills can have
a big impact later in life.
81

Most programs lack long-term follow-ups (even beyond age 10), or any follow-up at all, and few employ
methods of random assignment. Short-term effects are generally positive; intervention leads to better cognitive skills and, in most cases, lower grade retention in the early years of primary school. For an overview,
see Engle, Fernald, Alderman, Behrman, O’Gara, Yousafzai, Cabral de Mello, Hidrobo, Ulkuer, Ertem,
and Iltus (2011); Grantham-McGregor, Cheung, Cueto, Glewwe, Richter, and Strupp (2007); GranthamMcGregor et al. (1991); Jolly (2007); Lake (2011); Myers (1992); Walker, Wachs, Grantham-McGregor,
Black, Nelson, Huffman, Baker-Henningham, Chang, Hamadani, Lozoff, Meeks Gardner, Powell, Rahman,
and Richter (2011); Walker et al. (2005); Walker, Chang, Vera-Hernández, and Grantham-McGregor (2011);
Walker, Wachs, Gardner, Lozoff, Wasserman, Pollitt, Carter, and The International Child Development
Steering Group (2007); Young (1996) Engle, Black, Behrman, Cabral de Mello, Gertler, Kapiriri, Martorell,
Eming Young, and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007).
82
The supplementation program might have been ineffective in the long run because the supplement was
relatively weak, contained few micronutrients, and had no fortified formula. Some of the interventions referred
to in Myers (1992) and Young (1996) also reported stronger effects of stimulation over supplementation.

42

7.1.3

Perry Preschool Program

Evaluations of the Perry Preschool program provide some of the most compelling evidence
that non-cognitive skills can be boosted in ways that produce adult success. The Perry
Preschool program enriched the lives of 3- and 4-year-old low-income black children with
initial IQs below 85 at age three.83 They attended 2.5 hours of center-based preschool five
days a week for two years. In addition, home visits promoted parent-child relationships.
The program ended after two years of enrollment, and both treatment and control groups
entered the same school.
Participants were taught social skills in a daily “plan-do-review” sequence in which children first planned a task, executed it, and then reviewed it with teachers and fellow students.
They learned to work with others when problems arose.84 The program was evaluated by
the method of random assignment.
The program did not improve IQ scores in a lasting way. Figure 10 shows that, by age
10, treatment and control groups had the same average IQ scores. Many critics of early
childhood programs seize on this finding and related evidence to dismiss the value of early
intervention studies. Arthur Jensen’s (1969) discussion of IQ fadeout in Head Start and other
compensatory programs promoted the widespread embrace of the notion that intervention
efforts are ineffective and that intelligence is genetically determined. His uncritical reliance
on intelligence test scores illustrates the fallacy of relying on monodimensional measurements
of human skills.
83

We draw on the analysis of Heckman et al. (2010a,b, 2013).
Sylva (1997) describes the Perry program as a program that fosters non-cognitive skills. It has features
in common with the Tools of the Mind intervention discussed below. See Bodrova and Leong (2001) for the
Tools of the Mind curriculum. See Heckman and Pinto (2015) for a discussion of the Perry curriculum and
the Tools of the Mind curriculum.
84

43

Figure 10 Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group

100
95.5
95

94.9
91.3

91.7

IQ

90
85
80

86.3
79.6

83.3

87.1

88.1

87.7

86.9

86.8

83.5

84.6

Treatment group
Control group

78.5
75
Entry

85

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Age

Source: Cunha et al. (2006) and Heckman and Masterov (2007), based on data provided by the High Scope
Foundation.
Notes: IQ measured on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman and Merrill, 1960). The test was
administered at program entry and at each of the ages indicated.

The Perry intervention provides an effective rebuttal to these arguments. The program
greatly improved outcomes for both participating boys and girls, resulting in a statistically
significant rate of return of around 7%–10% per annum for both genders (see Heckman et al.,
2010a). These returns are in the range of the post-World War II, pre-2008 meltdown stock
market returns to equity in the U.S. labor market, estimated to be 6.9% per annum.85
Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) show that the Perry treatment effects arise primarily from lasting changes in non-cognitive skills, not from changes in IQ. Figure 11 shows
histograms of measures of non-cognitive skills for the treatment and control groups. The
treatment groups of both genders improved their teacher-reported externalizing behavior, a
skill related to Agreeableness and Conscientiousness. For girls, the program also improved
Openness to Experience (proxied by academic motivation). Figure 11 also shows that the
program improved scores on the California Achievement Test (CAT), even though it did
85

See DeLong and Magin (2009).

44

not have a lasting effect on IQ. This evidence is consistent with the evidence of Figure 2
showing that achievement test scores depend strongly on non-cognitive skills (see Borghans
et al., 2008; Borghans, Golsteyn, Heckman, and Meijers, 2009). Achievement tests measure
general knowledge. The acquisition of general knowledge (crystallized intelligence) depends
on persistence, curiosity, and focus. As in the NFP program, some of the benefits of Perry
are due to enhanced parenting. Heckman and Mosso (2014) and Moon (2014b) show that
the intervention also changed parents’ belief in the importance of parenting, especially for
the parents of boys.86
86

In line with these results in a late life book Arthur Jensen (1998) acknowledged that Conscientiousness
was an important determinant of life success although he did not consider how it (or IQ) might be fostered
by interventions.

45

Figure 11 Histograms of Indices of Noncognitive Skills and CAT Scores

Control Group

Treatment Group
.8

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Control Group

Treatment Group
.5
.4
.3
.1
0

0

.1

.2

.3

density

.4

.5

.6

(d) Academic Motivation

.6

(c) Academic Motivation

.2

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.6
0

.2

.4

density

.8

1

(b) Externalizing Behavior

1

(a) Externalizing Behavior

1

2

3

4

5

1

(e) CAT Control Group

2

3

4

5

(f) CAT Treatment Group

.04

density

.02

.04

0

0

.02

density

.06

.06

.08

.08

(Rank in Terms of Position in the National Distribution)

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

percentile

20

40

60

80

100

percentile

Source: Heckman et al. (2013).
Notes: Indices for Externalizing Behavior and Academic Motivation are based on items of the Pupil Behavior
Inventory (PBI), teacher ratings of student behavior. The units are expressed in terms of standard deviations.
The scale on “Externalizing Behavior” is normalized so that a higher score corresponds to better behavior.
The PBI includes whether the student disrupts classroom. “CAT” is the California Achievement Test score
expressed in percentiles of the general population distribution of the scores. The one-sided p-values for
difference in means are 0.001, 0.043, and 0.000 for Externalizing Behavior, Academic Motivation, and CAT
scores, respectively. Histograms are based on the pooled sample of males and females.

46

7.1.4

Abecedarian Program

The Abecedarian (ABC) program was another program aimed at disadvantaged black children. It started earlier, lasted much longer, and was much more intensive than the Perry
program, combining a preschool intervention that started when children were as young as 6
weeks old with school-age treatment through grade three.87 The preschool component was
full-day child care five days per week, 50 weeks a year. The curriculum focused on a series
of educational games but also had a medical and nutritional component.88 During grades
one through three, teachers and parents interacted on a bi-weekly basis.
In contrast to Perry, the preschool component of ABC led to lasting improvements in
IQ.89 For girls, the program improved IQ through age 21. The effect for boys was positive
but was less precisely estimated. Girls and boys also scored better on achievement tests.
ABC likely improved IQ because it started at an earlier age than Perry. Very early childhood
appears to be a critical period for shaping IQ.
As with Perry, the benefits of the ABC program differ across genders. For girls, the
program improved educational attainment, reduced participation in criminal activity, decreased substance abuse, and improved internalizing and externalizing behavior. Like the
Perry program, ABC improved employment and health for males and produced substantial
improvements in non-cognitive skills.90
The ABC program also sheds some light on how later interventions might complement
early interventions. Heckman et al. (2014) also study the effects of the school-age followup treatment. Half of the original treatment group and half of the original control group
were assigned to a three-year, school-age treatment after the preschool program. For boys,
87

It is easy to exaggerate the difference in intensity between the Perry program and the ABC program.
While the ABC program starts earlier and spends more time each day with the child, the amount of time
per day spent on essentially the same type of learning activities is very similar at ages 3 and 4. See Griffin,
Heckman, and Moon (2013).
88
See Campbell, Pungello, Miller-Johnson, Burchinal, and Ramey (2001); Campbell, Ramey, Pungello,
Sparling, and Miller-Johnson (2002).
89
We report on the treatment effects of the preschool component from Heckman et al. (2014).
90
Conti, Heckman, and Pinto (2014) report substantial beneficial effects of the program on adult health
for both genders.

47

the school-age treatment had little effect regardless of whether they were in the preschool
treatment group or control group. For girls, the school-age treatment had a positive effect
for those in the preschool treatment group but not for those who were in the control group.
The evidence for girls can be explained in part by dynamic complementarity – the early
program enhanced the benefits of the later program.91

7.2
7.2.1

Large-Scale Infant and Young Child Programs
Head Start

The Head Start program receives considerable attention both in the evaluation literature
and in public discussion. Head Start children are eligible for enrollment from ages three to
five, although they generally enter at age four and receive one year of treatment. In addition
to a center-based (preschool) intervention, Head Start includes medical services and parental
assistance (Ludwig and Miller, 2007). Its implementation differs greatly across sites, making
it difficult to evaluate its overall effectiveness (Deming, 2009). Parental participation was
not mandatory, and there is some evidence that many do not participate.92
There have been no long-term evaluations of Head Start based on randomized assignment.
Instead, most evaluations of Head Start compare siblings with different enrollment statuses93
or use regression discontinuity designs.94 Empirical evidence on Head Start is mixed. Many
studies find that Head Start improves IQ scores and achievement test scores, but that the
improvements fade by age 10 (Deming, 2009; Ludwig and Miller, 2007). For some subgroups,
there is evidence of persistent gains in test scores and reductions in retention rates.95 Garces
et al. (2002) find that Head Start improves outcomes for educational attainment for whites
91

Campbell, Conti, Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Pungello, and Pan (2014) show that the ABC program had
substantial effects on health.
92
Schumacher (2003)
93
For example, Deming (2009); Garces et al. (2002).
94
For example, Carneiro and Ginja (2011); Ludwig and Miller (2007).
95
Deming (2009) reports persistent gains for males and those with higher ability mothers as measured
by summary test score that includes the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), Peabody Individual
Achievement Math (PIATMT), and Reading Recognition (PIATRR). Retention rates were lower for boys,
blacks, and students with low maternal AFQT.

48

and reduces criminality for blacks, whereas Deming (2009) finds that Head Start improves
educational attainment for blacks.
A short term experimental study by Westat (2010) based on randomized assignment offers
a more pessimistic view. The study finds that most positive impacts on achievement tests96
and socio-emotional development97 fade by first grade. This evaluation likely underestimates
the true program effects. Many members of the control group joined the program at sites
other than where they initially applied or were enrolled in other childhood programs that
were more intensive than Head Start.
7.2.2

Chicago Child–Parent Center (CPC)

The Chicago Child–Parent Center (CPC) is an apparently successful large-scale preschool
program. It is directed toward disadvantaged, predominantly black, inner-city children in
Chicago. The program provides a half- or full-day preschool program for 3- and 4-year-olds.
The program was designed to develop basic reading, writing, and math skills. In contrast
to other large-scale programs, parents are required to visit the centers and receive advice on
good parenting behavior (Reynolds, 2000).
CPC has not been evaluated by the random assignment method. All evaluations are
based on samples of children attending CPC kindergarten matched to “comparable” children attending non-CPC kindergarten. Based on these methods, Reynolds et al. (2011)
and Reynolds et al. (2011) report that the program increased high school graduation by
about 7 percentage points, reduced substance abuse by 4-6 percentage points, and reduced
arrest rates by 6 percentage points. Because IQ was not measured, it is difficult to tell
what causes the improvement in adult outcomes. Some evidence suggests that non-cognitive
skills played a role. At age 13, the participants have higher levels of social and emotional
96
The tests included the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test and several batteries of the Woodcock-Johnson
III test.
97
The measures included parent- and teacher-reported measures of aggression, hyperactivity, withdrawn
behavior, and total problem behavior. They use several test batteries, including the Achenbach Classroom
Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach and Rescorla, 2001) and the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (ASPI; Lutz, Fantuzzo, and McDermott, 2000).

49

competence. The program also improves achievement test scores by about 1/3 of standard
deviation (Iowa Tests of Basic Skills),98 but improvements in non-cognitive skills can lead
to improvements in achievement tests without affecting IQ, as was the case with the Perry
program (Reynolds, 1995).
CPC might have been more successful than other similar programs, like Head Start,
because it encouraged parental involvement. Parents are induced to visit the centers, and
the staff teaches them various forms of stimulative play that they can do at home and assists
parents interested in pursuing further education and seeking jobs (Reynolds, 2000).

8

Education and Interventions in Kindergarten and Elementary School

150 years ago, moral education, rooted in Protestant Christianity, was taught in American
public schools.99 Moral and character education disappeared from the curriculum of public
schools. However, moral education is still featured in Catholic education. Some private
schools teach a secular version of moral education. For example, the Knowledge Is Power
Program (KIPP) Charter Schools enforce strict codes of discipline and give character (noncognitive skill) training to their participants (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). In contemporary
society, discussions of moral and character education provoke controversy even among its
advocates. Scholars disagree about the origins of character and morality and how they can
best be fostered.100
In this section, we survey the evidence on secular versions of non-cognitive skill develop98

Hieronymus, Lindquist, and Hoover (1980).
See the discussions in Heckman and Kautz (2014c) and Kaestle (1984).
100
The conceptualizations of morality and character differ in the literature. Non-cognitive skill is usually
viewed as a skill acquired through habituation and practice. In its perfected state it becomes a gut reaction.
Morality is viewed as a consequence of conscious choices. Many dismiss discussions of morality and character
out of hand because of their religious connotations or because they suggest a prudish vision of society that
does not tolerate cultural pluralism. Lapsley and Yeager (2012) survey the controversies in the field, the
curricula available and evidence on their effectiveness.
99

50

ment programs. This does not reflect any antireligious bias on our part. Instead, it reflects
the absence of convincing evaluations of the effectiveness of non-cognitive skill development
programs in religious schools.

8.1

Targeted Non-Cognitive Skill Interventions

Few well-evaluated interventions have targeted children in elementary school. Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, and Schellinger (2011) present a meta-analysis of 213 school-based
social and emotional learning programs. While their study suggests that these programs
have been successful, many of the evaluations they review suffer from substantial methodological problems. For example, only 15% of the studies have follow-ups that last beyond
6 months. For the studies with longer follow-up, the mean impact is positive and statistically significant. However, these follow-ups are still short compared to those for the Perry
Preschool program and ABC.101 Although these programs appear promising, evidence on
their long-run effectiveness is lacking.
8.1.1

The Seattle Social Development Project (SSDP)

Of all of the programs reported in Durlak et al. (2011), the Seattle Social Development
Project (SSDP) has been evaluated the most thoroughly. The program targeted public
elementary schools in high-crime areas of Seattle. The full program lasted from first grade
through sixth grade.
The program emphasized attachment and interaction between children and their parents and teachers. Throughout elementary school, the participants’ teachers received five
days of training per year that included proactive classroom management, interactive teaching, and cooperative learning. The first-grade teachers received additional lessons based on
the Cognitive Problem-Solving curriculum, which teaches children to resolve conflicts with
101

The largest federal study to date on character education programs failed to find evidence for improvements in behavior or academic performance (see Social and Character Development Research Consortium,
2010).

51

peers (Shure and Spivack, 1988). In first and second grade, parents were offered a sevensession course on behavioral management training.102 In second and third grade, parents
were offered a four-session course to support their children’s academic achievement.103 Finally, in fifth and sixth grade, parents were offered a five-session course designed to reduce
drug use.104 Parents of 43% of the children participated in parenting classes.105
The program improved a variety of long-run outcomes. Table 4 shows that SSDP improved grades and behavior during adolescence. At age 21, participants were 10 percentage
points more likely to have graduated from high school (or have earned an equivalency degree). By age 24, this effect faded, but this likely occurred because members of the control
group earn GED certificates.106 GED certificates do not confer the same benefits as a traditional high school diploma.107 By ages 24 and 27, the participants were 12 percentage points
more likely to earn an associate’s degree. The treatment group had higher earnings at ages
24 and 27, although treatment effects on income are not precisely determined. The program
improved self-efficacy at age 21 and 24 but did not have a statistically significant effect on
achievement test scores. The program improved mental health in the long run. Like many
other programs, if one judged it solely on the basis of achievement tests, SSDP would be
unsuccessful. Considering meaningful life outcomes and non-cognitive outcomes presents a
far more positive picture.
102
The course followed the “Catch ’Em Being Good” curriculum (Hawkins, Von Cleve, and Catalano Jr,
1991).
103
The course consisted of four sessions that followed the “How to Help Your Child Succeed in School”
curriculum (Abbott, O’Donnell, Hawkins, Hill, Kosterman, and Catalano, 1998).
104
The course followed the “Preparing for the Drug (Free) Years” curriculum (Haggerty, Kosterman,
Catalano, and Hawkins, 1999).
105
Hawkins et al. (1999).
106
Few people earn a traditional high school degree between age 21 and 24.
107
See Heckman et al. (2014b) and the literature they review. Unfortunately, Hawkins et al. (1999, 2005,
2008) fail to distinguish high school graduates from GED recipients, a common failing in the literature.

52

Table 4 Summary of Treatment Effects from the Seattle Social Development Project
Age
(h)

Outcome

Age 18

GPA
CAT(ES)(a)
Grade Repetition(%)
Dropout(%)
School Misbehavior(b)
Violent Crime(%)
Ever Arrested(%)
Arrested past year(%)
Smoking(%)
Pregnancy(%)
Anxiety(%)(c)
Depression(%)(c)
High School Graduate/GED(%)
More than 2 Years of College(%)
Self-efficacy(d)
Associate’s Degree(%)
Bachelor’s Degree(%)
Substance Abuse Index(e)
Mental Health Disorder Index(f )
Income(in thousands)(g)

0.24∗∗∗
0.05∗∗∗
−8.7∗∗∗
−7.3∗∗∗
−1.41∗∗∗
−11.4∗∗∗
−6.0∗∗∗
−0.7∗∗∗
−9.3∗∗∗

(i)

Age 24(j)

Age 27(j)

−2.0∗∗∗

1.0∗∗∗

1.0∗∗∗

−9.0∗∗∗

−8.0∗∗∗

6.0∗∗∗

6.0∗∗∗

0.13∗∗∗
12.0∗∗∗
7.0∗∗∗
3.0∗∗∗
−9.0∗∗∗
3.51∗∗∗

−0.01∗∗∗
12.0∗∗∗
6.0∗∗∗
−3.0∗∗∗
−11.0∗∗∗
3.12∗∗∗

Age 21

∗∗∗

−2.0
−8.0∗∗∗
10.0∗∗∗
8.0∗∗∗
0.17∗∗∗

Notes: The estimates are coefficients from regressions that control for sample member characteristics. % refers to treatment effects in terms of changes in prevalence in outcome variable in
percentage points. ES indicates Effect Size, reporting the treatment effect in standard deviations of
the outcome variable. (a) CAT stands for California Achievement Test score and combines reading,
language, and mathematics subtests. It has been standardized based on the sample of ninth-grade
Seattle students. (b) Measures frequency of occurrence of skipping, cheating, and being sent from
class. (c) Anxiety, social phobia, and depression were measured using the DSM-IV (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994). The mental health disorder index groups this for anxiety, social
phobia, posttraumatic stress disorders, and major depressive episodes. (d) Measured as mean
score on six items concerning perceived future opportunities, on a scale of 1–4. (e) The Substance
Abuse Index measures dependence on substances (tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drugs) using DSM-IV
criteria. (f ) The Mental Health Disorder Index summarizes problems of anxiety, social phobia,
posttraumatic stress and depression, using DSM-IV criteria. (g) Refers to income from all sources,
before taxes. Includes zero-earners; income is top-coded at $200,000. (h) Hawkins et al. (1999). (i)
Hawkins et al. (2005). (j) Hawkins et al. (2008).
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.

53

8.1.2

The Montreal Longitudinal Experimental Study (MLES)

The Montreal Longitudinal Experimental Study (MLES) provides further evidence that noncognitive skills can be shaped during elementary school.108 MLES shared a number of similarities with SSDP. They both targeted similar ages, focused on behavioral skills training,
involved parents, and had similar effects on outcomes. MLES was a two-year program
that lasted between ages seven and nine and targeted boys who had behavioral issues in
kindergarten. The intervention consisted of 19 sessions that included a variety of social
behavior/skills training administered by professionals. It also included a parental training
component that focused on fostering similar skills.
Algan et al. (2014) evaluate the intervention by the method of random assignment. They
find that the program improved a range of adult outcomes. It increased full time employment
or school enrollment at ages 17-26 by 11 percentage points and secondary school graduation
by ages 23-24 by 19 percentage points. It reduced the probability of having a criminal record
by ages 23-24 by 11 percentage points. They find that the program also boosted measures of
non-cognitive skills and grades during adolescence. They do not collect data on test scores
and psychological measures, so it is not clear whether the improvements in grades are due to
changes in non-cognitive skills alone or whether it also improved cognitive skills (as measured
by test scores).
8.1.3

Cambridge-Somerville Program

The Cambridge-Somerville Program is an example of a primary school program that harmed
its participants. This five-year intervention targeted five to thirteen year-old boys with
behavioral problems. The program was evaluated by the method of random assignment. The
treatment differed among participants, but included medical assistance, tutoring, access to
summer camps, and meetings with parents (McCord and McCord, 1959). A 30-year followup showed that participants exhibited worse drinking habits, more serious mental diseases,
108

See Algan, Beasley, Vitaro, and Tremblay (2014) for a detailed description of the program and study.

54

more heart problems, higher blood pressure, (modestly) higher crime rates, and died younger
(McCord, 1978). Despite the negative effects, participants reported that they thought the
program helped them. McCord (1978) speculates that the program failed because it did
not create a sense of autonomy among its participants. When the intensive assistance was
removed, the treatment group might have fallen back into unfavorable behaviors. Unlike
SSDP and MLES, it did not actively engage parents and it did not target specific behavioral
skills. These factors might have reduced its efficacy.
8.1.4

Project STAR

Project STAR provides evidence that higher quality kindergarten classes improve later-life
outcomes by improving non-cognitive skills. From kindergarten through third grade, children
and teachers were randomly assigned to classrooms of differing class sizes. In an analysis
that builds on the earlier work of Heckman et al. (2013), Chetty et al. (2011) examine the
Project STAR program and find that students placed in higher quality kindergarten classes
tend to have higher test scores at the end of kindergarten. They measure quality by peer
average performance on the SAT. By eighth grade, the effect on test scores faded over time.
As with the Perry program, benefits emerge later in life. Children placed in better
kindergarten classrooms had significantly higher earnings in early adulthood. Furthermore,
kindergarten classroom quality also predicts better fourth- and eighth-grade behavior as
measured by teacher-assessed effort, initiative, interest in the class, and disruptive behavior.
In turn, measured behavior predicts earnings in adulthood, suggesting that improvement
in non-cognitive skills is the main channel through which better kindergarten classrooms
improve earnings. The studies of Perry and STAR demonstrate the importance of long-run
followups, and the importance of accounting for non-cognitive skills in evaluating intervention
programs.

55

9

Education and Interventions Targeted Toward Adolescents and Young Adults

Compared to early-childhood programs, the evidence on adolescent programs is less abundant. There are, however, some well-documented and promising interventions. We divide
adolescent programs into four main categories: (1) mentoring programs for at-risk students;
(2) residential-based education programs for high school dropouts; (3) in-school, professional training; and (4) incentives for student performance. Several mentorship programs
and residential-based programs appear promising but have relatively short follow-ups. Somewhat similar programs with long follow-ups have had no long-term effects. These programs
appear to achieve their short-term effects by closely monitoring participants and removing
them from their usual environments.109 Programs that combine work and education are
more promising and have been shown to have lasting effects. A few programs that combine
long-term mentoring with financial support to attend college have improved educational
attainment but do not measure other outcomes.
Few programs that target adolescents have long-term follow-ups. As Table 2 shows, only
two evaluations of adolescent programs have follow-ups of at least 10 years, compared to 14
early-childhood and elementary school evaluations. Most adolescent intervention programs
measure fewer outcomes and focus mainly on schooling and employment.
Our framework on the life-cycle development of skills provides an interpretation of the
relative failure of adolescent programs. Early childhood is a sensitive period for the development of both cognitive and non-cognitive skills—prevention is more effective than remediation. Early investments are productive because early skills promote the development of later
skills and, through dynamic complementarity, make later investments more productive. The
finding that short-term benefits fade away quickly in most adolescent interventions might
indicate the importance of incentives and situations in affecting behavior. As previously
109

These are called “incapacitation” effects in criminology.

56

noted, several adolescent programs temporarily supervise and control the environments of
adolescents, thereby changing their incentives which beneficially, but temporarily, affects
their behavior.

9.1
9.1.1

Adolescent Mentorship Programs
Quantum Opportunity Program

The Quantum Opportunity Program (QOP) is one of the few adolescent mentorship programs with a long-term follow-up. Rodrı́guez-Planas (2012) estimates the effect of the QOP
on labor market outcomes, educational attainment, and risky behaviors. The program was
an intensive after-school program that provided mentoring, educational services, and financial incentives during the four years of high school (plus one additional year in case students
fell behind).
QOP was not successful in improving risky behaviors, and, if anything, caused harm for
male participants. Ten years after the start of the program, males in the treatment group
were 8 percentage points more likely to have been recently arrested. Males were more likely
to have completed two years of college or training, but the increased educational attainment
did not translate into higher earnings in the follow-up period. Female participants had better
educational outcomes during the first follow-up near the end of the program, but the control
group caught up by the end of the three-year follow-up.
Rodrı́guez-Planas (2010) suggests several reasons why the program might have failed.
First, increasing awareness about the consequences of risky behavior could have caused
teens to become fatalistic; for example, some might feel that drug addiction was inevitable.
Second, the mentors might have served as advocates when students were in trouble at school
or with the law, lowering the cost of engaging in problem behaviors. Third, students might
have used their stipends to purchase drugs or alcohol. Fourth, the program organized group
activities among the participants, which could have induced negative peer-effects.

57

9.1.2

Becoming a Man

A recent evaluation of Chicago’s “Becoming a Man” (B.A.M.) program provides evidence
that mentorship programs that target non-cognitive skills and are coupled with academic
tutoring might improve cognitive and academic outcomes.110 The program starts in 9th and
10th grade and lasts for three-quarters of an academic year. It consists of two components.
First, it targets “social-cognitive” (non-cognitive) skills through B.A.M. – a one-hour, weekly
Cognitive Behavioral Training (CBT) implemented in groups. Second, it targets academic
skills through daily, hour-long tutoring sessions in math.
Cook et al. (2014) evaluate the program by the method of random assignment. They
find that during the year of the intervention, assignment to the program was associated with
a 0.5 standard deviation increase in math achievement test scores, a 0.4 standard deviation
increase in math grades, and reduction of absences by 10 days.111 It did not have an effect
on reading scores or reading grades. While the program is promising, the follow-up period
is far too short to determine whether it has lasting effects on meaningful outcomes.
Its implementation differed from QOP in important ways that might explain why B.A.M.
appears to be more successful. In contrast to QOP, it did not provide monetary incentives,
the tutoring was in very small groups, and the larger group sessions were partly designed to
reduce conflict and might have reduced negative peer effects.
9.1.3

Pathways to Education Program

The Pathways to Education Program (Pathways) is an adolescent intervention that operates in housing projects of Toronto.112 The program is available throughout high school for
residents living in particular neighborhoods. It consists of four main components. First,
students meet twice-a-week with a “Student-Parent Support Worker” (mentor) who works
110

See Cook, Dodge, Farkas, Fryer, Guryan, Ludwig, Mayer, Pollack, and Steinberg (2014) for a detailed
description of the program.
111
The effect sizes are relative to the control group.
112
See Oreopoulos, Brown, and Lavecchia (2014) for a detailed description of the program.

58

directly with students and parents and is the main interface between students and the program. Second, participants are required to attend tutoring sessions twice a week and can
attend up to four times a week.113 Third, in 9th and 10th grade, students are required to
participate in group mentorship every two weeks. The group activities range from cooking
to attending sports events. Fourth, students receive bus passes to help them attend school
and financial assistance for college.
Oreopoulos et al. (2014) evaluate the program non-experimentally by adopting a “differencein-difference” strategy that compares students from neighborhoods that offered Pathways to
students from other similar neighborhoods. They estimate that the availability of Pathways
increased secondary school completion and post-secondary enrollment by about 15 percentage points. The program also improves achievement test scores. Non-cognitive skills are not
directly measured.
As with B.A.M., Pathways differed from QOP and other unsuccessful interventions in
some key ways. First, the financial incentives were only usable for bus fare and college
tuition, mitigating the possibility that they could be used to purchase drugs or alcohol as
was a concern in QOP. Second, Pathways was introduced at the neighborhood-level and the
take-up rates were over 85%, so it did not group only the highest-risk students together
which might have limited the role of negative peer effects. Third, it more actively engaged
parents.
9.1.4

Big Brothers Big Sisters

The Big Brothers Big Sisters (BBBS) mentoring program effectively improves educational
outcomes (Tierney et al., 1995). The program is aimed at children (ages 10-16) living
in unstable family environments, which generally are single-parent households. Volunteer
mentors have regular and lengthy meetings with the enrollees for an average treatment
length of one year.
113

Students with sufficiently high grades are exempt from the mandatory tutoring.

59

Tierney et al. (1995) evaluate the program by comparing treated children to a control
group that was put on a waiting list for the program. BBBS has positive impacts on academic
outcomes but only for girls. The effects on direct measures of non-cognitive skills related to
Big Five Neuroticism (Self-Worth, Social Acceptance, and Self-Confidence) are positive but
not statistically significant. Treatment group children are less likely to hit other children
or lie to their parents. The follow-up lasted only 18 months after random assignment.
Given the results from QOP, this follow-up is too short to determine whether the effects are
persistent. However, BBBS differed in important ways from QOP. BBBS features one-on-one
mentorship, which allows mentees and mentors to form stronger attachments and might help
avoid the negative peer effects of grouping at-risk youth together.
9.1.5

Empresários Pela Inclusão Social (EPIS) Program

Martins (2010) analyzes data from Empresários Pela Inclusão Social (EPIS), a program
developed to improve student achievement of 13- to 15-year-olds in Portugal. Unlike many
other interventions, EPIS emphasizes non-cognitive skills, aiming to increase motivation,
self-esteem, and study skills. The program consists of one-on-one meetings with a trained
staff member or meetings in small groups. The intervention is tailored to each participant’s
individual skill deficit. EPIS decreases grade retention by 10 percentage points, in a costeffective way. Other outcomes are not reported.
9.1.6

H&R Block FAFSA experiment

In this paper, we have primarily analyzed interventions through the lens of skill development. Other interventions provide adolescents and young adults with specific information or
assistance useful in attaining concrete goals or outcomes given a fixed skill base. Bettinger,
Long, Oreopoulos, and Sanbonmatsu (2012) analyze an intervention that helped families
complete financial aid applications and provided them with information about eligibility for
financial aid.

60

In collaboration with a tax preparation service, Bettinger et al. (2012) identified a group
of low-income families with adolescents or young adults who did not yet have a bachelor’s
degree. They assigned a member of these families into a group that received help completing
a financial aid form and an estimate of their college aid eligibility, a group that received
only an estimate of their college aid eligibility, or a control group. They divide the sample
into participants who are dependent on parents and independent adults. They find that
dependents whose parents received help in completing financial aid forms and eligibility
information were 8 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in college within the year
compared to the control group. No other groups benefited. This evidence suggests that
relatively small interventions that provide very specific types of information or assistance to
targeted groups can make a big difference. The follow-up period is too short to determine
whether members of the control group will eventually catch up.
9.1.7

Dartmouth College Coaching Program

In a similar vein as the H&R Block FAFSA experiment, the “Dartmouth College Coaching
Program” was a relatively short intervention that primarily consisted of providing information to students and helping them complete forms.114 The program targeted students in
their last year of secondary school who were on the cusp of applying to college but had taken
few steps in doing so. It provided these students with in-person mentorship, a waiver of their
college entrance exam fees, and a $100 bonus for completing the program. The mentorship
component was designed around a series of tasks required for college admission including
writing college essays, requesting transcripts, and completing the financial aid form.
Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) evaluate the intervention by the method of random assignment. They find that assignment to the treated group increased college enrollment of female
students by about 15 percentage points but had no effect on male students.115 In one cohort
114

See Carrell and Sacerdote (2013) for a detailed description of the program.
The enrollment variable is based on whether the student ever enrolled in college during the sample
period. They implemented the experiment for different cohorts so that the follow-up duration depends on
the cohort.
115

61

they also offered the control group $100 for completing college applications and estimated
similar treatment effects, suggesting that the cash incentives played a small role.

9.2
9.2.1

Residential-Based Programs
Job Corps

The Job Corps is the largest residential training program in the United States for at-risk
youth. Youth spend one year in training and remedial education, and receive counseling and
training in social skills. Early evaluations found that the program improved many outcomes
including wages, welfare dependence, college attendance, health, and crime.116 However,
more recent evaluations report that gains in earnings fade and that the reduced crime effects
came primarily during the program and only for the residential participants (Schochet et al.,
2001, 2008). The net earnings effects are basically zero.117 The program’s emphasis on job
search might explain the temporary increase in earnings after participants leave it.
9.2.2

National Guard ChalleNGe

The National Guard Youth ChalleNGe program is a 17-month intervention for youth who
dropped out of high school. Like the Job Corps, most training occurs in a residential facility
removed from the usual environments of participants. The program features a two-week
residential orientation and assessment period, a 20-week residential program often conducted
at a military base, and a one-year, nonresidential mentoring program (Bloom et al., 2009;
Millenky et al., 2010, 2011).
Nine months after the program, participants are more likely to have a GED or high school
diploma and be employed. They are less likely to have been arrested or convicted. Three
years after the intervention, the effects for criminal behavior and high school graduation
decline and become statistically insignificant. The initial reduction in crime likely occurs
116

See, e.g., Mallar, Kerachsky, Thornton, and Long (1982).
For males ages 20–24 there appear to be modest Job Corps effects. However, these findings do not
survive adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing (Schochet et al. (2008)).
117

62

because participants are housed in a residential program (an incapacitation effect). In-depth
interviews of the participants suggest that it was difficult for participants to maintain the
discipline that they had learned once they returned to their original environments (Millenky
et al. (2011)). However, the employment and earnings effects persist. Given the similarities
between the Job Corps and the ChalleNGe program, the three-year follow-up might not be
long enough to determine whether the labor market effects are persistent.

9.3

Workplace-Based Adolescent Intervention Programs

Workplace-based internships and apprenticeships can boost skills.118 A hundred and fifty
years ago, apprenticeships and workplace-based education were standard for most adolescents. Apprenticeships offer in-depth, work-based learning combined with related academic
course work. Few rigorous studies have examined how entering and completing apprenticeships in the United States affects the educational attainment, job skills, non-academic
skills, and job market outcomes of young people.119 A study of high school students who
participated in a Wisconsin youth apprenticeship in printing documented participant earnings levels substantially above expected earnings for similar youth (Orr, Bloom, Bell, Lin,
Cave, and Doolittle, 1994). Anecdotal evidence suggests that youth apprenticeships motivate participants to do better in school and to pursue difficult courses broadly related to
their occupational interests.
Well-structured career-focused programs can potentially enhance non-cognitive as well
as occupational skills, in ways most relevant to the occupations and tasks that engage young
people. Halpern (2009) undertook in-depth, observational studies of high school youth ap118

We have benefitted from the commentary of Robert Lerman in preparing this subsection. See Lerman
(2013) for a discussion of related issues.
119
Students involved in Wisconsin’s Youth Apprenticeship Program believed their worksite learning experiences were excellent, with 84%–86% reporting that they enabled them to improve their problem-solving and
teamwork skills (Scribner and Wakelyn, 1998). Students reported gaps between their work-based and schoolbased learning. But interviews with instructors and employers indicated that apprentices improved their social and interpersonal skills, develop independent decision-making skills, and increased their self-confidence
and self-esteem. However, one should be wary of self-reports. Students in the Cambridge-Somerville program reported satisfaction with the program, even though objective evaluations of it were negative (McCord,
1978).

63

prenticeships. Halpern’s qualitative analysis of these programs is rich and difficult to summarize. Nonetheless, several perspectives are worth noting. He gives many examples of how
apprentices gradually develop expertise in an occupation as well as in problem-solving skills.
They acquire self-confidence, teamwork, the ability to take direction and take initiatives, and
other non-cognitive skills. He notes that participating youth see themselves as judged by
their ability to meet or exceed the established standards of an occupation, including meeting
deadlines and facing genuine constraints and unexpected difficulties that arise in the profession.120 Adult mentors scaffold the discipline protocol for the apprentice, sequencing and
controlling task demands to keep them on the constructive side of difficulty. They direct
apprentices’ attention, demonstrate new points, and sometimes collaborate with them.
Utilizing workplaces as learning locations is motivated by evidence of the importance of
occupational and non-cognitive skills. Workplace-oriented training can help youth attain
development goals such as personal autonomy, efficacy, motivation, realism, optimism, and
knowledge of vocations. It facilitates matching between workers and firms, and motivates
adolescents to acquire relevant academic and non-cognitive skills. Evidence from other countries shows that workplace-based learning helps students develop an occupational identity,
a professional ethic, and self-esteem based on accomplishment (Rauner, 2007). We review
some of the better documented programs in this section.
9.3.1

Career Academies

Career Academies provide evidence that integrating career development into a standard high
school can have long-term labor market benefits. These academies operate within regular
high schools and prepare students for postsecondary education and employment. In addition to regular high school courses, Career Academies offer courses that are career- or
occupation-focused (Kemple and Willner, 2008). Individual academies focus on preparing
students for participation in particular industries such as finance, health science, hospitality,
120
To quote Halpern, “Young people learn through observation, imitation, trial and error, and reiteration;
in other words through force of experience.”

64

and tourism. They include activities that might enhance non-cognitive skills in the workplace (Kemple and Snipes, 2000). Career Academies have many features in common with
European apprenticeship programs.
Compared to other high schools, Career Academies expose students to career-oriented
activities, including job shadowing, career fairs, job search workshops, resume preparation,
and interview preparation. Students work together in teams when relating their experiences.
A recent evaluation based on random assignment estimates the effects of Career Academies on
labor market, educational, and social outcomes (Kemple and Willner, 2008). Table 5 shows
the differences in outcomes between the control and treatment groups. Career Academies
have positive and sustained impacts on earnings and employment among young men but
have no impact on high school completion rates and postsecondary educational enrollment
and attainment rates.121 Treatment group participants are more likely to live independently
with children and a spouse/partner. Young males in the treatment group are more likely
to get married and become custodial parents. For females, most effects are positive but not
statistically significant.
Career Academies likely benefit their students by improving non-cognitive skills. The
program improves earnings for males in the long run, even though it does not improve educational attainment or scores on achievement tests. The Career Academies include activities
that are designed to improve non-cognitive skills. Internships may teach students the importance of perseverance and Conscientiousness, along with other occupation-related skills that
improve their labor market readiness. Programs that integrate school and work not only
motivate students to learn relevant academic material but also integrate adolescents into the
larger society and teach children the skills valued in the workplace and in society at large.
121

The percentage gains in earnings were highest for the students facing the highest risk of dropping out
of school. Young women did not experience any statistically significant gains in earnings. Given that only
55% of the treatment group actually finished the full curriculum of the Career Academy, the earnings gains
likely understate the actual impact of full participation.

65

Table 5 Summary of Treatment Effects from Career Academies within 96-Month Follow-Up
after Scheduled High School Graduation
Outcome

Males

Females

361∗∗∗
2.8∗∗∗
4.1∗∗∗
0.6∗∗∗

118∗∗∗
−0.3∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗
0.7∗∗∗

−0.4∗∗∗
3.6∗∗∗
2.0∗∗∗
−1.0∗∗∗
−2.2∗∗∗

0.2∗∗∗
1.3∗∗∗
0.1∗∗∗
1.8∗∗∗
−1.6∗∗∗

9.0∗∗∗
11.5∗∗∗
−6.4∗∗∗

1.5∗∗∗
3.7∗∗∗
0.2∗∗∗

Labor Market (49–96 Months)
Monthly Earnings ($)(a)
Months Employed (#)
Average Hours Worked per Week (#)
Average Hourly Wages ($)
Educational Attainment (After 96 Months)
High School Diploma
GED
Certificate/License
AA Degree
BA Degree
Family Formation (After 96 Months)
Married and Living Together
Custodial Parent
Non-Custodial Parent

Notes: Impact estimates are regression-adjusted to control for background characteristics of the sample and
for the clustering of students within schools and random assignment years. (a) Nonworkers were assigned a
value of “0” for monthly earnings.
∗
10% significance; ∗∗ 5% significance; ∗∗∗ 1% significance.
Source: Kemple and Willner (2008).

9.3.2

Year-Up Program

The Year-Up program provides low-income, mostly black and Hispanic 18- to 24-year-olds
with full-time classes and six-month internships. To enter the program, applicants must
submit a written essay, letters of reference, a high school transcript, and attendance records
(Grobe, Rosenblum, and Weissman, 2010). Given the requirements, Year-Up applicants may
be more motivated than their peers.
During the first six months of the program, students take classes involving business
writing, time management, teamwork, problem solving, and conflict resolution (Grobe et al.
(2010)). To remain in the program, students must maintain high attendance rates, be on
time, and complete assignments (Roder and Elliot, 2011). Students who complete classes

66

are placed in internships with companies (Roder and Elliot, 2011). Participants continue
to attend a weekly class during their internships where they share experiences about their
internships, work on their resumes, do mock job interviews, and look into postsecondary
options. Students also learn technical skills
Roder and Elliott (2014) study the effect of Year-Up on labor market outcomes three
years after the end of the program. Qualified applicants on the waiting list were assigned
to treatment or control groups. Three years after the program ended, the treatment group
has higher annual earnings, primarily due to their increased hourly wages. The employment
rates are similar between the treatment and control groups. The earnings and wage benefits
arise from improvements in job quality. Compared to the control group, more members
in the treatment group find higher paying jobs in information technology and investment
operations.
The three-year follow-up is too short to determine whether the program has lasting
effects, but some evidence suggests that the benefits might be more permanent than other
similar programs. The Job Corps primarily improves earnings in the short run by increasing
employment (Schochet et al. (2008)). In contrast, Year-Up increases hourly wages (Roder
and Elliot, 2011). If these wage increases reflect increased human capital formation, the
benefits likely last longer. About a quarter of the treatment group is hired by the employer
sponsoring their internship.
The evaluation reports no direct measures of non-cognitive skills, but it does provide
clues that the program affected non-cognitive in ways that lead to better outcomes in the job
market. Year-Up students were taught that appropriate behavior, dress, and communication
are important for success.
9.3.3

Self-Sufficiency Project

The Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) provides direct evidence that working improves
non-cognitive skills. New welfare enrollees were told that if they remained on welfare a year

67

later, they would have the chance to participate in the SSP study. After a year, they were
either assigned to a treatment group that would receive an earnings subsidy for three years
if they worked full time or to a control group that would not.122
Assessing the effect of employment on skills is complicated by the possibility of reverse
causality. Just as employment might affect skills, skills might affect employment. The SSP
program provides a way to study the effects of exogenous variation of employment status
on skills. Gottschalk (2005) uses assignment status in the experiment as an instrumental
variable for employment to estimate the effect of employment on Locus of Control (the
extent to which people feel they have control over their lives).123 After 36 months, those
who received the subsidy were more likely to have an improved Locus of Control, suggesting
that work can improve this non-cognitive skill. This finding supports the earlier evidence
that work-based education can improve non-cognitive skills. Other studies evaluate the labor
market benefits of the program, but the findings are mixed.124
9.3.4

Apprenticeship Programs125

Apprentices are employees who have formal agreements with employers to carry out a recognized program of work-based and classroom learning. Apprenticeships typically begin in
late adolescence or early adulthood. The training is highly structured, with a well-designed
curriculum usually lasting three to four years. It is common for apprentices to spend three
to four days per week at workplaces, acquiring knowledge and undertaking productive work
involving gradually increasing levels of complexity. Classroom instruction in theoretical and
general studies takes place at vocational schools one to two days per week. Apprentices participate in the production process, work with a trainer who is often a mentor, and ultimately
gain sufficient occupational mastery to become certified by an external body (Wolter and
Ryan, 2011). The emphasis is on occupational skills, but apprentices are likely to improve
122

See Michalopoulos et al. (2002) for a detailed description of the program.
Locus of Control is related to Big Five Neuroticism. See Almlund et al. (2011) for a discussion.
124
See, e.g., Card and Hyslop (2009); Michalopoulos et al. (2002); Zabel et al. (2010, 2013).
125
The commentary and text of Robert Lerman was helpful in preparing this section. See Lerman (2013).
123

68

non-cognitive skills and other generic employment skills as well, including those most relevant for their chosen occupation. The training is employer-led and thus sensitive to market
demands and less costly to the government than full-time schooling. Career Academies and
apprenticeship programs share many features in common. They train participants in the
skills of specific occupations, supplement the training with general education, and provide
guidance and mentoring for participants.
Apprenticeship training is common in many countries, reaching 55%–70% of youth in
Austria, Germany, and Switzerland. The scale of apprenticeship varies widely across countries. Apprenticeships as a share of the total labor force are about 3.7%–3.9% in Australia
and Germany, about 2.3%–2.5% in Canada and England, and 1.7% in France but only about
0.3% in the United States.126
Given the concern that apprenticeships train workers too narrowly and make apprentices less adaptable to a changing labor market, in evaluating apprenticeship programs it is
important to follow those completing apprenticeships over long time horizons. At a minimum, an evaluation has to find an appropriate comparison group, estimate costs to firms,
workers, and the government, and take account of the heterogeneity of occupations used for
apprenticeships.
Several studies of apprenticeship training in European countries find high rates of returns
to participants, often in the range of 10%–15%.127 Bougheas and Georgellis (2004) find that
about 70% of apprentices were in full-time employment immediately after training. Cooke
(2003) shows that apprentices do not initially earn more than other workers, but experience
greater wage growth.
One recent study of apprenticeship training analyzes small Austrian firms that eventu126

Apprenticeships have expanded rapidly in several countries, including Australia (rising from 157,000
in 1996 to 515,000 in 2012) and in England (rising from 53,000 in 1990 to 614,000 in 2012) (National
Apprenticeship Service, 2012; National Centre for Vocational Education Research, 2012). Along with the
increasing roles of apprenticeship in Australia and England have come initiatives to upgrade the quality of
their programs (McDowell, Oliver, Persson, Fairbrother, Wetzlar, Buchanan, and Shipstone, 2011).
127
See, e.g., Adda, Dustmann, Meghir, and Robin (2013); Bougheas and Georgellis (2004); Clark and Fahr
(2002); Winkelmann (1996).

69

ally failed. It compares the wages of apprentices who started well before the firm failed (and
thus who had a long period in apprenticeship training) with wages of apprentices who spent
less time in training because the firm failed earlier in their apprenticeship period (Fersterer,
Pischke, and Winter-Ebmer, 2008). Estimates suggest that for a three- to four-year apprenticeship, post-apprenticeship wages are 12%–16% higher than they would otherwise be.
Since the worker’s costs of participating in an apprenticeship are often minimal, the returns
are high.
What about job and occupational mobility? Buechtemann, Schupp, and Soloff (1993)
find that about 80% of apprentices join the firm where they apprenticed after completing
the program. In order to examine the adaptability of apprenticeship training, researchers
(Clark and Fahr, 2002; Geel and Backes-Gellner, 2009) identified groups of skills that are
required for each occupation. Changing occupations may not imply a significant change in
the types of expertise required because of the overlap of skill requirements across occupations.
While only 42% of apprentices stay in their initial occupation, nearly two-thirds remain with
the apprentice occupation or another occupation requiring a similar mix of skills (Geel and
Backes-Gellner, 2009). When apprentices move to another occupation that requires similar
skills, their wages increase. Those trained in occupations with more specific skills are most
likely to remain in their initial occupation or move to occupations within the same cluster.128
Germany has formally integrated apprenticeship programs into its educational system
with apparent success. In Germany, there are three types of secondary schools: low (Hauptschule), medium (Realschule), and high (Gymnasium). Students who graduate from any of
these secondary schools qualify to participate in the dual apprenticeship program. Those
who graduate from higher quality schools have more prestigious vocational options.129 The
apprenticeships typically last about three years during which participants spend one to two
128

Clark and Fahr (2002) also find that the wage penalty of departing from the occupation for which
apprentices trained varies with the distance away from the original occupation and that there is no penalty
at all from displacement into a somewhat related occupation. Among the former apprentices changing
occupations, about two of five report using many or very many of the skills from their apprenticeship and
another 20% used some of the skills.
129
See Franz and Soskice (1995) for a detailed description of the program.

70

days per week in a part-time vocational training school. They work the remaining time
(Franz and Soskice, 1995).
Harhoff and Kane (1997) argue that apprentices occupy a similar place in the German
economy as high school graduates occupy in the American economy. They find that apprentices earn about 19% more than those completing 10 or fewer years of school but 47%
less than college graduates, whereas in the United States high school graduates earn about
23% more than those who complete 10 or fewer years of school but 42% less than those who
complete college. The estimates are similar over the life cycle.
Adda et al. (2013) estimate that participating in the German apprenticeship program
yields a 9%–10% annual rate of return. This estimate includes the return to non-cognitive
skills which the authors do not isolate from the other benefits of the program. It also includes
the return to the education and job training received, which likely produces skills valued in
the labor market.
Some American apprenticeships are also promising. Hollenbeck (2008) estimates rates
of return to various types of job training in Washington State. He compares outcomes
of apprentices to those of other workers with similar backgrounds and earnings histories.
His results show that apprenticeship training yields higher returns than other training or
postsecondary (mostly community college) occupational programs. For apprenticeships, the
social and governmental rates of return are large (over 20%) within the first 2.5 years after
apprentices exit the program.
Another, more recent study of apprenticeship in 10 American states documents large and
statistically significant earnings gains from participating in an apprenticeship (Reed, YungHsu Liu, Kleinman, Mastri, Reed, Sattar, and Ziegler (2012)). The study estimates how
the length of participation in an apprenticeship affects earnings, holding constant the preenrollment earnings of apprenticeship participants. Six years after starting a program, the
earnings of the average apprenticeship participant (average duration in an apprenticeship) are
40% higher than the earnings of nonparticipants with the same pre-apprenticeship history.

71

Workplace-based education is promising. It breaks down the artificial barrier between
the culture of high schools and that of the rest of society documented in Coleman (1961).
It motivates adolescents to learn relevant academic skills and gives mentoring and guidance
to participants, many of whom come from disadvantaged families where such guidance is
missing.

10

Other Curricula that Have Been Applied to Multiple Age Groups

10.1

Tools of the Mind

A random assignment evaluation of Tools of the Mind provides evidence that non-cognitive
skills can be fostered. Tools of the Mind is a program that attempts to teach preschool and
early primary schoolchildren to regulate their social and cognitive behaviors. The curriculum
encourages children to role-play and learn in groups with other children. In short-term followups, several studies show that it improves classroom behavior as well as executive functioning,
defined as higher-level cognitive skills, including inhibitory control, working memory, and
cognitive flexibility.130 Similar findings are reported for the Montessori preschool curriculum
(Lillard and Else-Quest, 2006).
However, the evidence on the program is not all favorable.131 There are few long-term
evaluations of it. As noted by Heckman et al. (2013), the Perry curriculum and the Tools of
the Mind curriculum have common intellectual influences, so the positive long-term evidence
on Perry arguably transfers to forecasting the likely long-run effects of Tools of the Mind.
130
Barnett, Jung, Yarosz, Thomas, Hornbeck, Stechuk, and Burns (2008); Barnett, Yarosz, Thomas, and
Hornbeck (2006); Bodrova and Leong (2001, 2007); Diamond, Barnett, Thomas, and Munro (2007).
131
See the study by Farran, Lipsey, and Wilson (2011).

72

10.2

Studies that Teach the Incremental Theory of Intelligence

Several studies examine the effect of teaching students that capabilities are malleable and
that learning can change the structure of the brain (the “incremental theory of intelligence”).
Dweck (2007) presents an extensive discussion of this approach. The focus in this intervention is on promoting cognition, but the measures used to evaluate the interventions include
achievement tests and grades that are also determined by non-cognitive skills. Some of this
research also measures perseverance. The theory underlying the intervention is that children
who believe that cognitive ability is a fixed trait might have little incentive to improve it.
The “mindset” interventions implement the logic of Figure 1. Effort and non-cognitive
skills determine performance on tasks, including performance on grades and achievement
tests. Motivating greater effort enhances performance, and the “mindset” intervention is
one such motivational exercise. At issue is whether the enhanced effort, however motivated,
has lasting consequences. Unfortunately, all of the follow-ups are short-term in nature, so the
important question—do these motivational programs have lasting consequences?—remains
unanswered.132
Aronson, Fried, and Good (2002) evaluate an intervention in which college students were
taught the incremental theory of intelligence. As a way to internalize the information, the
participants were instructed to write a letter that explains the theory to a low-performing
middle school student. At the end of the next academic quarter, the average GPA in the
treatment group was modestly higher than in the control group. There was no follow-up.
Good, Aronson, and Inzlicht (2003) study an intervention in which seventh-grade students
were taught the incremental theory of intelligence. At the end of the year, students who
learned about the incremental theory of intelligence performed somewhat better on the math
and reading sections of the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) achievement test.
The effect was strongest for girls.
132

Motivation research (Deci, 1971; Deci and Ryan, 1985) suggests that intrinsic rewards have longer
lasting consequences than extrinsic rewards (e.g., payments or punishment).

73

Blackwell, Trzesniewski, and Dweck (2007) evaluate a program in which seventh graders
are taught about the incremental theory of intelligence through a series of class sessions. The
treatment group and control group participated in eight 25-minute classroom sessions that
had similar course material about the physiology of the brain, study skills, and antistereotypic
thinking. Only the treatment group was taught the incremental theory of intelligence. After
one term, the treatment group improved its math GPAs relatively more than the control
group.
While these studies are promising, their follow-ups are very short. The longest follow-up
is a year after the beginning of the program. For example, it is possible that the interventions
increased motivation in the short run, much like the studies in which children are incentivized
using M&M candies. In addition, while the effects are statistically significant, they are
relatively small. It is unknown whether the benefits outweigh the costs. None of the studies
of the “mindset” intervention report a rate of return. The mechanism by which reported
results are produced is not analyzed.133

10.3

Prevention vs. Remediation

Targeted prevention is often more effective than remediation. However, it is not true that
in all cases prevention is better than remediation. The untargeted early childhood programs
favored by many policy advocates unwisely spend resources on children from strong family
environments who already have substantial early investments. In doing so they generate
dead weight loss. Even if the targeting of a prevention program is efficient, remediation may
still be a better strategy. Remediation programs delay expenditure until problems manifest
themselves. The effectiveness of a prevention strategy versus a remediation strategy depends,
in part, on the relative benefits of conducting the respective programs including the costs of
detecting problems early in life and the errors that result from incorrectly treating children
133

Hunt (2012), a leading authority on intelligence, provides a trenchant assessment of this group of
interventions and in particular the work of Dweck.

74

from perfectly normal families.134

11

The Effects of Education and Parental Investment
on Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skill

In this section, we discuss other evidence on the effect of schooling and parental investment on
promoting cognitive and non-cognitive skills. We largely draw on evidence from observational
studies but many of them address causality.
Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006) and Heckman et al. (2014) estimate the effect of
schooling in creating cognitive and non-cognitive skills, controlling for the problem of reverse
causality that schooling may be caused by skills. Specifically, they estimate the effect of
schooling on Self-Esteem and Locus of Control, non-cognitive skills related to Neuroticism.135
Figures 12 and 13 show the effect of education on measures of these skills: Schooling improves
both non-cognitive and cognitive skills. In results that are not displayed, they show that
these traits, in turn, boost a variety of labor market and social outcomes at age 30.136
134

See Heckman (2014).
The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale assesses the degree of approval or disapproval of oneself (Rosenberg,
1965). The relationship between these measures and the Big Five traits of Neuroticism is discussed in
Almlund et al. (2011). See Table 1.
136
Both Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi (2014) and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006) use an
identification strategy employing matching on proxies for unobserved skills that corrects for measurement
error and the endogeneity of schooling.
135

75

Figure 12 Causal Effect of Schooling on ASVAB Measures of Cognition
(a) Arithmetic Reasoning

(b) Word Knowledge
1.5
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5
Less than 12

12

1

0.5

0

− 0.5
Less than 12

16 or more
16 or more

13 −15

12

16 or more

(b)

(a)

(c) Paragraph (a)
Comprehension

(d) Math Knowledge
1.5
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

1.5
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

13 −15

Years of completed schooling at test date

Years of completed schooling at test date

1

0.5

0

−0.5
Less than 12

12

1

0.5

0

−0.5
Less than 12

more
1616
or or
more

13 −15

12

13 −15

16 or more

Years of completed schooling at test date

Years of completed schooling at test date

(d)

(c)

(e) Coding Speed
Mean value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5
Less than 12

12

13 −15

16 or more

Years of completed schooling at test date

(e)

Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 4).
Notes: Mean effect of schooling on components of the ASVAB. The first four components are averaged to create males with
average ability. We standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero and variance one. The model is estimated
using the NLSY79 sample. Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, 2.5%–97.5% confidence intervals. Regressors
are fixed at means.

76

Figure 13 Causal Effect of Schooling on Two Measures of Non-Cognitive Skill
(b) Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
(a)

0.8

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

Expected value of test score, covariates fixed at mean

(a) Rotter Locus of Control Scale

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

−0.2
Less than 12
12
13 or more
Years of completed schooling at test date

Source: Heckman et al. (2006, Figure 5).
Notes: Effect of schooling on socioemotional scales for males with average ability, with 95% confidence bands. The locus of
control scale is based on the four-item abbreviated version of the Rotter Internal-External Locus of Control Scale. This scale
is designed to measure the extent to which individuals believe they have control over their lives through self-motivation or
self-determination (internal control), as opposed to the extent to which individuals believe that the environment controls their
lives (external control). The self-esteem scale is based on the 10-item Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. This scale describes a
degree of approval or disapproval toward oneself. In both cases, we standardize the test scores to have within-sample mean zero
and variance one, after taking averages over the respective sets of scales. The model is estimated using the NLSY79 sample.
Solid lines depict average test scores, and dashed lines, 2.5%–97.5% confidence intervals. Regressors are fixed at means.

77

Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) estimate a causal model of parental investment
using longitudinal data on the development of children with rich measures of parental investment and child skills. It estimates the model underlying Figure 9. They show that skills
are self-productive and exhibit dynamic complementarity; levels of skills at one age affect
the productivity of future investments at later ages and hence help determine the evolution
of future skills through direct and cross effects. For example, more motivated children learn
more.
The authors find that it is more difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse environments on cognitive skills in adolescence than it is to build cognitive skills at earlier
ages. Thus the early years are sensitive periods for cognitive skills. This finding is consistent
with the high-rank stability of cognitive skills after age 11 or so; it also helps to explain the
evidence on ineffective cognitive remediation strategies for disadvantaged adolescents documented in Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006), Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron,
and Shonkoff (2006), and Cunha and Heckman (2007).
Non-cognitive skills foster cognitive development. Greater malleability of non-cognitive
skills is found over longer stretches of the life cycle than for cognitive skills. This occurs
in part because new aspects of non-cognitive skills emerge with maturity and can be influenced.137 Investment in non-cognitive skills in the early years has a higher economic return
than investment in the later years because it builds the base for subsequent investment.
Nonetheless, the productivity of later-age investment in non-cognitive skills is substantial. If
the early years have been compromised, it is more effective in the adolescent years to focus
on developing non-cognitive skills rather than on cognitive skills.138
Heckman et al. (2014) estimate a sequential model of education to study the effects of
education on a variety of outcomes, controlling for cognitive and non-cognitive skills and
the endogeneity of education. Correcting for selection into education, they find that early
137

Borghans et al. (2008); Roberts and Mroczek (2008); Roberts, Walton, and Viechtbauer (2006).
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) report that 16% of the variation in educational attainment is
explained by adolescent cognitive skills, 12% is due to adolescent socioemotional traits (non-cognitive skills),
and 15% is due to measured parental investments.
138

78

cognitive and non-cognitive skills have substantial causal effects on schooling, labor market
outcomes, adult health, and social outcomes and that education at most levels causally
produces benefits in labor market, health, and social outcomes. They also study the effects
of schooling on measures of adult non-cognitive skills and find substantial impacts. They
show that both cognitive and non-cognitive skills strongly determine schooling attainment
but that for many outcomes there are additional effects of both cognitive and non-cognitive
skills on outcomes beyond their effects on education and the effect of education on outcomes.
Jackson (2013) estimates a valued-added model of the effect of ninth-grade math and
English teachers on student cognitive and non-cognitive skills as measured by absences,
suspensions, grades, and grade progression.139 Similar models have been adopted by school
districts to assess the teacher’s impact on student achievement test scores and to determine
teacher bonuses. Jackson estimates a bigger effect of teachers on non-cognitive skills than on
cognitive skills.140 Estimated teacher effects on cognitive and non-cognitive skills are only
weakly correlated with each other, suggesting that some teachers improve one dimension of
skill without improving the other. These findings imply that using achievement tests alone
to assess teacher effectiveness misses important dimensions of teacher quality.
Coleman, Hoffer, and Kilgore (1982), Neal (1997), and Bryk, Lee, and Holland (1993)
document the benefits of Catholic education in terms of scores on achievement tests.141 It has
long been speculated that Catholic schools mold non-cognitive skills through creating a more
disciplined environment and through teaching moral values. However, to our knowledge,
there are no direct estimates of the effects of religious education on non-cognitive skills.
Typical of the entire literature on evaluation of schools, these studies focus on the effects of
Catholic schools on test scores and schooling.
Arum (2005) documents the decline of disciplinary practices in American schools arising
139
See, e.g., the Teacher Advancement Program in Chicago Public Schools (Glazerman and Seifullah,
2012).
140
The estimates are from teacher “fixed-effect” models.
141
Neal (1997) corrects for the selection effect that Catholic schools can expel unruly and undisciplined
students. Uncontrolled comparisons could show a spurious positive effect of Catholic schools that do not
reflect their true effect on any given person.

79

in part from legal and legislative developments originating in the 1960s that increased the
rights of students and circumscribed teachers from using traditional measures of enforcing
discipline. He cites evidence showing that greater discipline improves test scores and behavior
and promotes high school graduation.142
Some modern schools have shown how it is possible to integrate non-cognitive skill education into schools. The Knowledge Is Power Program (KIPP) is a group of public charter
middle schools that are designed to improve educational outcomes for low-income families.
Tough (2012) discusses how the first wave of KIPP students excelled at taking achievement
tests but dropped out of college at disappointingly high rates. In response, KIPP schools
started to emphasize non-cognitive skills, “grit, self-control, social intelligence (including
self-advocacy), zest, optimism, and gratitude, that enable students to stick with college even
in the face of considerable obstacles” (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). Their motto is: Work
hard. Be nice.
Evidence on the efficacy of KIPP is lacking. An evaluation of KIPP schools suggests that
it has improved achievement test scores three years after students enter the program.143 A
recent report from KIPP found that 33% of the students graduate from a four-year college,
which is less than their goal of 75% but is four times higher than the rate for students
with comparable backgrounds (The KIPP Foundation, 2011). However, these evaluations
are based on comparing KIPP students to students in other schools; some have argued
that KIPP students have higher levels of starting achievement and that KIPP selects more
motivated students and parents into their schools.144 A recent randomized trial evaluation
of KIPP (Tuttle, Gill, Gleason, Knechtel, Nichols-Barrer, and Resch, 2013) found that KIPP
boosted achievement test scores but had mixed effects on non-cognitive skills. For example,
participants in KIPP were more likely to lie to their parents or quarrel with them (Tuttle
et al., 2013).
142

DiPrete, Muller, and Shaeffer (1981).
Tuttle, Teh, Nichols-Barrer, Gill, and Gleason (2010).
144
Carnoy, Jacobsen, Mishel, and Rothstein (2005).
143

80

Similar to KIPP, a recent intervention in Chicago attempts to foster non-cognitive skills.
The OneGoal program selects and trains high school teachers to help students apply to
colleges, improve grades and test scores, and, importantly, persist through college. It serves
low-income schools in Chicago, most of which have college enrollment rates of less than 50%.
Like KIPP, it attempts to cultivate non-cognitive skills (Tough, 2012). So far, OneGoal
appears to be successful: 94% of OneGoal participants attend college, and 85% of the college
enrollees complete the first year.145 In preliminary work, Kautz and Zanoni (2014) use nonexperimental methods to evaluate OneGoal. They find that OneGoal selects students with
near average cognitive skill but with above average non-cognitive skill. Nevertheless, after
controlling for pre-existing skill, OneGoal appears to improve academic indicators in high
school and boost high school graduation and college enrollment.
While there have been no published long-term evaluations of KIPP or OneGoal that
account for selection bias, these programs show that it is possible to openly emphasize noncognitive skills in schools without infringing on the rights of students or families or violating
the boundaries between church and state. These efforts can be viewed as secular versions of
moral and non-cognitive skill education that do not introduce religion into schools.

12

Summary

This paper reviews the recent literature on the economics and psychology of non-cognitive
skills and how interventions can develop non-cognitive skills. Non-cognitive skills predict
later-life outcomes with the same, or greater, strength as measures of cognition. They
have strong effects on educational attainment but have additional effects on important life
outcomes beyond their effects on schooling.
Non-cognitive skills can be enhanced, and there are proven and effective ways to do so.
Non-cognitive skills are shaped by families, schools, and social environments. At any age,
145

See http://www.onegoalgraduation.org/onegoal-results/. The OneGoal students are not old
enough to estimate college graduation rates.

81

non-cognitive skills are stable across different tasks, but performance on any task depends
on multiple skills as well as the effort expended on it. Effort, in turn, depends on incentives
to perform the task. Since all measures of cognitive and non-cognitive skills are measures
of performance on some task, it is necessary to standardize for incentives, effort, and other
skills in measuring any particular non-cognitive or cognitive skill, although this is not yet
widely done. Despite these difficulties, reliable measures of non-cognitive skills have been
developed, and there is an active literature on improving what is available.
Though stable at any age, skills are not set in stone over the life cycle. Both cognitive
and non-cognitive skills can change. Parents, schools, and social environments shape them,
although there are important genetic influences. Skill development is a dynamic process.
The early years are important in laying the foundation for successful investment in the later
years. While there is hard evidence on the importance of the early years in shaping all skills,
many non-cognitive skills are more malleable than cognitive skills at later ages.
This paper reviews a variety of interventions targeted to different stages of the life cycle.
Long-term evaluations of early childhood programs are more numerous. There is substantial evidence that high-quality early childhood programs have lasting and beneficial effects
on non-cognitive skills. The evidence on interventions in elementary schools shows lasting
benefits of interventions that primarily operate through boosting non-cognitive skills.
There are few long-term evaluations of adolescent interventions. The available evidence
suggests a much greater benefit from programs that target non-cognitive skills compared to
the benefits of programs that mainly target cognition and academic learning. Workplacebased programs that teach non-cognitive skills appear to be the most effective remediation
interventions for adolescents. They motivate acquisition of work-relevant skills and provide
discipline and guidance for disadvantaged youth that is often missing in their homes or high
schools. Successful interventions at any age emulate the mentoring and attachment that
successful families give their children. Recent work suggests that programs that provide
information can be beneficial in promoting educational attainment.

82

The available evidence suggests that the most successful adolescent remediation programs
are not as effective as the most successful early childhood and elementary school programs.
The successful early childhood programs are targeted toward disadvantaged children. Building an early base of skills that promote later-life learning and engagement in school and
society appears to be a good strategy. Based on the available evidence, early childhood
programs tend to have higher rates of return than adolescent programs. It is not, however,
necessarily true that prevention is better than remediation.146 The evidence to date may be
an artifact of the particular types of adolescent programs evaluated thus far.

References
Abbott, R. D., J. O’Donnell, J. D. Hawkins, K. G. Hill, R. Kosterman, and R. F. Catalano (1998). Changing teaching practices to promote achievement and bonding to school.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 68 (4), 542–552.
Achenbach, T. M. and L. A. Rescorla (2001). Manual for ASEBA School-Age Forms and
Profiles. Burlington, VT: Research Center for Children, Youth and Families.
Ackerman, P. L. and E. D. Heggestad (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests: Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin 121 (2), 219–245.
Adda, J., C. Dustmann, C. Meghir, and J.-M. Robin (2013). Career progression, economic
downturns, and skills. Unpublished manuscript, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London, UK.
Algan, Y., E. Beasley, F. Vitaro, and R. E. Tremblay (2014, February). The long-term
impact of non-cognitive skills training at school entry. Unpublished manuscript, Sciences
Po.
Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psychology
146

See Heckman (2014) for one analysis.

83

and economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 4, pp. 1–181. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV (4 ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Aos, S., R. Lieb, J. Mayfield, M. Miller, and A. Pennucci (2004). Benefits and costs of
prevention and early intervention programs for youth. Report 04-07-3901, Washington
State Institute for Public Policy, Olympia, WA.
Aronson, J., C. B. Fried, and C. Good (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on
African American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 38 (2), 113–125.
Arum, R. (2005). Judging School Discipline: The Crisis of Moral Authority. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ayllon, T. and K. Kelly (1972). Effects of reinforcement on standardized test performance.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (4), 477–484.
Barnett, W. S., K. Jung, D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, A. Hornbeck, R. Stechuk, and S. Burns
(2008). Educational effects of the Tools of the Mind curriculum: A randomized trial. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 23 (3), 299–313.
Barnett, W. S., D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, and A. Hornbeck (2006). Educational effectiveness
of a Vygotskian approach to preschool education: A randomized trial. Technical report,
National Institute for Early Education Research, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey.
Barrick, M. R. and M. K. Mount (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology 44 (1), 1–26.

84

Barton, P. (2006). High School Reform and Work: Facing Labor Market Realities. Princeton,
NJ: Educational Testing Service.
Becker, A., T. Deckers, T. Dohmen, A. Falk, and F. Kosse (2012, July). The relationship
between economic preferences and psychological personality measures. Annual Review of
Economics 4, 453–478.
Benda, B. B. (2005). The robustness of self-control in relation to form of delinquency. Youth
& Society 36 (4), 418–444.
Besharov, D. J., P. Germanis, C. A. Higney, and D. M. Call (2011). Houston Parent-Child
Development Center. Working Paper 17, University of Maryland, School of Public Policy,
Welfare Reform Academy.
Bettinger, E. P., B. T. Long, P. Oreopoulos, and L. Sanbonmatsu (2012). The role of
application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block
FAFSA experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1205–1242.
Blackwell, L. S., K. H. Trzesniewski, and C. S. Dweck (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an
intervention. Child Development 78 (1), 246–263.
Bloom, D., A. Gardenhire-Crooks, and C. L. Mandsager (2009). Reengaging high school
dropouts: Early results of the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe program evaluation.
Report, MDRC. Last accessed online February 11, 2013. http://www.mdrc.org/sites/
default/files/full_491.pdf.
Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2001). Tools of the Mind: A Case Study of Implementing
the Vygotskian Approach in American Early Childhood and Primary Classrooms. Geneva:
International Bureau of Education, UNESCO.

85

Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2007). Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach to Early
Childhood Education. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc.
Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The economics
and psychology of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 972–1059.
Borghans, L., B. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and H. Meijers (2009, April). Gender differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3), 649–658.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011a). Identification
problems in personality psychology. Personality and Individual Differences 51 (3: Special
Issue on Personality and Economics), 315–320.
Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011b). Reinterpreting
estimated effects of cognition on social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript, Department
of Economics, University of Chicago.
Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive skills
in explaining cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 2–12.
Bouchard, T. J. and J. C. Loehlin (2001, May). Genes, evolution and personality. Behavior
Genetics 31 (3), 243–273.
Bougheas, S. and Y. Georgellis (2004). Early career mobility and earnings profiles of German
apprentices: Theory and empirical evidence. Labour 18 (2), 233–263.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In J. J.
Heckman and E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5 of Handbooks in
Economics, Chapter 59, pp. 3705–3843. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Test scores and high school

86

grades as predictors. In Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at America’s Public
Universities, pp. 112–133. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bowlby, J. (1951). Maternal Care and Mental Health. Bulletin, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and
the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The determinants of earnings: A
behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1137–1176.
Boyle, S. H., R. B. Williams, D. B. Mark, B. H. Brummett, I. C. Siegler, and J. C. Barefoot
(2005). Hostility, age, and mortality in a sample of cardiac patients. American Journal of
Cardiology 96 (1), 64–66.
Breitmayer, B. J. and C. T. Ramey (1986, October). Biological nonoptimality and quality
of postnatal environment as codeterminants of intellectual development. Child Development 57 (5), 1151–1165.
Breuning, S. E. and W. F. Zella (1978). Effects of individualized incentives on normreferenced IQ test performance of high school students in special education classes. Journal
of School Psychology 16 (3), 220–226.
Bridgeman, B., J. B. Blumenthal, and S. R. Andres (1981). Parent Child Development
Center: Final evaluation report. Report, ETS Research.
Bryk, A. S., V. E. Lee, and P. B. Holland (1993). Catholic Schools and the Common Good.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Buechtemann, C. F., J. Schupp, and D. J. Soloff (1993). Roads to work: school-to-work
transition patterns in Germany and the United States. Industrial Relations Journal 24 (2),
97–111.
87

Campbell, F., G. Conti, J. J. Heckman, S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, E. Pungello, and Y. Pan
(2014). Early childhood investments substantially boost adult health. Science 343 (6178),
1478–1485.
Campbell, F. A., E. P. Pungello, S. Miller-Johnson, M. Burchinal, and C. T. Ramey (2001,
March). The development of cognitive and academic abilities: Growth curves from an
early childhood educational experiment. Developmental Psychology 37 (2), 231–242.
Campbell, F. A., C. T. Ramey, E. Pungello, J. Sparling, and S. Miller-Johnson (2002).
Early childhood education: Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. Applied
Developmental Science 6 (1), 42–57.
Canli, T. (2006). Biology of Personality and Individual Differences. New York: Guilford
Press.
Card, D. and D. R. Hyslop (2009). The dynamic effects of an earnings subsidy for longterm welfare recipients: Evidence from the Self-Sufficiency Project applicant experiment.
Journal of Econometrics 153 (1), 1–20.
Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2011, January). Preventing behavior problems in childhood
and adolescence: Evidence from Head Start. Unpublished manuscript, University College
London.
Carneiro, P. and R. Ginja (2012, January). Long-term impacts of compensatory preschool
on health and behavior: Evidence from Head Start. IZA Discussion Paper 6315, Institute
for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Carneiro, P. and J. J. Heckman (2003). Human capital policy. In J. J. Heckman, A. B.
Krueger, and B. M. Friedman (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital
Policies?, pp. 77–239. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

88

Carnoy, M., R. Jacobsen, L. Mishel, and R. Rothstein (2005). The Charter School Dust-up.
Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Carrell, S. E. and B. Sacerdote (2013). Late interventions matter too: The case of college
coaching New Hampshire. Working Paper 19031, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hilger, E. Saez, S. W. Diane, and D. Yagan (2011). How
does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1593–1660.
Clark, D. and R. Fahr (2002, February). The promise of workplace training for non-college
bound youth: Theory and evidence from German apprenticeship. CEP Discussion Paper
518, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of Economics and Political Science,
London, UK.
Clingman, J. and R. L. Fowler (1976). The effects of primary reward on the I.Q. performance
of grade-school children as a function of initial I.Q. level. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis 9 (1), 19–23.
Cloninger, C. R., D. M. Svrakic, C. Bayon, and T. R. Przybeck (1999). Measurement of
psychopathology as variants of personality. In C. R. Cloninger (Ed.), Personality and
Psychopathology, pp. 33–66. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Coleman, J. S. (1961). The Adolescent Society: The Social Life of the Teenager and Its
Impact on Education. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Coleman, J. S., T. Hoffer, and S. Kilgore (1982). High School Achievement: Public, Catholic,
and Private Schools Compared. New York: Basic Books.

89

Conti, G., J. Heckman, and R. Pinto (2014). The long-term health effects of early childhood
interventions. Under revision, Economic Journal.
Cook, P. J., K. Dodge, G. Farkas, R. G. Fryer, Jr, J. Guryan, J. Ludwig, S. Mayer, H. Pollack,
and L. Steinberg (2014, January). The (surprising) efficacy of academic and behavioral
intervention with disadvantaged youth: Results from a randomized experiment in Chicago.
Working Paper 19862, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
Cooke, L. (2003). A comparison of initial and early life course earnings of the German
secondary education and training system. Economics of Education Review 22 (1), 79–88.
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992a). Four ways five factors are basic. Personality and
Individual Difference 13 (6), 653–665.
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992b). Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PIR) and the NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) Professional Manual. Odessa, FL:
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008, Fall). Formulating, identifying and estimating the technology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4),
738–782.
Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2009, April). The economics and psychology of inequality
and human development. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3), 320–364.
Presented as the Marshall Lecture, European Economics Association, Milan, Italy, August
29, 2008.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the

90

evidence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook
of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of
cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.
Currie, J. and D. Thomas (1995, June). Does Head Start make a difference? American
Economic Review 85 (3), 341–364.
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 18, 105–115.
Deci, E. L. and R. M. Ryan (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human
Behavior. New York: Plenum Press.
DeLong, J. and K. Magin (2009, Winter). The U.S. equity return premium: Past, present
and future. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 193–208.
Deming, D. (2009, July). Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development:
Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (3), 111–
134.
Devlin, B., M. Daniels, and K. Roeder (1997). The heritability of IQ. Nature 388 (6641),
468–471.
DeYoung, C. G., J. B. Hirsh, M. S. Shane, X. Papademetris, N. Rajeevan, and J. R. Gray
(2010). Testing predictions from personality neuroscience: Brain structure and the Big
Five. Psychological Science 21 (6), 820–828.
Diamond, A., S. Barnett, J. Thomas, and S. Munro (2007). Preschool program improves
cognitive control. Science 318 (5855), 1387–1388.

91

DiPrete, T. A., C. Muller, and N. Shaeffer (1981). Discipline and order in American high
schools. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. Contractor Report
from NORC.
Duckworth, A. (2012, November). Reference bias. Presented at the University of Chicago.
Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly (2007, June). Grit:
Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92 (6), 1087–1101.
Duckworth, A. L., P. D. Quinn, D. R. Lynam, R. Loeber, and M. Stouthamer-Loeber (2011).
Role of test motivation in intelligence testing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108 (19), 7716–7720.
Durlak, J. A., R. P. Weissberg, A. B. Dymnicki, R. D. Taylor, and K. B. Schellinger (2011).
The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of
school-based universal interventions. Child Development 82 (1), 405–432.
Dweck, C. S. (2007). Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York, NY: Ballantine
Books.
Eckenrode, J., M. Campa, D. W. Luckey, C. R. Henderson, R. Cole, H. Kitzman, E. Anson,
K. Sidora-Arcoleo, and D. L. Olds (2010, January). Long-term effects of prenatal and infancy nurse home visitation on the life course of youths: 19-year follow-up of a randomized
trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 164 (1), 9–15.
Edlund, C. V. (1972). The effect on the behavior of children, as reflected in the IQ scores,
when reinforced after each correct response. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (3),
317–319.
Engle, P. L., M. M. Black, J. R. Behrman, M. Cabral de Mello, P. J. Gertler, L. Kapiriri,
R. Martorell, M. Eming Young, and The International Child Development Steering Group
92

(2007, January). Strategies to avoid the loss of developmental potential in more than 200
million children in the developing world. The Lancet 369 (9557), 229–242.
Engle, P. L., L. C. H. Fernald, H. Alderman, J. Behrman, C. O’Gara, A. Yousafzai,
M. Cabral de Mello, M. Hidrobo, N. Ulkuer, I. Ertem, and S. Iltus (2011, October).
Strategies for reducing inequalities and improving developmental outcomes for young children in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet 378 (9799), 1339–1353.
Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of the people much of
the time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (7), 1097–1126.
Farran, D. C., M. W. Lipsey, and S. Wilson (2011, August). Experimental evaluation of the
Tools of the Mind pre-k curriculum. Technical report, Peabody Research Institute Report.
Fersterer, J., J.-S. Pischke, and R. Winter-Ebmer (2008). Returns to apprenticeship training
in Austria: Evidence from failed firms. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 110 (4), 733–
753.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is Intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn Effect. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Franz, W. and D. W. Soskice (1995). The German apprenticeship system. In Institutional
Frameworks and Labor Market Performance, Chapter 8, pp. 208–234. New York, NY:
Routle.
Friedman, D. and A. H. Streicher (1985). Reliability of scores for Fiscal Year 1981 Army
applicants: Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery forms 8, 9, and 10. Technical
report, Defense Technical Information Center.
Friedman, H. S. and L. R. Martin (2011). The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for
Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. New York, NY: Hudson
Street Press.
93

Garces, E., D. Thomas, and J. Currie (2002, September). Longer-term effects of Head Start.
American Economic Review 92 (4), 999–1012.
Geel, R. and U. Backes-Gellner (2009). Occupational mobility within and between skill
clusters: An empirical analysis based on the skill-weights approach. Economics of Education Working Paper Series 0047, University of Zurich, Institute for Strategy and Business
Economics (ISU).
Gensowski, M. (2014). Personality, IQ, and lifetime earnings. Discussion Paper 8235, IZA.
Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. Chang, and
S. Grantham-McGregor (2013). Labor market returns to early childhood stimulation:
A 20-year followup to an experimental intervention in Jamaica. Working Paper 19185,
NBER.
Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. Chang, and
S. Grantham-McGregor (2014). Labor market returns to an early childhood stimulation
intervention in Jamaica. Science 344 (6187), 998–1001.
Gertler, P. and S. Martinez (2012). Vocational and life skills in youth training: A randomized
experiment in the Dominican Republic. Presented at the IZA/World Bank/OECD Conference on Activation and Employment Support Policies, Bahcesehir University, Istanbul,
Turkey, May 01, 2012.
Glazerman, S. and A. Seifullah (2012). An evaluation of the Chicago Teacher Advancement
Program (Chicago TAP) after four years. Final Report 06736-520, Mathematica Policy
Research.
Goldammer, C. (2010). Skills, investment, and race: Evidence from the ECLS-K. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

94

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2008). The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge,
MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Goldschmidt, P. and D. Huang (2007). The long-term effects of after-school programming
on educational adjustment and juvenile crime: A study of the LA’s BEST after-school
program. Technical report, National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and
Student Testing (CRESST), Los Angeles, CA.
Good, C., J. Aronson, and M. Inzlicht (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test
performance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Applied Developmental Psychology 24 (6), 645–662.
Gottfredson, M. R. and T. Hirschi (1990). A General Theory of Crime. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Gottschalk, P. (2005). Can work alter welfare recipients’ beliefs? Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 24 (3), 485–498.
Gough, H. G. and A. B. Heilbrun (1983). The Adjective Check List Manual. Palo Alto, CA:
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Grantham-McGregor, S., Y. B. Cheung, S. Cueto, P. Glewwe, L. Richter, and B. Strupp
(2007). Developmental potential in the first 5 years for children in developing countries.
The Lancet 369 (9555), 60–70.
Grantham-McGregor, S. M., C. A. Powell, S. P. Walker, and J. H. Himes (1991). Nutritional
supplementation, psychosocial stimulation, and mental development of stunted children:
The Jamaican study. The Lancet 338 (8758), 1–5.
Grek, S. (2009). Governing by numbers: The PISA ‘effect’ in Europe. Journal of Education
Policy 24 (1), 23–37.

95

Griffin, M., J. J. Heckman, and S. H. Moon (2013). Preschool curricula. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Grobe, T., E. Rosenblum, and T. Weissman (2010). Dollars and Sense: How “Career First”
Programs Like Year Up Benefit Youth and Employers. Boston, MA: Jobs for the Future.
Groot, W. (2000). Adaptation and scale of reference bias in self-assessments of quality of
life. Journal of Health Economics 19 (3), 403–420.
Haggerty, K., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, and J. D. Hawkins (1999). Preparing for the
drug free years. Juvenile justice bulletin, US Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, Washington, DC.
Halpern, R. (2009). The Means to Grow Up: Reinventing Apprenticeship as a Developmental
Support in Adolescence (1 ed.). Critical youth studies. New York, NY: Routledge.
Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004, July–August). The effect of schooling
and ability on achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2), 39–98.
Harhoff, D. and T. J. Kane (1997). Is the German apprenticeship system a panacea for the
US labor market? Journal of population economics 10 (2), 171–196.
Hawkins, J., E. Von Cleve, and R. Catalano Jr (1991). Reducing early childhood aggression:
Results of a primary prevention program. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry 30 (2), 208–217.
Hawkins, J. D., R. F. Catalano, R. Kosterman, R. D. Abbott, and K. G. Hill (1999). Preventing adolescent health-risk behaviors by strengthening protection during childhood.
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 153 (3), 226–234.
Hawkins, J. D., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, K. G. Hill, and R. D. Abbott (2005). Promoting positive adult functioning through social development intervention in childhood.
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 159 (1), 25–31.
96

Hawkins, J. D., R. Kosterman, R. F. Catalano, K. G. Hill, and R. D. Abbott (2008). Effect
of social development intervention in childhood 15 years later. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine 162 (12), 1133–1141.
Heckman, J. and R. Pinto (2015). Econometric mediation analyses: Identifying the sources of
treatment effects from experimentally estimated production technologies with unmeasured
and mismeasured inputs. Forthcoming, Econometric Reviews.
Heckman, J. J. (2008, July). Schools, skills and synapses. Economic Inquiry 46 (3), 289–324.
Heckman, J. J. (2014). Prevention versus remediation. Unpublished manuscript, University
of Chicago.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.) (2014a). The Myth of Achievement
Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2014b). The economic and social benefits
of GED certification. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth
of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life, Chapter 5,
pp. 171–267. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (2014c). Who are the GEDs?

In J. J.

Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The
GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, S. Urzúa, and G. Veramendi (2011). The effects of educational choices on labor market, health, and social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and G. Veramendi (2014). Education, health and wages.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
97

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012, August). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Economics 19 (4), 451–464. Adam Smith Lecture.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014a). Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
improve character and cognition. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.),
The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life,
pp. 341–430. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014b). Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
improve character and cognition. Technical report, IZA Discussion Paper No. 7750. J.
Heckman, J.E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The
GED and the Role of Character in American Life, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2014.
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014c). Achievement tests and the role of character in
American life. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of
Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Heckman, J. J. and P. A. LaFontaine (2010, May). The American high school graduation
rate: Trends and levels. Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2), 244–262.
Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov (2007). The productivity argument for investing in
young children. Review of Agricultural Economics 29 (3), 446–493.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, and R. Pinto (2014). The effects of early intervention on
abilities and social outcomes: Evidence from the Carolina Abecedarian study. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.
Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010a, February). The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public
Economics 94 (1–2), 114–128.
98

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010b, August).
Analyzing social experiments as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the
HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Quantitative Economics 1 (1), 1–46.
Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014). The economics of human development and social
mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689–733.
Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013). Understanding the mechanisms through
which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American Economic
Review 103 (6), 1–35.
Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzúa (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3), 411–482.
Heine, S. J., E. E. Buchtel, and A. Norenzayan (2008). What do cross-national comparisons
of personality traits tell us? The case of Conscientiousness. Psychological Science 19 (4),
309–313.
Heine, S. J., S. Kitayama, D. R. Lehman, T. Takata, E. Ide, C. Leung, and H. Matsumoto
(2001). Divergent consequences of success and failure in Japan and North America: An
investigation of self-improving motivations and malleable selves. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 81 (4), 599–615.
Heine, S. J., D. R. Lehman, K. Peng, and J. Greenholtz (2002, June). What’s wrong with
cross-cultural comparisons of subjective Likert scales? The reference-group effect. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (6), 903–918.
Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
in American Life. New York: Free Press.

99

Hieronymus, A. N., E. F. Lindquist, and H. D. Hoover (1980). Iowa Tests of Basic Skills:
Primary Battery. Iowa City, IA: Houghton.
Hillage, J., J. Regan, J. Dickson, and K. McLoughlin (2002). Employers skill survey: 2002.
Research Report RR372, Department for Education and Skills.
Hirschi, T. and M. Gottfredson (1993). Commentary: Testing the general theory of crime.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 30 (1), 47–54.
Hogan, J. and B. Holland (2003). Using theory to evaluate personality and job-performance
relations: A socioanalytic perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (1), 100–112.
Hollenbeck, K. (2008). State use of workforce system net impact estimates and rates of
return. Technical report, Upjohn Institute. Presented at the Association for Public Policy
Analysis and Management (APPAM) Conference, Los Angeles, CA.
Holmlund, H. and O. Silva (2009). Targeting non-cognitive skills to improve cognitive outcomes: Evidence from a remedial education intervention. Discussion Paper 4476, IZA.
Holt, M. M. and T. R. Hobbs (1979). The effects of token reinforcement, feedback and
response cost on standardized test performance. Behaviour Research and Therapy 17 (1),
81–83.
Holzer, H. (1997). Is there a gap between employer skill needs and the skills of the work
force? In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in Work and Learning:
Implications for Assessment, Chapter 2, pp. 6–33. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Howard, K. S. and J. Brooks-Gunn (2009). The role of home-visiting programs in preventing
child abuse and neglect. The Future of Children 19 (2), 119–146.
Huang, D., B. Gribbons, K. S. Kim, C. Lee, and E. L. Baker (2000). A decade of results:
The impact of the LA’s BEST after school enrichment program on subsequent student
100

achievement and performance. Technical report, UCLA Center for the Study of Evaluation,
Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, Los Angeles, CA.
Huang, D., K. S. Kim, A. Marshall, and P. Pérez (2005). Keeping kids in school: An LA’s
BEST example—a study examining the long-term impact of LA’s BEST on students’
dropout rates. Technical report, National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards,
and Student Testing (CRESST), Los Angeles, CA.
Humphries, J. E. (2014). Growth in GED testing. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and
T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in
American Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hunt, E. (2012). Improving intelligence. Presented at the American Psychological Association Annual Meeting, Sunday, May 27, 2012, Chicago, IL.
Jablonka, E. and G. Raz (2009). Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: Prevalence, mechanisms, and implications for the study of heredity and evolution. The Quarterly Review
of Biology 84 (2), pp. 131–176.
Jackson, C. K. (2013). Non-cognitive ability, test scores, and teacher quality: Evidence from
9th grade teachers in North Carolina. Working Paper 18624, NBER.
Jencks, C. (1979). Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America.
New York: Basic Books.
Jensen, A. R. (1969). How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement. Harvard
educational review 39 (1), 1–123.
Jensen, A. R. (1998). The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability. Westport, CT: Praeger.
John, O. (2000). The big five personality test. http://www.outofservice.com/bigfive/
?score-bigfive.

101

John, O. P., A. Caspi, R. W. Robins, and T. E. Moffitt (1994). The “little five”: Exploring
the nomological network of the five-factor model of personality in adolescent boys. Child
Development 65 (1), 160–178.
John, O. P. and S. Srivastava (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement
and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, Chapter 4, pp. 102–138. New York: The Guilford Press.
Johnson, A. W. (1999). Assessing the impact of the Sponsor-A-Scholar youth mentoring
program on student performance. Technical Report 355, Mathematica Policy Research.
Johnson, D. and T. Walker (1991). A follow-up evaluation of the Houston Parent-Child
Development Center: School performance. Journal of Early Intervention 15 (3), 226–236.
Jolly, R. (2007). Early childhood development: The global challenge. The Lancet 369 (9555),
8–9.
Kaestle, C. F. (1984, May). Moral education and common schools in America: A historian’s
view. Journal of Moral Education 13 (2), 101–111.
Kagitcibasi, C., D. Sunar, and S. Bekman (2001). Long-term effects of early intervention:
Turkish low-income mothers and children. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 22 (4), 333–361.
Kagitcibasi, C., D. Sunar, S. Bekman, N. Baydar, and Z. Cemalcilar (2009). Continuing
effects of early enrichment in adult life: The Turkish Early Enrichment Project 22 years
later. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 30 (6), 764–779.
Kahne, J. and K. Bailey (1999). The role of social capital in youth development: The case of
“I Have a Dream” programs. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 21 (3), 321–343.
Kautz, T. and W. Zanoni (2014). Measuring and fostering non-cognitive skills in adolescents:

102

Evidence from chicago public schools and the onegoal program. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Kemple, J. and J. C. Snipes (2000). Career Academies: Impacts on student engagement and
performance in high school. Report 03/2000, MDRC.
Kemple, J. and C. Willner (2008). Career Academies: long-term impacts on labor market
outcomes, educational attainment, and transitions to adulthood. Report 06/2008, MDRC.
Kern, M. L. and H. S. Friedman (2008). Do conscientious individuals live longer? Health
Psychology 27 (5), 505–512.
Kettner, N. (1976). Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB form 5): Comparison with GATB and DAT tests: Final report for period May 1975–October 1976.
Technical report, DTIC Document: Department of Defense, Department of the Air Force,
Air Force Systems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory.
Kitzman, H., D. L. Olds, R. Cole, C. Hanks, E. Anson, K. Arcoleo, D. W. Luckey, M. Knudtson, C. R. Henderson, and J. Holmberg (2010, May). Enduring effects of prenatal and
infancy home visiting by nurses on children: Follow-up of a randomized trial among children at age 12 years. Journal of the American Medical Association 164 (5), 412–418.
Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,
neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.
Krueger, A. B. (2003, February). Economic considerations and class size. Economic Journal 113 (485), F34–F63.
Kubzansky, L. D., D. Sparrow, P. Vokonas, and I. Kawachi (2001). Is the glass half empty
or half full? A prospective study of optimism and coronary heart disease in the normative
aging study. Psychosomatic Medicine 63 (6), 910–916.
103

Lake, A. (2011).

Early childhood development—global action is overdue.

The

Lancet 378 (9799), 1277–1278.
Lally, J. R., P. L. Mangione, and A. S. Honig (1987). The Syracuse University Family
Development Research Program: Long-Range Impact of an Early Intervention with LowIncome Children & their Families. San Francisco, CA: Center for Child and Family Studies,
Far West Laboratory for Educational Research and Development.
Lang, F. R., D. John, O. Lüdtke, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011). Short assessment
of the Big Five: Robust across survey methods except telephone interviewing. Behavior
research methods 43 (2), 548–567.
Lapsley, D. and D. Yeager (2012). Moral-character education. In I. Weiner, W. Reynolds, and
G. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of Psychology, Volume 7 of Educational Psychology, Chapter 7,
pp. 117–146. New York, NY: Wiley.
Larson, G. E., D. P. Saccuzzo, and J. Brown (1994). Motivation: Cause or confound in
information processing/intelligence correlations? Acta Psychologica 85 (1), 25–37.
Lemann, N. (1999). The Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Lerman, R. I. (2013). Are employability skills learned in U.S. youth education and training
programs? Under review, IZA Journal of Labor Policy.
Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology 22 (140), 55.
Lillard, A. and N. Else-Quest (2006).

The early years: Evaluating Montessori.

Sci-

ence 313 (5795), 1893–1894.
Lleras, C. (2008). Do skills and behaviors in high school matter? The contribution of

104

noncognitive factors in explaining differences in educational attainment and earnings. Social Science Research 37 (3), 888–902.
Ludwig, J. and D. L. Miller (2007). Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from a regression discontinuity approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1),
159–208.
Lutz, M. N., J. Fantuzzo, and P. McDermott (2000). Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennysylvania.
Mallar, C., S. Kerachsky, C. Thornton, and D. Long (1982). Evaluation of the impact of
the Job Corps program: Third follow-up report. Technical Report PR82-05, Mathematica
Policy Research, Inc., Princeton, NJ.
Martin, L. R., H. S. Friedman, and J. E. Schwartz (2007). Personality and mortality risk
across the life span: The importance of conscientiousness as a biopsychosocial attribute.
Health Psychology 26 (4), 428–436.
Martins, P. S. (2010). Can targeted, non-cognitive skills programs improve achievement?
Discussion Paper 5266, IZA.
McAdams, D. P. (2006). The Person: A New Introduction to Personality Psychology (4 ed.).
Hoboken, N.J.: J. Wiley and Sons.
McCord, J. (1978).

A thirty-year follow-up of treatment effects.

American Psycholo-

gist 33 (3), 284–289.
McCord, J. and W. McCord (1959). A follow-up report on the Cambridge-Somerville Youth
Study. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 322 (1), 89–96.
McCormick, M. C., J. Brooks-Gunn, S. L. Buka, J. Goldman, J. Yu, M. Salganik, D. T.
Scott, F. C. Bennett, L. L. Kay, J. C. Bernbaum, C. R. Bauer, C. Martin, E. R. Woods,

105

A. Martin, and P. H. Casey (2006, March). Early intervention in low birth weight premature infants: Results at 18 years of age for the Infant Health and Development Program.
Pediatrics 117 (3), 771–780.
McDowell, J., D. Oliver, M. Persson, R. Fairbrother, S. Wetzlar, J. Buchanan,
and T. Shipstone (2011).
21st century.

A shared responsibility:

Apprenticeships for the

http://www.australianapprenticeships.gov.au/faq/documents/

apprenticeshipsforthe21stcenturyexpertpanel.pdf, last accessed February 11, 2013.
McLanahan, S. (2004, November). Diverging destinies: How children are faring under the
second demographic transition. Demography 41 (4), 607–627.
Michalopoulos, C., D. Tattrie, C. Miller, P. K. Robins, P. Morris, D. Gyarmati, C. Redcross,
K. Foley, and R. Ford (2002). Final report on the Self-Sufficiency Project for long-term
welfare recipients. Report, Social Research and Demonstration Corporation.
Millenky, M., D. Bloom, and C. Dillon (2010). Making the transition: Interim results of the
National Guard Youth ChalleNGe evaluation. Report 05/2010, MDRC.
Millenky, M., D. Bloom, S. Muller-Ravett, and J. Broadus (2011). Staying on course: Threeyear results of the National Guard Youth ChalleNGe evaluation. Report 06/2011, MDRC.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, W., O. Ayduk, M. G. Berman, B. J. Casey, I. H. Gotlib, J. Jonides, E. Kross,
T. Teslovich, N. L. Wilson, V. Zayas, and Y. Shoda (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span:
decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 6 (2), 252–256.
Moon, S. H. (2012, July). Time to invest in disadvantaged young children. Samsung Economic Research Institute Quarterly 5 (3), 50–59.
Moon, S. H. (2014a). Decomposing racial skill gaps in the U.S. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
106

Moon, S. H. (2014b). Multi-dimensional human skill formation with multi-dimensional
parental investment. Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Mroczek, D. K. and A. Spiro (2007). Personality change influences mortality in older men.
Psychological Science 18 (5), 371–376.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in Personality: A Clinical and Experimental Study of
Fifty Men of College Age. New York: Oxford University Press.
Myers, R. (1992). The Twelve Who Survive: Strengthening Programmes of Early Childhood
Development in the Third World. New York, NY: Routledge/UNESCO.
National Apprenticeship Service (2012).

History of apprenticeships.

http://

www.apprenticeships.org.uk/About-Us/History-of-Apprenticeships.aspx, last accessed February 11, 2013.
National
time

Centre
series

of

for

Vocational

apprenticeships

Education
and

Research

traineeships

in

(2012).
Australia

Historical
from

1963.

http://www.ncver.edu.au/publications/2329.html.
Naumann, L. P. and O. P. John (2011). Toward a domain-specific approach to cultural differences: The influence of cultural values and reference-group standards on self-reported
personality. Unpublished manuscript, Sonoma State University, Department of Psychology.
Neal, D. A. (1997, January). The effects of Catholic secondary schooling on educational
achievement. Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1, Part 1), 98–123.
Nelsen, B. (1997). Should social skills be in the vocational curriculum? Evidence from the
automotive career field. In A. M. Lesgold, M. J. Feuer, and A. M. Black (Eds.), Transitions

107

in Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment, Papers and Proceedings. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
Niles, M. D., A. J. Reynolds, and M. Nagasawa (2006). Does early childhood intervention
affect the social and emotional development of participants? Early Childhood Research
and Practice 8 (1).
Nisbett, R. E. (2009, February). Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures
Count. New York, NY: W. W. Norton and Company.
Nisbett, R. E., J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, J. Flynn, D. F. Halpern, and E. Turkheimer
(2012). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments. American Psychologist 67 (2), 130–159.
Nyhus, E. K. and E. Pons (2005). The effects of personality on earnings. Journal of Economic
Psychology 26 (3), 363–384.
OECD (2011). Doing better for families. Technical report.
OECD (2013a). What is PISA? In PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do,
Volume I of Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science, Chapter 1, pp.
23–30. OECD Publishing.
OECD (2013b). PISA 2012 results: Ready to learn: Students engagement, drive and selfbeliefs (volume iii). Technical report, OECD Publishing.
Olds, D. L. (2006). The Nurse-Family Partnership: An evidence-based preventive intervention. Infant Mental Health Journal 27 (1), 5–25.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, R. Cole, C. Hanks, K. Arcoleo, E. Anson, D. W. Luckey, M. Knudtson, C. R. Henderson, J. Bondy, and A. J. Stevenson (2010, May). Enduring effects of
prenatal and infancy home visiting by nurses on maternal life course and government

108

spending: Follow-up of a randomized trial among children at age 12 years. Journal of the
American Medical Association 164 (5), 419–424.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, R. Cole, J. Robinson, K. Sidora, D. W. Luckey, C. R. Henderson,
C. Hanks, J. Bondy, and J. Holmberg (2004, December). Effects of nurse home-visiting
on maternal life course and child development: Age 6 follow-up results of a randomized
trial. Pediatrics 114 (6), 1550–1559.
Olds, D. L., H. Kitzman, C. Hanks, R. Cole, E. Anson, K. Sidora-Arcoleo, D. W. Luckey,
C. R. Henderson, J. Holmberg, R. A. Tutt, A. J. Stevenson, and J. Bondy (2007, December). Effects of nurse home-visiting on maternal and child functioning: Age 9 follow-up of
a randomized trial. Pediatrics 120 (4), 832–845.
Olds, D. L., J. Robinson, L. Pettitt, D. W. Luckey, J. Holmberg, R. K. Ng, K. Isacks, K. Sheff,
and C. R. Henderson (2004, December). Effects of home visits by paraprofessionals and
by nurses: Age 4 follow-up results of a randomized trial. Pediatrics 114 (6), 1560–1568.
Oreopoulos, P., R. S. Brown, and A. Lavecchia (2014). Pathways to education: An integrated
approach to helping at-risk high school students. Unpublished manuscript, University of
Toronto, Department of Economics.
Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).

OECD employment

and labour market statistics. Data available from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
employment/data/oecd-employment-and-labour-market-statistics_lfs-data-en.
Orr, L., H. Bloom, S. Bell, W. Lin, G. Cave, and F. Doolittle (1994). The National JTPA
Study. Impacts, Benefits, and Costs of Title II-A. Bethesda, MD: Abt Associates.
Peng, K., R. E. Nisbett, and N. Y. Wong (1997). Validity problems comparing values across
cultures and possible solutions. Psychological Methods 2 (4), 329–344.

109

Perez-Arce, F., L. Constant, D. S. Loughran, and L. A. Karoly (2012). A cost-benefit
analysis of the national guard youth ChalleNGe program. Technical Report 1193, RAND
Corporation.
Pratt, T. C. and F. T. Cullen (2000). The empirical status of Gottfredson and Hirschi’s
general theory of crime: A meta-analysis. Criminology 38 (3), 931–964.
Quinn, L. M. (2014). An institutional history of the GED. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries,
and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character
in American Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ramey, C. T., A. M. Collier, J. J. Sparling, F. A. Loda, F. A. Campbell, D. A. Ingram,
and N. W. Finkelstein (1976). The Carolina Abecedarian Project: A longitudinal and
multidisciplinary approach to the prevention of developmental retardation. In T. Tjossem
(Ed.), Intervention Strategies for High-Risk Infants and Young Children, pp. 629–655.
Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Rauner, F. (2007).

Vocational education and training—A European perspective.

In

A. Brown, S. Kirpal, and F. Rauner (Eds.), Identities at Work, Volume 5 of Technical
and Vocational Education and Training: Issues, Concerns and Prospects, pp. 115–144.
Springer.
Raven, J., J. C. Raven, and J. Court (1988). Manual for Raven’s Progressive Matrices and
Vocabulary Scales. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment.
Raven, J. C. (1962). Advanced Progressive Matrices: Sets I and II (Revised ed.). London:
H.K. Lewis.
Reed, D., A. Yung-Hsu Liu, R. Kleinman, A. Mastri, D. Reed, S. Sattar, and J. Ziegler
(2012). An effectiveness assessment and cost-benefit analysis of registered apprenticeship in
10 states. Mathematica Final Report 06689.090 and 40096, Mathematica Policy Research.

110

Reynolds, A. J. (1994). Effects of a preschool plus follow-on intervention for children at risk.
Developmental Psychology 30 (6), 787–804.
Reynolds, A. J. (1995). One year of preschool intervention or two: Does it matter? Early
Childhood Research Quarterly 10 (1), 1–31.
Reynolds, A. J. (2000). Success in Early Intervention: The Chicago Child-Parent Centers.
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Reynolds, A. J. and J. A. Temple (1998, February). Extended early childhood intervention
and school achievement: Age 13 findings from the Chicago Longitudinal Study. Child
Development 69 (1), 231–246.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, S.-R. Ou, I. A. Arteaga, and B. A. B. White (2011, July).
School-based early childhood education and age-28 well-being: Effects by timing, dosage,
and subgroups. Science 333 (6040), 360–364.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, D. L. Robertson, and E. A. Mann (2002). Age 21 cost-benefit
analysis of the Title I Chicago Child-Parent Centers. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis 24 (4), 267–303.
Reynolds, A. J., J. A. Temple, B. A. White, S.-R. Ou, and D. L. Robertson (2011, January–
February). Age 26 cost-benefit analysis of the Child-Parent Center early education program. Child Development 82 (1), 379–404.
Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality
development. Journal of Research in Personality 43 (2), 137–145.
Roberts, B. W., N. R. Kuncel, R. L. Shiner, A. Caspi, and L. R. Goldberg (2007, December).
The power of personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic
status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives in Psychological Science 2 (4), 313–345.
111

Roberts, B. W. and D. Mroczek (2008). Personality trait change in adulthood. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 17 (1), 31–35.
Roberts, B. W., K. E. Walton, and W. Viechtbauer (2006). Patterns of mean-level change
in personality traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin 132 (1), 1–25.
Roberts, R. D., G. N. Goff, F. Anjoul, P. C. Kyllonen, G. Pallier, and L. Stankov (2000).
The Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB): Little more than acculturated
learning (Gc)!? Learning and Individual Differences 12 (1), 81–103.
Roder, A. and M. Elliot (2011). A promising start: Year-Up’s initial impacts on young
adults’ careers. Technical report, Economic Mobility Corporation.
Roder, A. and M. Elliott (2014). Sustained gains: Year Up’s continued impact on young
adults’ earnings. Technical report, Economic Mobility Corporation.
Rodrı́guez-Planas, N. (2010). Mentoring, educational services, and economic incentives:
Longer-term evidence on risky behaviors from a randomized trial. Discussion Paper 4968,
IZA.
Rodrı́guez-Planas, N. (2012, October). Longer-term impacts of mentoring, educational services, and learning incentives: Evidence from a randomized trial in the United States.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (4), 121–139.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Rothstein, R., R. Jacobsen, and T. Wilder (2008). Grading Education: Getting Accountability
Right. New York: Economic Policy Institute and Teachers College Press.
Rutter, M. (2006). Implications of resilience concepts for scientific understanding. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences 1094 (1), 1–12.
112

Ryan, R. M. and E. L. Deci (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions
and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology 25 (1), 54–67.
Salgado, J. F. (1997). The five factor model of personality and job performance in the
European Community. Journal of Applied Psychology 82 (1), 30–43.
Schmidt, F. L. and J. Hunter (2004). General mental ability in the world of work: Occupational attainment and job performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 86 (1), 162–173.
Schmitt, D. P. (2002). Are sexual promiscuity and relationship infidelity linked to different
personality traits across cultures? Findings from the International Sexuality Description
Project. Online Readings in Psychology and Culture 4 (Unit 4), 1–22. Retrieved from
http://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/orpc/vol4/iss4/4.
Schmitt, D. P., J. Allik, R. R. McCrae, and V. Benet-Martı́nez (2007). The geographic
distribution of Big Five personality traits: Patterns and profiles of human self-description
across 56 nations. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 38 (2), 173–212.
Schochet, P. Z., J. Burghardt, and S. Glazerman (2001). National Job Corps Study: The
Impacts of Job Corps on Participants’ Employment and Related Outcomes. Princeton, NJ:
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Schochet, P. Z., J. Burghardt, and S. McConnell (2006). National Job Corps Study and
Longer-Term Follow-Up Study: Impact and Benefit-Cost Findings Using Survey and Summary Earnings Records Data. Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Schochet, P. Z., J. Burghardt, and S. McConnell (2008, December). Does Job Corps work?
Impact findings from the National Job Corps Study. American Economic Review 98 (5),
1864–1886.

113

Schulz, R., J. Bookwala, J. E. Knapp, M. Scheier, and G. M. Williamson (1996). Pessimism,
age, and cancer mortality. Psychology and Aging 11 (2), 304–309.
Schumacher, R. (2003). Family support and parent involvement in Head Start: What do
Head Start program performance standards require? Technical report, Center for Law
and Social Policy.
Schweinhart, L. J., H. V. Barnes, and D. Weikart (1993). Significant Benefits: The HighScope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 27. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press.
Scribner, J. P. and D. Wakelyn (1998). Youth apprenticeship experiences in Wisconsin: A
stakeholder-based evaluation. The High School Journal 82 (1), 24–34.
Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).

Learning a Living: A

Blueprint for High Performance: A SCANS Report for America 2000. Washington, DC:
United States Government Printing Office.
Segal, C. (2008, October). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and
economic success. Economics working papers, Department of Economics and Business,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Segal, C. (2012, August). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and
economic success. Management Science 58 (8), 1438–1457.
Shonkoff, J. P. and D. Phillips (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of
Early Child Development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Shure, M. B. and G. Spivack (1988). Interpersonal cognitive problem solving. In R. H.
Price, E. L. Cowen, R. P. Lorion, and J. Ramos-McKay (Eds.), 14 Ounces of Prevention: A Casebook for Practitioners, Chapter 6, pp. 69–82. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

114

Social and Character Development Research Consortium (2010, October). Efficacy of schoolwide programs to promote social and character development and reduce problem behavior
in elementary school children. Research Report NCER 20112001, National Center for
Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Sroufe, L. A. (1997, Spring). Psychopathology as an outcome of development. Development
and Psychopathology 9 (2), 251–268.
Sroufe, L. A., B. Egeland, E. Carlson, and W. A. Collins (2005). The Development of the
Person: The Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaptation from Birth to Adulthood. New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Stasz, C. (2001). Assessing skills for work: Two perspectives. Oxford Economic Papers 53 (3),
385–405.
Sylva, K. (1997). The quest for quality in curriculum. In L. J. Schweinhart and D. P.
Weikart (Eds.), Lasting Differences: The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum Comparison
Study through Age 23, pp. 89–93. Ypsilanti: High/Scope Press.
Temple, J. A. and A. J. Reynolds (2007). Benefits and costs of investments in preschool
education: Evidence from the Child-Parent Centers and related programs. Economics of
Education Review 26 (1), 126–144.
Terman, L. M., B. T. Baldwin, E. Bronson, J. C. DeVoss, F. Fuller, T. Lee Kelley, M. Lima,
H. Marshall, A. H. Moore, A. S. Raubenheimer, G. M. Ruch, R. L. Willoughby, J. Benson Wyman, and D. Hazeltine Yates (1925). Genetic Studies of Genius: Mental and
Physical Traits of a Thousand Gifted Children, Volume 1. Stanford University, CA: Stanford University Press.
Terman, L. M. and M. A. Merrill (1960). Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the
Third Revision Form L-M. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

115

Terman, L. M., M. H. Oden, N. Bayley, H. Marshall, Q. McNemar, and E. B. Sullivan (1947).
Genetic Studies of Genius: The Gifted Child Grows Up: Twenty-Five Years’ Follow-Up
of a Superior Group, Volume 4. Stanford University, CA: Stanford University Press.
Thaler, R. H., S. Mullainathan, and D. Kahneman (2008, July). A short course in behavioral
economics. Edge Master Class, Sonoma, CA, July 25–27, 2008.
The KIPP Foundation (2011). The promise of college completion: KIPP’s early successes
and challenges. Report, The KIPP Foundation, San Francisco, CA.
Tierney, J. P., J. Baldwin-Grossman, and N. L. Resch (1995). Making a difference: An
impact study of Big Brothers Big Sisters. Report, Public/Private Ventures.
Tough, P. (2012). How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden Power of Character. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Tuttle, C. C., B. Gill, P. Gleason, V. Knechtel, I. Nichols-Barrer, and A. Resch (2013).
KIPP middle schools: Impacts on achievement and other outcomes: Final report. Report
06441.910, Mathematica Policy Institute.
Tuttle, C. C., B.-r. Teh, I. Nichols-Barrer, B. P. Gill, and P. Gleason (2010). Student characteristics and achievement in 22 KIPP middle schools. Report 06441.900, Mathematica.
Tyler, R. W. (1973). Assessing educational achievement in the affective domain. Measurement in Education 4 (3), 1–8.
Walker, G. C. and F. Vilella-Velez (1992). Anatomy of a Demonstration: The Summer
Training and Education Program (STEP) from Pilot through Replication and Postprogram
Impacts. Philadelphia, PA: Public/Private Ventures.
Walker, S., T. Wachs, S. Grantham-McGregor, M. Black, C. Nelson, S. Huffman, H. BakerHenningham, S. Chang, J. Hamadani, B. Lozoff, J. Meeks Gardner, C. Powell, A. Rahman,

116

and L. Richter (2011). Inequality in early childhood: risk and protective factors for early
child development. The Lancet 378 (9799), 1325–1338.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, C. A. Powell, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor (2005). Effects
of early childhood psychosocial stimulation and nutritional supplementation on cognition and education in growth-stunted Jamaican children: Prospective cohort study. The
Lancet 366 (9499), 1804–1807.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, C. A. Powell, E. Simonoff, and S. M. Grantham-McGregor
(2007). Early childhood stunting is associated with poor psychological functioning in
late adolescence and effects are reduced by psychosocial stimulation. The Journal of
Nutrition 137 (11), 2464–2469.
Walker, S. P., S. M. Chang, M. Vera-Hernández, and S. Grantham-McGregor (2011). Early
childhood stimulation benefits adult competence and reduces violent behavior. Pediatrics 127 (5), 849–857.
Walker, S. P., T. D. Wachs, J. M. Gardner, B. Lozoff, G. A. Wasserman, E. Pollitt,
J. A. Carter, and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007, January). Child development: Risk factors for adverse outcomes in developing countries.
The Lancet 369 (9556), 145–157.
Walker, T. and D. L. Johnson (1988). A follow-up evaluation of the Houston Parent-Child
Development Center: Intelligence test results. Journal of Genetic Psychology 149 (3),
377–381.
Walsh, D. A. (2005). Why Do They Act That Way? A Survival Guide to the Adolescent
Brain for You and Your Teen (1 ed.). New York: Free Press.
Washington Workforce Training Board (2008). Washington state employers workforce needs
and practices survey. Statewide report.

117

Westat (2010). Head Start Impact Study: Final report. Contract 282-00-0022, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Westwood, A. (2004).

Skills that matter and shortages that don’t.

In C. Warchust,

I. Grugulis, and E. Keep (Eds.), The Skills that Matter. New York, NY: PalgraveMacmillan.
Winkelmann, R. (1996, July). Employment prospects and skill acquisition of apprenticeshiptrained workers in Germany. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 49 (4), 658–672.
Wolter, S. C. and P. Ryan (2011). Apprenticeship. In S. M. Eric A. Hanushek and L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 3 of Handbooks in Economics, Chapter 11, pp. 521–576. Elsevier.
Young, M. E. (1996). Early Childhood Development: Investing in the Future. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Zabel, J., S. Schwartz, and S. Donald (2010). The impact of the Self-Sufficiency Project
on the employment behaviour of former welfare recipients. Canadian Journal of Economics 43 (3), 882–918.
Zabel, J., S. Schwartz, and S. Donald (2013, February). An analysis of the impact of the
Self-Sufficiency Project on wages. Empirical Economics 44 (1), 231–259.
Zemsky, R. (1997). Skills and the economy: An employer context for understanding the
school-to-work transition. In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in
Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

118

