                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  RETIREMENT TIMING OF WOMEN AND THE ROLE OF CARE RESPONSIBILITIES
                        FOR GRANDCHILDREN

                                         Robin L. Lumsdaine
                                        Stephanie J.C. Vermeer

                                         Working Paper 20756
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20756


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




Preliminary research for this paper was initiated while the first author was a National Fellow at the
Hoover Institution, Stanford University. The collaboration for this paper is the result of a research
internship at American University for the second author. Financial support for the first author from
the National Institute on Aging, grant numbers R03-AG14173 and R03-AG043010, and for the second
author from Stichting A.A. van Beek-Fonds, is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Rachel Friedberg,
Ed Lazear, Chris Ruhm, David Wise, and seminar participants at American University, Columbia
University, Dartmouth College, Erasmus University, the Hoover Institution, and the NBER Summer
Institute on Aging for helpful conversations and suggestions on this topic. We are especially grateful
to Kathleen McGarry for her input and expertise on the dataset and to Mike Bader, Seth Gershenson,
Alan Gustman, Elvira Sojli, Wing Wah Tham, three anonymous referees and the Editor for their very
helpful comments on this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Robin L. Lumsdaine and Stephanie J.C. Vermeer. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Retirement Timing of Women and the Role of Care Responsibilities for Grandchildren
Robin L. Lumsdaine and Stephanie J.C. Vermeer
NBER Working Paper No. 20756
December 2014
JEL No. J12,J13,J14,J22,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper considers the potential relationship between providing care for grandchildren and retirement,
among women nearing retirement age. Using 47,400 person-wave observations from the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS), we find the arrival of a new grandchild is associated with a more than eight
percent increase in the retirement hazard despite little overall evidence of a care/retirement interaction.
We document that while family characteristics seem to be the most important factors driving the care
decision, they are also important determinants of retirement. In contrast, while financial incentives
such as pensions and retiree health insurance have the largest influence on retirement, the opportunity
cost associated with outside income seems to have little effect on whether or not a grandmother provides
care. There is little evidence of substitution between caring for grandchildren versus providing care
for elderly parents or engaging in volunteer activities; grandchild care is instead taken on as an additional
responsibility. Our findings suggest that policies aimed at prolonging worklife may need to consider
grandchild care responsibilities as a countervailing factor while those policies focused on grandchild
care may also affect elderly labor force composition.


Robin L. Lumsdaine
Kogod School of Business
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu

Stephanie J.C. Vermeer
Roland Berger Strategy Consultants
World Trade Center
Strawinskylaan 581, 1077 XX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
vermeerstephanie@gmail.com
                                                                                                      1


 RETIREMENT TIMING OF WOMEN AND THE ROLE OF CARE
 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR GRANDCHILDREN

I.     Introduction

       This paper investigates whether caring for a grandchild might influence women’s retirement

 decisions and conversely if women’s retirement might influence their propensity to provide care

 for a grandchild, especially in response to a grandchild’s birth.1 The importance of this question

 is underscored in a 2010 article surveying work-family research over the previous decade

 (Bianchi and Milkie 2010):

       “The aging of the Baby Boom generation, now poised to retire in the next decade,
       suggests the need for increased attention to issues that surround family caregiving
       across households (to frail parents and adult children and grandchildren) and the
       intersection of this type of caregiving with changing work statuses (e.g., retirement or
       reduced labor force participation, a spouse’s retirement).”

       Although historically the economics literature on the elderly has not focused on care work

 responsibilities for grandchildren (an exception is Cardia and Ng 2003), there is evidence that it

 is an area of growing interest (Bengsten 2001). Over at least the past three decades, the number

 of grandparents participating in grandchild care has been increasing – a phenomenon



 1
     As noted by Luo et al. (2012), “Grandchild care can take several forms.” Throughout this

 paper, we use the terms “care”, “caring”, “caregiving”, and “care work” interchangeably to

 describe the act of providing childcare assistance (including babysitting) for grandchildren, and

 the terms “carers”, “careworkers”, and “caregivers” for those who provide such care. We

 recognize that the conventions regarding the description of such contributions has changed over

 the past decades and do not intend for our descriptors to convey any particular preference for one

 versus the other. In particular in this paper they should be interpreted as equally emphasizing the

 value of such contributions.
                                                                                                      2


documented with a wide range of data sources (e.g., Fuller-Thomson et al. 1997, and Guzman

2004, using the National Survey of Families and Households; Taylor et al. 2010, using a Pew

Research Survey; Laughlin 2010, using the Survey of Income and Program Participation).2 As

with caring for parents, more of the burden of caring for grandchildren falls on women (Soldo

and Hill 1995), motivating our focus on grandmothers in this paper. In addition, more than 50%

of grandmothers living near (i.e., not coresident) to their grandchildren under age 13 reported

providing childcare assistance, with an even higher percentage (64%) of employed grandmothers

reporting affirmatively (Guzman 2004). There is also evidence that grandparent care is an

especially prevalent form of care for pre-school aged children (Laughlin 2010; Luo et al. 2012).

      In addition, the prevalence of grandparents providing care has been increasing, especially as

a result of the financial crisis that began in the United States in 2007-8, generating renewed

interest in the role grandparent caring plays in helping out the middle generation (Taylor et al.

2010). Early evidence of this phenomenon was documented in Jendrek (1993), who found that of

grandmothers caring for grandchildren in a non-custodial relationship, over 60% cited the

employment of the grandchild's parents and/or wanting to help the grandchild's parents

financially as reasons for providing care.

         Yet very little evidence exists regarding whether and how care responsibilities for

grandchildren might affect grandmothers’ retirement. Instead, much of the literature on the

interaction between care work and retirement focuses on retirement decisions in the context of

caring for elderly parents or infirm spouses (Coile 2004; Gustman and Steinmeier 2004; Ilchuk

2009). For other types of care arrangements, e.g., caring for either young children or elderly

2
    Questions on grandparent caring were added to the long form of the decennial census for the

first time in 2000 (Simmons and Dye 2003).
                                                                                                     3


parents, retirement considerations largely have been ignored. As a result, the role of grandchild

care responsibilities in influencing retirement plans and decisions remains unexplored.

   In fact, early literature on retirement decisions did not consider familial responsibilities at all

but instead concentrated largely on economic and financial considerations such as the effects of

pensions and Social Security (e.g., Gustman and Steinmeier 1986; Stock and Wise 1990), as well

as individual characteristics such as health (e.g., McGarry 2004). Subsequent economic research

highlighted the complexity of retirement decisions and the role that both financial and

nonfinancial factors might play in influencing such decisions (see, Lumsdaine 1996 and

Lumsdaine and Mitchell 1999, and references therein). In particular, it emphasized that if factors

such as care work influence the retirement decision, their omission from a retirement model

could result in an overestimated impact of proposed changes in the included factors (e.g.,

pensions, health insurance). From a policy perspective, therefore, recognizing the interplay

between increasing demand for care work and retirement decisions may inform evaluations of

proposed policy changes. We consider the specific example of grandchild care work in this

context.

   This paper aims to explore the interaction between grandchild care and retirement. In many

respects, the need to provide care for grandchildren may have a different impact on the

retirement decision than when spousal or dependent child caregiving is involved. For example,

Pozzebon and Mitchell (1989) attribute evidence of delayed retirement among working women

when their spouse is in poor health to the need to retain employer-provided health insurance

coverage. Such health insurance considerations are less likely to influence the retirement

decision when the care work responsibility is toward a grandchild or elderly parent (who
                                                                                                      4


typically would not be covered by the potential care provider’s employer-provided health

insurance).

          An examination of the relationship between the decision to care for a grandchild and the

decision to retire can help inform our understanding of how the demographic composition of the

labor force may change in the future and determine whether policies to promote later retirement

may have either limited effect or unintended care work consequences.           We consider the

following questions in this paper using a neoclassical economic approach: (1) does caring for

grandchildren influence the odds of women’s retirement and vice versa?, (2) what

socioeconomic, demographic, or health factors influence these decisions?, (3) how does the birth

of a grandchild affect the odds of women’s retirement and does this effect vary according to the

grandmother’s age, proximity, health, or the birth order of the grandchild? A variety of

additional questions (e.g., what factors influence transition probabilities of starting or stopping

the provision of care) are considered via an online appendix.


    II.      Data and Methods

             A. Data

             The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) is an ideal dataset with which to consider the

care patterns of women on the verge of retirement.3 Begun in 1992, the HRS is a biennial survey



3
    As a condition of use, we note, “The HRS (Health and Retirement Study) is sponsored by the

National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA U01AG009740) and is conducted by the

University of Michigan.” Where possible, we use the RAND HRS data files (St. Clair et al.

2010) for their ease of use and consistency of variables across waves. As of the initial writing of

this paper, the family section variables had not been included in the RAND HRS data files but
                                                                                                       5


of individuals who were born between 1931 and 1941 (and hence were roughly between ages 51

and 61 in 1992) and their spouses. It surveyed over 12,600 individuals and contained over 5,800

variables at its inception, with detailed information on family structure, financial assets, health,

and expectations. An excellent description of the development of the HRS is provided by Juster

and Suzman (1995); a more recent publication further summarizes many features of this

important survey (National Institute on Aging 2007). A number of subpopulations were

oversampled as part of the HRS survey design; we therefore use household sampling weights

unless otherwise noted.

       We construct our sample from all the women that were aged 51-61 during any of the first

eight waves because this age-range coincides with the target range defined in wave 1 of the

dataset, aimed at capturing the transition to retirement.

               1.      Sample Construction, by wave

       We briefly describe the sample construction including sample size, continuation, new

entrants, and attrition, for each wave. The sample is constructed by sequentially omitting

observations that met the following selection criteria: (1) male, (2) outside of the target 51-61

age range in both the current and all previous waves, that is we exclude those whose age at first

entry was >61 and those who in the current wave are <51, (3) missing information on

family/child characteristics, (4) missing income information, (5) missing other key explanatory

variables.




were for the most part in the associated Enhanced Fat Files. For the few explanatory variables

where RAND data were not available (e.g., family variables such as children's characteristics) we

merged data across waves using the raw HRS data.
                                                                                                       6


          Table 1 details the application of these criteria for each wave. The largest sample

reduction occurs as a result of the first two criteria; out of the wave 1 sample of 12,652

individuals, we drop 46.4% due to the first criterion (that the individual be female) and another

13.5% due to the second criterion (that the individual be between ages 51-61 at entry into our

sample).4 Only 0.9% of the omissions are due to the other three criteria, resulting in 39.2%

admissible observations (4,960 individuals). Applying these selection criteria across all waves,

we use 32% of all observations, and delete only slightly over 1% due to missing information;

42% are dropped due to not being female. An additional 25% are dropped because they both are

not within the 51-61 age range in the current wave, nor have they ever been within the 51-61 age

4
    While at first glance the reduction due to this second criterion seems large, it is important to

remember that the current version of the HRS reflects the merging of the original (1992) HRS

sample with the Assets and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey. The latter

survey consisted of individuals born prior to 1923 (and hence were age 70+ when first surveyed

in 1993), and their spouses. This population was presumed by the survey designers to be retired

and hence was not asked many of the questions used in our analysis. It is also important to note

that due to the longitudinal nature of the dataset, the same (over age 70) individuals are omitted

in each wave to which they respond. Specifically, of 17,293 unique women in the overall sample

(e.g., all individuals after application of the first criterion), 4,619 correspond to the AHEAD

survey and 881 do not belong to any of the existing cohorts as a result of being too young. Of

the remaining 11,793 women, 9,363 are included in our analysis sample (79.3%). For more

details on the structure and sampling design of the HRS, see the online HRS documentation,

hrsonline.osr.umich.edu/sitedocs/surveydesign.pdf and

hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/sitedocs/userg.HRSSAMP.pdf.
                                                                                                    7


range in any of the previous waves. Once an individual is within the 51-61 age range (i.e., once

they are “admitted” into our sample), they remain in the sample.5 Attrition between waves is

quite low; on average more than 91% of our admissible sample in each wave continues onto the

next wave.

         The number of admissible women we use for each wave is highlighted in bold in the

middle of the table. For example, from our initial wave 1 sample of 4,960 women (obtained by

applying the five criteria specified above), 448 of these individuals were not re-interviewed in

the second wave (i.e., had died or were lost to follow-up). To the remaining 4,512 (line 1 in the

table) were added 558 new entrants (line 2 in the table) for a total wave 2 sample of 5,070

individuals. In 1998 (wave 4), the HRS was expanded to include two additional cohorts, the

Children of the Depression (CODA) cohort born between 1924 and 1930, and the War Baby

cohort born between 1942 and 1947. Because some members of the latter cohort fall into our

sample age range of 51-61, there is a large increase in our analysis sample at wave 4. There is a

similar large increase in 2004 (wave 7), when the Early Baby Boomer cohort was added to the

survey. The eight waves are cumulated into a pooled sample, representing 9,363 unique women

across 47,400 person-wave observations.

                 2.     Main variables of interest

In this section, we describe the main variables of interest in our analysis.

5
    The HRS sampling design is to add cohorts as they reach age 51. Our approach therefore

corresponds to how additional cohorts are added into the HRS (see next paragraph); in

particular, first spousal observations whose birth years corresponded to the new cohort are taken

as members and then additional participants are recruited to round out (i.e., make representative)

the new cohort.
                                                                                                      8


Caring for Grandchildren

     For analysis of care status, we consider those women that are caring for grandchildren (the

caring “treatment” group), those that have grandchildren but are not providing care (the caring

“at risk” group), and those that do not have grandchildren (the caring “control” group, i.e., those

that are not yet “at risk” for care work). The HRS questions about how much time was spent

caring for grandchildren changed slightly across the waves. In wave 1, the questionnaire asked

whether an individual spent more than 100 hours caring for a grandchild in the past 12 months

and, if the answer was yes, how many hours were spent. In wave 2, the questionnaire asked the

same question but with a lower threshold of 50 hours. In waves 3 and beyond, the questionnaire

asked the following question:

     “Did you (or your husband/or your wife/or your partner/.../or your late husband/or your
     late wife/or your late partner) spend 100 or more hours in total (since Previous Wave
     Interview Month-Year/in the last two years) taking care of (grand or great-
     grandchildren/grandchildren)?”

and if the answer was yes, how many hours were spent by each person (respondent and spouse)

individually. We define caring for grandchildren as responses of more than 336 hours in waves

1 and 2 and responses of more than 672 (twice 336) in later waves, in order to use data

comparable to more than 336 hours per year across all waves.6 We choose a higher (than 50 or



6
    Note that a variety of types of grandchild care are captured by this definition, including

babysitting and coresidence both with and without the grandchild’s parent. Luo et al. 2012

distinguish between different types using the categories “babysitting”, “multigeneration

household”, and “skipped-generation household” and document care transitions into and out of

each type. As our main focus is on the interaction between caregiving responsibilities, however

they may arise, and retirement, we employ the coarser single definition in our analysis.
                                                                                                    9


100 hours) threshold of 336 hours per year in an attempt to distinguish potential reporting error

by grandparents who may have had a grandchild visit for a two-week vacation. The sample

breakdown by grandparent status and birth of grandchildren is shown in Table 2a.

New Grandchild

          The use of grandparents for childcare assistance is particularly high when the

grandchildren are of pre-school age (Laughlin 2010). Because the age of the grandchildren is not

reported in HRS, we construct a dummy variable for the arrival of a “new grandchild” as a proxy

measure, equal to one if a (first or additional) grandchild has been born during the two years

since the previous wave. This variable is included in our estimation to allow for the possibility

that the arrival of a new grandchild may alter care work and retirement intentions, and their

interaction, to a larger degree initially than as the grandchild ages. Across all waves, 25% of the

person-wave observations had grandchildren born during the sampling period; more than 10% of

these were first-grandchildren. On average, there are 176 new grandmothers (grandmothers who

experienced the birth of their first grandchild) in each wave and 1,690 women have

grandchildren born in each wave.

Retired

          For this variable, we use a RAND HRS variable, derived from the HRS employment

status variable, where respondents were able to report being retired in addition to other

employment statuses. The RAND variable classifies an individual as retired if this response was

selected, regardless of whether other statuses, such as working, disabled, etc., were also selected.

Table 2b shows the retirement status of the sample, cumulated across waves.

          Looking across all the waves in the sample provides an overview of the richness of our

longitudinal dataset versus the baseline (wave 1) sample. Because the individuals in the first
                                                                                                      10


wave are 51-61, few of them are retired at baseline. The availability of subsequent waves

enables us to further investigate the factors that affect the transition into retirement and in

particular, how retirement plans change with the arrival of grandchildren and/or care

responsibilities. For example, of the 4,960 women in wave 1, 7.1% are already retired while

over the whole sample (47,400 person-wave observations), 24.3% are retired.



               3.      Key explanatory variables

Work Status and Job Characteristics

       Six categories of employment status are included in our analysis. The variable Part-

retired is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the answer to the RAND HRS question, ‘At this

time do you consider yourself to be completely retired, partly retired, or not retired at all?’, is

“partly retired” and zero otherwise. Similarly, Self-employed is equal to one when the response

to the RAND HRS question: ‘do you work for someone else, are you self-employed, or what?’

(regarding the current main job) is “self-employed”. The other employment status variables

(also dichotomous measures) are derived from the RAND HRS variable that divides the response

to the question on employment status into mutually exclusive categories:

      Work FT is equal to one if the respondent is working full-time, defined as working for

       more than 35 hours per week and more than 36 weeks per year, and zero otherwise.

      Work PT is equal to one if the respondent is working part-time and zero otherwise.

      Unemployed is equal to one if the respondent is unemployed and zero otherwise.

      Out of LF is equal to one if the respondent is not in the labor force and zero otherwise.

We additionally include two variables designed to capture whether the individual has flexibility

with respect to the hours she works. Can cut hrs is a dichotomous measure equal to one if either:
                                                                                                 11


(a) the answer to the question ‘Could you reduce the number of hours in your regular work

schedule?’ is yes, (b) the respondent is self-employed, or (c) the respondent reports that her

hours vary a lot from week to week; otherwise it is zero. Hrs/week is the average number of

hours worked per week on the respondent’s main job.

Demographic Characteristics

       The demographic characteristics are variables available in or constructed from the RAND

HRS and are dichotomous variables equal to one if the condition is true and zero otherwise.

These variables include: Black, Hispanic, and Married. The Age variable indicates the age of

the respondent in years at the end of each interview, constructed by RAND as the age at the date

on the end of the interview relative to the respondent birth date. The Education variable is

constructed using the “highest degree” variable since it is consistently defined across all waves.

Because the available level of granularity of the higher-level degrees varies across waves, we

include only the following set of dichotomous measures (equal to one if the variable name is the

highest degree obtained: High School (or passing a high school equivalency exam), Associate,

Bachelor, Grad/Prof (equal to one if the highest level of education attained is a graduate degree,

e.g., MA, MBA, PhD, MD, JD).

Income and Wealth

       For the variables in this section we use the constructed income variables from the RAND

HRS data. The RAND HRS dataset consists of imputations of all asset and income types using a

consistent method. A detailed description of the method used is given in the RAND HRS

documentation (St. Clair et al. 2010). All variables in this section are reported in nominal dollars

and are transformed via logarithm to reduce the effect of large outliers. These are:
                                                                                                 12


Earnings (the sum of a respondent’s wage, bonus / overtime pay, commissions, tips, second job

or military reserve earnings, professional practice or trade income), Family Income (the total

income of the respondent and her spouse), House value (the value of the house less mortgages

and home loans), and Liquid wealth (the aggregated value of all non-housing assets, e.g.,

checking and savings accounts, CDs, savings bonds, T-bills, stocks and bonds, minus debt).

       We also include pension accrual separately (Pen/Ann wlth, the sum of the respondent’s

income from all pensions and annuities) to capture possible financial impediments to labor force

exit as a result of expected future cash flows.

Family Characteristics

       The fourth set of variables considers family arrangements. Some family characteristics,

such as the number of grandchildren or the care responsibilities of the respondent, are available

in the RAND enhanced fat files. However, family data in HRS that pertain to an ‘other person’

observation (such as characteristics of the respondents’ children) are not yet included in the

RAND enhanced fat files for each wave and are therefore obtained from HRS directly. In

addition to the overall number of living children (#children) and grandchildren (#grandchildren),

we include the number of children still living at home or temporarily away at school

(#live@home) and four attributes of the subset of children who themselves have children (and

therefore might need help with grandchild care), specifically the number that: (a) are married

(#Kids married), (b) male (#Kids male), (c) own their own home (#Kids house), and (d) work

full-time (#Kids work FT). Note that these four variables are conditional on having children (i.e.,

they reference the parents of the grandchildren). For those women that do not have

grandchildren, these variables take a value of zero, regardless of whether or not they have

children.
                                                                                                     13


          The HRS does not separately track how near each of the grandchildren lives to the

grandparent, other than through coresidence (Coresident GC).7 In order to approximate the

proximity of the grandchildren, we construct the following two dichotomous measures: One < 10

miles (equal to one if at least one child -- that also has at least one child -- lives within 10 miles)

and All < 10 miles (equal to one if all the children that have at least one child live within 10

miles).

          Finally we have two dummy variables that measure alternative types of altruistic

behavior. The variable CareParent is a dichotomous variable equal to one if a question like the

following8 is answered affirmatively “How about another kind of help. Have you [or your

(husband/partner)] spent 100 or more hours in the past 12 months helping your parent(s) (or

stepparents) with basic personal needs like dressing, eating, and bathing?” Similarly, the

dichotomous variable Volunteer is equal to one if the respondent did volunteer work totaling 100

hours or more for religious, educational, health-related or other charitable organizations, and

zero otherwise.




7
    There is also not a separate variable for grandchild coresidence in all waves -- therefore we

construct this variable by first considering whether children live in the home and secondly

whether those children have children.
8
    This question is taken from the wave 1 (1992) questionnaire; the exact wording of the question

has changed slightly over the years. For example, more recent surveys reference “since the

previous interview on [date]” rather than asking about time spent in the past 12 months.
                                                                                                      14


Health

         We control for health using two relatively basic measures. Health is the self-assessed

health status of the respondent (on a scale of one to five, with one being the best health) while

Disabled is a dichotomous variable, constructed from the question on employment status in the

RAND enhanced fat files.

Spouse Variables

         Because an individual’s decisions regarding care work and retirement may be influenced

by (or jointly determined with) those of their spouse, we also include variables that capture

spousal characteristics – whether the spouse is working full- or part-time (FulltimeSP and

Parttime SP, respectively), disabled (DisabledSP), retired (RetiredSP) – constructed analogously

to the respondent characteristics. Health SP is a dichotomous variable based on the self-assessed

health status of the spouse (on a scale of one to five, with one being the best health), set equal to

one if the self-assessed health status response is equal to four (“fair”) or five (“poor”) and zero

otherwise. The original variable (with five options) is available in the RAND HRS data.

         These variables are equal to zero for persons who are unmarried.

Pension and Health Insurance Variables

         The final set of variables considers pension and health insurance factors that might

influence attachment to one's job. In the RAND HRS dataset is a variable that shows the types

of pension plans in which the respondent is included. From that, we construct three separate

dichotomous measures: Have DB plan (equal to one if the respondent has only a defined benefit

type of plan for her current job, Have DC plan (equal to one if the respondent has only a defined

contribution type of plan for her current job), and Exp pension (equal to one if the respondent has
                                                                                                      15


any pension plan at all, whether a DB, DC or both, and therefore expects to receive pension

benefits in the future).

        Four health insurance variables are constructed from a single categorical variable in the

RAND HRS dataset and are equal to one if the condition holds and zero otherwise: Emp. HI (the

respondent has health insurance coverage through either her own or her spouse's employment

plan), Ret. HI (the respondent has retiree health insurance coverage under any employer-

provided plan, either her own or her spouse’s), Own HI (the respondent's health insurance

coverage is from her own employment plan only, and Spouse HI plan (the respondent's health

insurance coverage is from her spouse's employment plan only). We additionally use the HRS

data to construct the Paymore variable, equal to one if the respondent will have to pay an

additional premium for health insurance if she retirees. If the individual currently has health

insurance coverage but does not report access to retiree coverage, the value of this variable is

one.

        B. Methods

        The theoretical approach we take (described in more detail in Appendix A1) is a

neoclassical economic approach, as used by Becker (1976, 1981) to characterize aspects of

family behavior (e.g., fertility, divorce) as the result of economic decisions, in the context of a

life-cycle framework that recognizes intertemporal tradeoffs. The life-cycle model often has

been used in the economics literature in the context of retirement decisions (e.g., Gustman and

Steinmeier 1986, Pozzebon and Mitchell 1989, Stock and Wise 1990) to explicitly capture the

economic tradeoff between allocating more time to paid work and less time to non-paid-work

activity (and as a result earning more) versus allocating less time to paid work and more time to

non-paid-work activity (but having less income as a result). Early life-cycle models of
                                                                                                    16


retirement focused solely on financial factors as determinants of the retirement decision but more

recent studies have incorporated nonpecuniary factors such as health and caring responsibilities.

It is therefore an appealing model to use to consider the time and financial tradeoffs between

working for pay and caring for grandchildren, yet to date it has not been used to explore this

question. We follow McGarry (2006) in assuming that (in the context of providing parent care),

“A potential caregiver maximizes a standard utility function by comparing the marginal value of

providing an hour of care with the value of an hour spent working or enjoying leisure,” and that

an altruistic care provider (in our context, a grandmother) derives utility from her own

consumption of both market goods and leisure, as well as her family's (and specifically her

grandchildren's) well-being. In other words, at a given point in time, an individual chooses a

retirement date R which maximizes her utility, U=f[C(R), L(R), Uf(R)], where utility is a positive

function of planned future consumption (C), years spent outside of paid employment (L), and

family utility (Uf), all of which are functions of a variety of covariates (such as age, health status,

income, etc.). The time spent outside of paid employment is divided into two forms, CG+NCG,

representing the sum of time spent caring (CG) for grandchildren and time spent in any other

unpaid activity (NCG, i.e., not caring for grandchildren, although it could include other forms of

care). The benefit of this formulation is that it recognizes the fact that the desirability of the two

unpaid categories can differ without having to specify how (i.e., whether positively or

negatively) they differ. Utility is maximized subject to the budget constraint equating

consumption with the present discounted value of income over the balance of the individual's life

(this includes income from own earnings, social security, pensions, assets, etc.) plus the present

discounted value of nonlabor income.
                                                                                                      17


        Following Pozzebon and Mitchell (1989), the model assumes that: (1) the employment

and care work decisions of other members of the family (in our case, the individual's children

and spouse) are taken as given, and (2) it is necessary to designate a planning date for

computation of income projections. Due to the nature of the data, it is assumed that the planning

date is the date of survey interview on which the data were collected. While this assumption is

not particularly desirable (it is more standard, in dynamic models, to assume that the planning

date is a fixed age or horizon for all individuals), we use it in this setting as we cannot observe

the true planning date. In addition, while prospective grandparents may exert indirect influence

on the fertility of their children, it is assumed that the children's fertility decisions are

independent of the grandmother’s employment status and retirement decision.

        We begin by documenting the relationship between care status and work and computing

transition probabilities between various work/caregiving states. Descriptive statistics showing

the bivariate relationships between all our covariates and the key variables of interest are

contained in Appendix A2.

        We use Cox proportional hazard models (Cox 1984) to estimate the times to retirement

and caring for grandchildren, that is, in both cases we assume the rates of retirement and caring

λi(t) at age t, i = retirement, caring, are given by: λi(t;X) = exp(Xβ) λ0i(t), where λ0i(t) is the

baseline hazard function when (without loss of generality) X=0. In other words, the log relative

hazard is linear in a set of explanatory variables, X. The baseline sample consists of the

subsample of individuals who are either (a) not retired (for the retirement hazard) or (b) not

caring for grandchildren (to estimate the caring hazard). This model is estimated using

unweighted observations since there is a lack of consensus regarding incorporation of weights in

the estimation of a Cox model when the weights are time-varying (as they are in the HRS). The
                                                                                                 18


Cox proportional hazard model is preferable to a probit model since it recognizes the dynamic

option-value nature of the life-cycle decision (that is, by remaining in the current state, an

individual retains the “option” to leave the non-care work or non-retirement states under more

advantageous terms at a later age; see, for example, Stock and Wise 1990). While a joint (or a

family) model of caring for grandchildren and retirement decision-making is perhaps even more

desirable (such a model is outlined in Appendix A1), it is well-known that such models are

typically quite complex and hence require substantial simplifying assumptions for tractability

(e.g., Cardia & Ng, 2003).


IV.     Results

       A.      The Link Between Caring for Grandchildren and Work

       Figure 1 establishes the link between labor force participation and caring for

grandchildren among women in two different age categories, separately for those without

grandchildren, those with grandchildren but not providing care, and grandmothers who are caring

for their grandchildren. In the top figure, the fraction of women working full-time is shown; in

the middle one, the fraction working for pay. The bottom figure gives the average self-reported

probability of working full-time beyond age 65, for the subsample of women that are working

full-time when surveyed. Within each age group, having grandchildren and further, providing

care for them, is associated both with decreased labor force attachment and lower expectations

about future attachment. These differences are more pronounced at younger ages (51-54) --

those caring for grandchildren in this age group work for pay almost 10% less than non-caring

grandmothers and 21% less than those without grandchildren -- but they are also evident in the

older age group. The divergence in labor force attachment between caring grandmothers and

their non-caring counterparts is even more pronounced when considering full-time work and the
                                                                                                      19


older age group (58-61); among these individuals, those caring for grandchildren are nearly 19%

less likely to be working full-time than non-caring grandmothers and 29% less likely to be

working full-time than those without grandchildren.



        B. Transitions

        Because we retain individuals throughout all waves even when they age beyond 61, the

overall sample consists of more than 79% grandmothers by wave 8. Using the approach taken in

McGarry's (2006) paper on caring for elderly parents, rather than track the transitions of a single

cohort, we stack the information for all grandmothers from all eight waves of our sample to

consider transitions among the following four states: (1) working and not caring for

grandchildren, (2) caring only, (3) retired only, and (4) retired and caring. In addition to

providing an elegant representation of the transitions into and out of both caring and work, the

McGarry (2006) paper provides a natural comparison to our results in order to highlight potential

differences between the effects of grandchild care versus parent care responsibilities; we discuss

these differences at the end of this section.

        Table 3 considers transitions into and out of various work/caring states from one wave

(time t) to the next (time t+1) for individuals who were grandmothers at time t, so that each row

of the table represents the transitions from the state in the first column to each of the four

possible states (columns 2 to 5). This yields a sample of 29,053 transition observations. Not

surprisingly, there is a fair amount of persistence in all four states (the diagonal of the table),

with more than 67% of the sample remaining in the same state as they were in the previous

wave. The persistence in caring states (the 2nd and 4th elements of the diagonal) is much lower,

roughly half that in the non-caring states (the 1st and 3rd elements of the diagonal), regardless of
                                                                                                   20


retirement status. Further, there is evidence of substantial movement into and out of both the

retirement and the caring states. While 11.6% of the sample retired between consecutive waves

(the sum of the first and third rows of columns 4 and 5, divided by the total number of

observations), less than half as many, 5%, “unretired”, that is, they engaged in paid work after

having reported themselves as retired in the previous wave (the sum of rows five and seven,

columns 2 and 3). Therefore, for at least some of the sample, there is evidence that retirement is

not an absorbing state. There is similarly evidence of transitions into and out of caring for

grandchildren. While 8.8% began caring between consecutive waves, another 10.2% stopped

caring from one wave to the next.

       The majority of our observations are either “not retired and not providing care” (17,954

out of the 29,053, or 61.8% of the sample, computed as the number of observations in the first

row of the table divided by the total number of transitions) or “retired only” (5,722, the third row

of the table, or 19.7% of the sample). While nearly three-quarters (74.8%) of those working (not

retired) and not providing care continue in this state, nearly 10% of these individuals assume

caring responsibilities without leaving the labor force altogether. The remaining 15% retire, with

about 10% of those retiring also beginning care work around the same time as the retirement

transition (i.e., between the same waves). These proportions are consistent with McGarry’s

(2006) study of caring for elderly parents. There, 78.6% of those working and not providing care

continued in that state, while nearly 7% assumed care responsibilities without leaving the labor

force, and 14.5% retired. The proportion of those retiring that also began providing care around

the same time was similarly 10%. We further model transitions into and out of care work in

Appendix A3; the results are presented in Table A3.2.
                                                                                                     21


       C. Proportional Hazard Results

             1.        Caring for Grandchildren

       Table 4 contains results from the estimation of the Cox proportional hazard models used

to estimate non-care work and non-retirement survival, assuming the individual is currently not

providing care or not retired, respectively. All independent variables in both regressions are as of

the preceding wave, that is, variables in wave t-1 are used to estimate the probability that failure

occurs at time t. For ease of interpretation, hazard ratios are reported (those in bold are

significant at the 5% level of significance); coefficient estimates and associated robust standard

errors are available from the authors on request. A hazard ratio greater than one means that an

individual is more likely to caregive (column 1) or retire (column 2), with higher values of that

explanatory variable. Conversely, a ratio less than one implies that the individual is less likely to

provide care or retire, respectively.

       There is little evidence that the propensity to provide care for grandchildren depends on

retirement or any other labor force status. While those that are retired are nearly four percent

more likely to provide grandchild care than those that are not, the difference is not significant.

Neither do pecuniary factors appear to influence the propensity to provide care; none of the

income/wealth or pension/health insurance variables are significant. In contrast, the birth of a

grandchild (even to those that are already grandmothers) is strongly associated with new care

work responsibilities (Vandel et al. 2003, document significant variation in the types of

grandparent care provided during the first three years of infancy).

        Those women that have new grandchildren born are 69.5% more likely to be providing

care for grandchildren two years later, relative to those that had no new grandchildren born; this

increased propensity is even higher than for individuals that have coresident grandchildren (52%
                                                                                                    22


more likely to be providing care than those who do not). Each additional year of age is

associated with a more than six percent lower propensity to provide care for grandchildren, while

those grandmothers that have attained the highest educational level are almost 35% less likely.

          One interpretation of why the arrival of a new grandchild is associated with caring

despite retirement not being a significant determinant is that grandmother caring may be more

demand driven than supply driven.9 Consistent with this interpretation, the results show that

family characteristics have the greatest influence on the propensity to provide care for

grandchildren, even after controlling for the grandmother’s own characteristics. Those who have

children working full-time are 14% more likely to be caring for their grandchildren than those

who do not. Those who have at least one child living within a ten mile radius are nearly twice as

likely (93% more) to assist with grandchild care responsibilities. In contrast, having children

that are male is associated with a lower likelihood of caring for one’s grandchildren. There is

little evidence of either altruistic complementarity or substitutability; there is no significant

difference in the care hazard between those that engage in other volunteer work or care for

infirmed parents or parents-in-law versus those who do not. Those that are in worse health or

those that are disabled are less likely to be care providers.

               2.        Labor Force Participation

          The second column of Table 4 contains results from the estimation of a Cox proportional

hazard model exploring the relationship between work survival of an individual and several

explanatory variables. We study the time between when a working woman first enters the sample

9
    Our finding is also consistent with the literature that notes especially strong demand for

grandparent care when the grandchild is of pre-school age (e.g., Luo, et al. 2012). We are

grateful to our anonymous referees for suggesting this interpretation.
                                                                                                      23


until she retires and investigate whether caring responsibilities influence the retirement timing.

The main variables of interest are the caring and grandchild variables. As with the care results,

hazard ratios are reported.

          Having additional grandchildren or a new grandchild born between two subsequent

waves increases the probability of retirement by 1.4 percent and 8.5 percent, respectively, but

having other care responsibilities (either for grandchildren or parents) do not appear to affect the

probability of retirement in a significant way.10 Workers that are older, disabled or in poorer

health, partly retired or self-employed, have a retired or disabled spouse or are more highly

educated are more likely to retire, while those that have jobs where they are able to reduce their

weekly hours or that already work fewer hours are less likely to retire. In addition to the result

that caring responsibilities influence retirement timing, we find strong evidence that many family

characteristics affect the likelihood of retiring. Although having more children that own their

own home is associated with a 5.5 percent increase in the probability of retiring, having more

10
     The p-value on these variables is 0.051 and 0.203, respectively, so that while neither is

statistically significant at the 95% level of confidence, the caring for grandchildren variable is

significant at the 90% level of confidence. It is also possible that the lack of significance on the

caring variable in the retirement equation reflects the censoring that occurs as a result of the new

grandchild effect since when those grandmothers retire, they have reached “failure” in the Cox

proportional hazard sense, meaning that their subsequent caregiving is no longer available to

assist with identification of a retirement effect. To consider this possibility, we re-estimate the

Cox proportional hazard model omitting the “new grandchild” variable. In this case, the p-value

on the caring variable declines to 0.041; in addition, the coefficients on the other variables are

qualitatively unchanged.
                                                                                                      24


children, more children living at home, more children who are married, or at least one child

living nearby is associated with a significantly lower probability of retiring.

       Higher earnings, liquid wealth or pension accural is also significantly associated with a

higher probability of retirement; even larger effects result from pension and health insurance

variables, emphasizing the well-documented incentive effects associated with such variables

(e.g., Gruber and Madrian 1995; Stock and Wise 1990). Individuals that expect a pension, have

a defined benefit plan or have retiree health insurance obtained through their own or their

spouse’s employer are between 25% and 55% more likely to retire. In addition, women that

have employer-provided health insurance are more than 20% less likely to retire, a result that is

consistent with the concept of “job-lock” that has been discussed extensively in the economics

literature (see, e.g., Gruber and Madrian 2002 and references therein).



 V.    Discussion and Conclusions

       This paper has considered the relationship between caring for grandchildren and the

timing of women’s retirement. We find little evidence that care work is related to the

opportunity cost associated with outside income. In particular, job characteristics such as being

able to reduce hours or the existence of pension or health insurance benefits seem to be unrelated

to the likelihood of caring for grandchildren. Instead, caring for grandchildren is strongly related

to both the grandmothers’ health and disability status, her demographic characteristics, and the

characteristics of her children. In addition, the arrival of a new grandchild greatly increases the

likelihood of providing care, consistent with the literature that documents strong demand for care

in the early years of a grandchild’s life. We find little evidence of substitution between caring

for grandchildren and caring for elderly parents or engaging in volunteer activities.
                                                                                                    25


         Consistent with previous literature, our results show that some of the most important

factors that affect the retirement decision are financial incentives such as pensions and retiree

health insurance. This finding corroborates the results from traditional retirement models that do

not include nonpecuniary factors such as unpaid care work. In addition, both poor health and

disability increase the probability of retirement, as does having a disabled or retired spouse.

Even controlling for these factors, however, having a new grandchild additionally increases the

probability of retirement by more than eight percent, an effect similar in magnitude to the health

effect. In contrast, there is little evidence that caring for parents or grandchildren directly

increases the probability of retirement beyond the new grandchild effect; in both cases the

results are not statistically significant.

        There are a number of possible explanations for our finding that the arrival of a new

grandchild increases the propensity to be caring and/or retired by so much. In addition to such

caring providing a possible new attractive alternative to paid work, it may be indicative of a

response to demand from the middle generation so that they may participate more fully in the

labor market, as noted in the National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP (2009) study, and

Taylor et al. (2010). Indeed we find a positive association between the number of children that

are working full-time and the probability of caring for grandchildren. In addition, our finding

that those who can reduce the number of hours they work are less likely to be retired indicates a

desire to stay working in the face of such additional demand, consistent with results of Pavalko

and Henderson (2006). This suggests that flexible work arrangements may mitigate any

retirement effects that are associated with caring for grandchildren.

        Our findings suggest a number of interesting policy implications. First, policies aimed at

extending the years spent working (such as are being discussed in the context of shoring up the
                                                                                                     26


social security trust fund and addressing the challenges associated with an aging population) may

have limited effect if retirement decisions are primarily driven by family considerations such as

the arrival of a new grandchild or health deterioration. Second, it is possible that policies that

address childcare needs of younger generations may reduce informal care demands on those of

retirement age and hence keep the older generation in the workforce longer (i.e., either working

until an older age or working more hours). Whether or not this is the case depends largely on

whether retirement to provide caregiving is a necessity or a choice; that remains a topic for

future research.

       In summary, our results contribute to the literature that has examined the interaction

between care work and labor force participation, by specifically examining women caring for

grandchildren in the context of the retirement decision. Taken together, our findings suggest that

labor force participation is the more dominant activity. When we consider transitions of

retirement-age women who are both working and caring for grandchildren, we find that women

are nearly eight times more likely to give up caring responsibilities than they are work

responsibilities. We also find, however, that the arrival of a new grandchild, as well as a number

of other family attributes, significantly affects the probability of women’s retirement, even after

controlling for financial and health effects that more typically have been associated with

influencing the retirement decision. Our results show that not only are family characteristics

most important to the grandchild care decision, they are also important to the retirement decision.
                                                                                             27


References

Becker, G. S. (1976). The Economic Approach to Human Behavior. Chicago: University of

  Chicago Press.

Becker, G. S. (1981). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bengtson, V.L. (2001). Beyond the Nuclear Family: The Increasing Importance of

  Multigenerational Bonds. Journal of Marriage and Family, 63, 1-16.

Bianchi, S.M., & Milkie, M.A. (2010). Work and Family Research in the First Decade of the

  21st Century. Journal of Marriage and Family 72, 705-725.

Cardia, E., & Ng, S. (2003). Intergenerational Time Transfers and Childcare. Review of

  Economic Dynamics, 6, 431-454.

Coile, C. (2004). Retirement Incentives and Couples' Retirement Decisions [Electronic version].

  Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1): article 17. Available at:

  http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/topics/vol4/iss1/art17 Accessed 12/21/10.

Cox, D.R. (1984). Regression Models and Life-Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.

  Series B (Methodological), 34, 187-220.

Fuller-Thomson, E., Minkler, M., & Driver, D. (1997). A Profile of Grandparents Raising

  Grandchildren in the United States. The Gerontologist, 37, 406-411.

Gruber, J., & Madrian, B.C. (1995). Health Insurance Availability and the Retirement Decision.

  American Economic Review, 85, 938-948.

Gruber, J., & Madrian, B.C. (2002). Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job Mobility: A

  Critical Review of the Literature. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) working

  paper 8817.
                                                                                            28


Gustman, A., & Steinmeier, T. (1986). A Structural Retirement Model. Econometrica, 54, 555-

  584.

Gustman, A., & Steinmeier, T. (2004). Social Security, Pensions and Retirement Behavior

  Within the Family. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 19, 723-738.

Guzman, L. (2004). Grandma and Grandpa Taking Care of the Kids: Patterns of Involvement.

  Child Trends Research Brief Publication #2004-17. Washington, DC: ChildTrends.

Ilchuk, S. (2009). Retirement Decisions of Women and Men in Response to Their Own and

  Spousal Health. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Pardee RAND Graduate School.

Jendrek, M. P. (1993). Grandparents Who Parent Their Grandchildren: Effects on Lifestyle.

  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 55, 609-621.

Juster, F. T., & Suzman, R. (1995). An Overview of the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of

  Human Resources, 30, S7-S56.

Laughlin, L, (2010). Who's Minding the Kids? Child Care Arrangements: Spring 2005/Summer

  2006. Current Population Reports: Household Economic Studies, August, U.S. Department

  of Commerce.

Lumsdaine, R.L. (1996). Factors Affecting Labor Supply Decisions and Retirement Income. In

  E. Hanushek and N. Maritato (Eds.), Assessing Knowledge of Retirement Behavior (pp. 61-

  122. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Lumsdaine, R. L., & Mitchell, O. S. (1999). New Developments in the Economic Analysis of

  Retirement. In O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3

  (pp. 3261-3307). Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
                                                                                                    29


Luo, Y., LaPierre, T.A., Hughes, M.E., & Waite, L.J. (2012). Grandparents Providing Care to

   Grandchildren: A Population-Based Study of Continuity and Change. Journal of Family

   Issues, 33, 1143-1167.

McGarry, K. (2004). Health and Retirement: Do Changes in Health Affect Retirement

   Expectations? Journal of Human Resources, 39, 624-648.

McGarry, K. (2006). Does Caregiving Affect Work? In D. Wise & N. Yashiro (Eds.), Health

   Care Issues in the United States and Japan (pp. 209-228). Chicago: University of Chicago

   Press.

National Alliance for Caregiving in collaboration with AARP. (2009). Caregiving in the U.S.

   2009. http://www.caregiving.org/data/Caregiving\_in\_the\_US\_2009\_full\_report.pdf,

   accessed November 4, 2010.

National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health and Human

   Services (2007). Growing Older in America: The Health and Retirement Study. NIH

   Publication No. 07-5757.

Pavalko, E.K. & Henderson, K.A. (2006). Combining Care Work and Paid Work: Do

   Workplace Policies Make a Difference? Research on Aging 28(3), 359-374.

Pozzebon, S., & Mitchell, O. S. (1989). Married Women's Retirement Behavior. Journal of

   Population Economics, 2, 39-53.

St. Clair, P., Blake, D., Bugliari, D., Chien, S., Hayden, O., Hurd, M., Ilchuk, S., Kung, F.-Y.,

   Miu, A., Panis, C., Pantoja, P., Rastegar, A., Rohwedder, S., Roth, E., Carroll, J., &

   Zissimopoulos, J. (2010). RAND HRS Data Documentation, Version J. Santa Monica:

   RAND Center for the Study of Aging, Labor & Population Program.
                                                                                               30


Simmons, T., & Dye, J. L. (2003). Grandparents Living With Grandchildren: 2000. Census 2000

  Brief, U.S. Department of Commerce.

Soldo, B. J., & Hill, M. S. (1995). Family Structure and Transfer Measures in the Health and

  Retirement Study: Background and Overview. Journal of Human Resources, 30, s108-137.

Stock, J. H., & Wise, D. A. (1990). Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement.

  Econometrica, 58, 1151-1180.

Taylor, P., Livingston, G., Parker, K., Wang, W., & Docketerman, D. (2010). Since the Start of

  the Great Recession, More Children Raised by Grandparents. Washington, DC: Pew

  Research Center.

Vandell, D. L., McCartney, K., Owen, M. T., Booth, C., & Clarke-Stewart, A. (2003). Variations

  in Child Care by Grandparents During the First Three Years. Journal of Marriage and

  Family, 65, 375-381.
                                                                                                                       31


                                        Table 1: Sample Construction, by wave

                                            W1        W2        W3        W4        W5        W6        W7        W8
Usable sample, previous wave                         4,960     5,070     5,125     6,005     6,037     6,065     7,071

           - Lost since previous wave                 -448      -428      -446      -513      -522      -441      -562

Carry over into current wave                         4,512     4,642     4,679     5,492     5,515     5,624     6,509

% retained from previous wave                       91.0%     91.6%     91.3%     91.5%     91.4%     92.7%     92.1%



Total individuals current wave            12,652    19,642    17,991    21,384    19,579    18,167    20,129    18,469

- Not female                              -5,868    -8,227    -7,479    -8,959    -8,112    -7,458    -8,350    -7,584

- Not between ages 51-61*                 -1,710    -6,189    -5,179    -6,228    -5,262    -4,458    -4,409    -3,537

- Missing family/children information         -49       -73     -120        -62       -79     -128      -220      -215

- Missing income information                  -53       -79       -84     -127        -83       -53       -64       -58

- Missing other explanatory variables         -12        -5        -4        -3        -6        -5       -15        -8



Final admissible sample this wave:         4,960     5,070     5,125     6,005     6,037     6,065     7,071     7,067

(1) Carry over from last wave                        4,512     4,642     4,679     5,492     5,515     5,624     6,509

(2) Newly added this wave                  4,960       558       483     1,326       545       550     1,447       558

Cumulative total sample:                   4,960    10,030    15,155    21,160    27,197    33,262    40,333    47,400


* Abbreviated definition. The exact definition of this criterion is that an individual “either was >61 at first entry into
the survey or whose age in the current wave is <51”. Therefore, if an individual is deemed “admissible” in an earlier
wave (i.e., in addition to meeting the other criteria, they have met the age 51-61 criterion in an earlier wave), they
continue to be included in subsequent waves, even if they age beyond the 51-61 age range. As noted in the paper, a
large proportion of the observations deleted due to this criterion are respondents that were part of the original Assets
and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old (AHEAD) survey, that sampled people born prior to 1923 and their spouses.
Consistent with the HRS sampling design regarding the addition of cohorts, if a respondent is initially deemed
inadmissible due to being younger than 51, she joins the analysis sample upon reaching 51.
                                                                                                                              32


                                       Table 2a: Grandchild status, by wave

By wave                                                 W1     W2          W3          W4          W5          W6      W7           W8

No grandchildren                                     1,136    1,136        940      1,263       1,225       1,181     1,515        1,408

Grandmothers                                         3,824    3,934     4,185       4,742       4,812       4,884     5,556        5,659

   (a) First grandchild born since last wave                   163         232         165         139         164     175          196

   (b) Other grandchild born since last wave                  1,499     1,544       1,323       1,615       1,549     1,386        1,685

   (c) No grandchildren born since last wave                  2,272     2,409       3,254       3,058       3,171     3,995        3,778

Cumulative, across waves

   No grandchildren                                  1,136    2,272     3,212       4,475       5,700       6,881     8,396        9,804

   Grandchildren, no care work                       2,916    6,020     9,482      13,361      17,438     21,524     26,113    30,846

   Caring for grandchildren                             908   1,738     2,461       3,324       4,059       4,857     5,824        6,750




                                       Table 2b: Retirement status, by wave

                               W1       W2      W3        W4          W5          W6          W7          W8
   Non-retired                4,608    9,071   13,226    17,908   22,387         26,560      31,382      35,889

   Retired                       352     959    1,929     3,252       4,810       6,702       8,951      11,511

   % retired                   7.1%    9.6%    12.7%     15.4%    17.7%          20.1%       22.2%       24.3%
                                                                                    33


Table 3: Transitions between retirement and care work, sample of grandmothers
                                                     Time t+1
                             not retired / caring only     retired    retired /   Total
Time t                      not providing                    only      caring
                                 care
not retired / not providing
care
   Number                      13,444         1,741         2,500       269       17,954
   Percent of row                  76.0          9.8          12.7       1.4       100.0
caring only
   Number                       2,018         1,661          319        276       4,274
   Percent of row                 47.0          40.9          6.5        5.6      100.0
retired only
    Number                      1,063          123          4,124       412       5,722
    Percent of row               18.3           2.3           72.3       7.1      100.0
retired / caring
    Number                       147           121           474        361       1,103
    Percent of row               13.0          10.5          42.9       33.7      100.0
Total                          16,672         3,646         7,417      1,318
Note: Percents are weighted values, counts are unweighted.
                                                                                          34


Table 4: Cox Proportional Hazard Models (hazard ratios reported)
                          Failure: Caring for Grandchildren      Failure: Retirement
                                       N=25,529                        N=26,621
                                (# of failures = 1,678)         (# of failures = 3,223)
Caring for Grandchildren                                                 1.096
Retired                                  1.066
New grandchild                           1.695                           1.085

Work status and job
Part-retired                            0.947                             1.666
Work FT                                 0.876                             1.052
Work PT                                 0.916                             1.139
Unemployed                              0.972                             1.324
Out of LF                               1.223                             1.202
Can cut hrs                             1.011                             0.888
Self-employed                           1.084                             1.202
Hrs/week                                1.003                             0.995

Demographics
Black                                   1.299                             1.094
Hispanic                                1.086                             0.921
Married                                 1.045                             0.982
Age                                     0.938                             1.135
High school                             1.035                             1.101
Associate                               1.294                             1.114
Bachelor                                1.048                             1.195
Grad/Prof                               0.651                             1.355

Income and wealth
Earnings                                1.000                             1.041
Family income                           0.987                             0.982
House value                             0.999                             1.006
Liquid wealth                           0.993                             1.009
Pen/Ann wlth                            1.013                             1.030

Family characteristics
#children                               1.015                             0.972
#live@home                              1.001                             0.890
#kids married                           0.993                             0.949
#kids male                              0.942                             0.999
#kids house                             0.957                             1.055
#kids work FT                           1.142                             0.998
One < 10 miles                          1.945                             0.907
All < 10 miles                          1.243                             1.051
#grandchildren                          0.993                             1.014
Coresident GC                           1.519                             1.104
                                                                                                                   35


Table 4 (continued)
Altruism, Health, Spouse
Care parent                                          1.152                                       1.086
Volunteer                                            1.117                                       1.025
Health                                               0.943                                       1.067
Disabled                                             0.719                                       1.406
Health SP                                            0.985                                       0.937
Disabled SP                                          1.191                                       1.179
Fulltime SP                                          0.951                                       0.885
Parttime SP                                          0.762                                       0.926
Retired SP                                           0.983                                       1.263

Pension/Health Insurance
Have DB plan                                         0.978                                       1.261
Have DC plan                                         0.968                                       0.889
Exp pension                                          0.901                                       1.386
Emp. HI                                              0.867                                       0.795
Ret HI                                               1.094                                       1.552
Own HI                                               1.054                                       1.159
Spouse HI plan                                       1.227                                       1.227
Paymore                                              1.062                                       0.998

Log Pseudo Likelihood                             -13.365.1                                   -25,721.9
Note: In order to be included in the regression, women need to be in the sample for a minimum of two consecutive
waves. Independent variables are measured at time t-1 (i.e., as of the previous wave). We do not use weights in the
Cox Proportional Hazard regression. If a respondent is between ages 51-61 in an earlier wave, she continues to be
included in the subsequent wave, even if she ages beyond 61. Non-retired/Non-caregivers that re-enter the sample at
a later time (after they drop out of the sample due to missing observations) are only included in the sample if they
are still non-retired/not providing care. Robust standard errors are used to determine levels of significance; numbers
are in bold if p<0.05.
                                                                                         36


Figure 1: Female labor force attachment, by age, care status
  a. Proportion of total sample working full-time (>35 hours per week), N = 47,400




  b. Proportion of total sample doing any work for pay, N = 47,400




 c. Self-reported probability of working full-time after age 65 (among those currently
                                 working FT), N = 12,914
             37




APPENDICES
                                                                                                                   38


      APPENDIX A1: MODELING THE JOINT CARE/RETIREMENT DECISION11

        As noted in the text, we take a neoclassical economics approach. Both the retirement and

care decisions can be viewed in the context of a multinomial choice in an intertemporal

consumption framework. An individual decides between working for wages and spending time

in other pursuits and, within the latter category, decides between caring and noncaring. Such a

choice can be modeled in a life-cycle framework, such as that used by Stock and Wise (1990),

where an individual maximizes indirect utility at time t given retirement at date r, Vt (r), which is

additively separable in future wage income and other income:




where Uw(Ys) = Ysγ + ωs is the indirect utility of future wage income and Ur[Bs(r)]=[kBs(r)]γ+ξs

is the indirect utility of income associated with non-wage activity (which includes all non-wage

sources of income, such as retirement benefits, outside investments, etc.). It is assumed that the

individual will not live past age S. In this framework, r is the retirement date, γ is a coefficient

of risk aversion, β is the discount rate, ωs and ξs are individual specific random effects, and the

parameter k is to recognize that the utility associated with a dollar of wage income may differ

from the utility associated with a dollar of non-wage income. k may be further parameterized to

account for taste; for instance by modeling k as k=k0+kCDC, we allow individuals to behave as

though they receive additional utility – in addition to financial inducements at a given age – from

caring, where DC is a dummy variable equal to one if the individual provides care to

grandchildren.




11
 Throughout this section, the notation and terminology we use is the same as that used in the original Stock and
Wise 1990 paper.
                                                                                                     39


       The “option value model” of retirement (Stock and Wise 1990) proposes that an

individual will decide to retire based on the age that maximizes the above indirect utility. A key

assumption of this option value framework is that retirement is an absorbing state, so that an

individual will postpone retirement in order to retain the option of retiring under potentially more

lucrative terms in the future. The optimal retirement date is chosen as the age r* which

maximizes Gt(r) = Et[Vt(r)] - Et[Vt(t)], that is, the gain from postponing retirement. If Gt(r) is

negative for all future ages r, the individual retires today. Thus observed retirement decisions

are described in terms of Pr[Gt(r*) > 0], which in turn is described by a particular

parameterization of Vt(r). Maximum likelihood estimation determines the parameters γ, k (and,

if included, kC), β, and σ (the variance of the compound error ω - ξ). Alternatively, we can

calculate the gain on the basis of an assumed valuation of income and an assumed discount rate.

Assuming that retirement depends on this calculated option value as well as other unobserved

determinants of retirement, a standard specification of retirement would be Pr[δ0 + δ1Ǧt(r*) + ε

> 0], where Ǧt(r) is the option value calculated under the presumed parameter values. This is a

probit formulation, assuming that ε has a normal distribution. The results from the reduced-form

probit estimation for the caregiving and retirement decisions separately can be found in

Appendix A3, Table A3.1.
                                                                                                   40


                APPENDIX A2: BIVARIATE DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

       The first three columns of Table A2.1 contain weighted means of a variety of

characteristics, by care status, for three groups of individuals: those without grandchildren (“No

Grandchildren”, the “control” group), those who have grandchildren but were not providing care

(“Not Caring”, the caring “at risk” group) and those who were caring for their grandchildren

(“Caring”, the caring “treatment” group) across all eight waves for the full aggregated sample.

Tables for each wave separately are available from the authors on request. The fourth column

tests for the equivalence of means across the latter two subgroups; means that are different at the

5% level of significance are highlighted in bold in this column. A negative (positive) value

means that on average carers are less (more) likely to possess the attribute than non-caring

grandmothers.

       The No Grandchildren group differs from the other two in a number of dimensions (e.g.,

more likely to be working full- or part-time; less likely to be out of the labor force, retired,

partially-retired, or disabled). While many of the dimensions along which this group differs is

likely due to age differences (i.e., the No Grandchildren group is younger), they are also

wealthier along every wealth/income dimension we use, more likely to have or expect a pension,

have employer-provided health insurance and retiree health insurance, and judge themselves to

be healthier (note that the health variable is defined such that a lower number denotes healthier),

than grandmothers.

       The results show there are also significant differences between caring and non-caring

grandmothers and suggest a tradeoff between paid third-party childcare versus intergenerational

provision of such care. On average, although carers are younger, they are less likely than their

non-care providing counterparts to work full-time or be retired and more likely to be either
                                                                                                       41


unemployed or working part-time, self-employed, or in jobs where they are able to reduce their

weekly hours. Relatedly, for all income measures (total income, family income, house value,

and liquid wealth), carers have lower income/wealth than their non-caring counterparts.

        In many other respects, however, caring and noncaring grandmothers are quite similar.

There is no significant difference in the number of children that caring grandmothers have versus

grandmothers that do not provide care, nor is there a significant difference in the number of those

children that are male. There is also no significant difference between groups in terms of being

out of the labor force, partially-retired, or disabled, although in some of the individual waves

these variables are significantly different across the two populations. In addition, there is little

difference between carers and non-carers in the proportion that are married or that have a high

school diploma as their highest educational attainment level. Grandmothers that provide care

are, however, more likely to be Black or Hispanic (not significant in some waves), and, less

likely to possess a bachelor's or graduate degree than their non-caring counterparts.

       There is strong evidence that proximity, family characteristics and structure influence

care provision. Carers are 34% more likely to have at least one child living within a ten-mile

radius (including co-residence – labeled One < 10 miles in the table), 50% more likely to have

all children living within a ten-mile radius (All < 10 miles), and more than twice as likely to have

co-resident grandchildren (Coresident GC). Overall, caring grandmothers have significantly

more children that work full time or live at home and significantly fewer children that are

married or own a home, but this pattern is not consistent across all waves. Surprisingly, there is

no evidence of substitution from other forms of time allocation to grandchild care; the

percentage of grandchild carers that are additionally either volunteering or caring for elderly

parents is actually higher than the percentage of non-carers. While this complementarity among
                                                                                                    42


forms of caring may suggest greater altruistic tendencies among carers, it also highlights the fact

that caring for grandchildren is taken on as an additional time demand.

       The next set of variables considers the relationship between self-assessed health status,

disability status, and spousal characteristics, and caring for grandchildren. Although there is no

significant difference in the proportion of carers and non-carers that have spouses in “fair” or

“poor” health, carers assess their own health to be worse than noncarers do and carers are more

likely to have a disabled spouse. In addition, carers are more likely to have a spouse that is

employed full-time, and less likely to have a retired spouse, than their non-caring counterparts.

       The variables describing pension and health insurance characteristics are included to

capture factors that might adhere individuals to full-time employment and thus inhibit care work.

Consistent with this intuition, carers are less likely to expect a pension or to have access to either

a defined benefit or defined contribution plan than non-carers. They are also more likely to have

employer-provided health insurance or retiree-health insurance, although these differences are

not statistically significant in every wave. In addition, carers are less likely to obtain health

insurance through their own employer and more likely to obtain it through their spouse's

employer. Taken together, these observations may suggest a substitution effect between “good”

jobs and care work; to the extent that a pension plan indicates a high-quality job, the opportunity

cost of leaving to provide care is higher for individuals in these types of jobs.

       The final three columns of Table A2.1 document the differences between retired and non-

retired grandmothers (the retirement “treatment” and “at risk” groups, respectively). Those that

are retired are less likely to be caring either for elderly parents or grandchildren (despite having

more grandchildren). They are more likely to be older, healthier, wealthier, more highly

educated, and more likely to have children that are male, married, own their own home, and
                                                                                               43


working full-time. Many of these variables may reflect the significant difference in age between

retired and non-retired grandmothers, emphasizing the importance of going beyond descriptive

statistics to consider the relationship between caring for grandchildren and retirement.
                                                                                           44


Table A2.1: Descriptive statistics, by care and retirement status
                                                       Grandmothers
                  No             Not                               Not
                                             Caring    T-test               Retired   T-test
            Grandchildren       Caring                            Retired
Retired            0.16          0.24         0.20      -8.25          .         .           .
Caring               .               .            .           .    0.19      0.15       -8.50
New grandchild         .         0.39         0.42       3.44      0.42      0.31      -20.11

Work status and job
Part-retired        0.07        0.09         0.10        1.10      0.09          .           .
Work FT             0.46        0.32         0.30       -2.91      0.41          .           .
Work PT             0.14        0.10         0.12        3.12      0.14          .           .
Unemployed          0.02        0.01         0.02        2.41      0.02      0.00      -17.35
Out of LF           0.33        0.49         0.50        1.42      0.37          .           .
Can cut hrs         0.32        0.26         0.27        2.63      0.32      0.08      -61.73
Self-employed       0.10        0.07         0.09        5.32      0.09          .           .
Hrs/week           23.92       17.05        16.55       -1.85     21.72      1.61     -144.27

Demographics
Black               0.08        0.10         0.16       11.92      0.12      0.10      -4.24
Hispanic            0.06        0.07         0.09        3.97      0.08      0.04     -18.08
Married             0.59        0.66         0.67        1.77      0.67      0.64      -4.88
Age                57.28       60.20        58.77      -20.20     58.49     64.64     103.71
High School         0.48        0.61         0.60       -1.71      0.61      0.61       1.00
Associate           0.06        0.04         0.05        2.39      0.05      0.04      -3.00
Bachelors           0.20        0.09         0.07       -5.49      0.08      0.11       8.89
Grad/Prof           0.17        0.05         0.03       -6.73      0.04      0.07      10.34

Income and Wealth
Earnings           6.32         4.76         4.41       -5.33      5.61      1.75      -81.94
Family Income     10.69        10.37        10.26       -5.40     10.36     10.32       -2.53
House value        9.43         8.99         8.67       -4.60      8.70      9.70       17.83
Liquid wealth      6.51         5.84         4.76      -10.63      5.07      7.49       30.14
Pen/Ann wlth.      1.05         1.30         1.19       -2.61      0.61      3.47       61.12

Family characteristics
#children           1.61         3.62        3.61       -0.64      3.66      3.51       -6.59
#live @home         0.91         0.57        0.86       15.90      0.70      0.37      -27.18
#Kids married          .         1.79        1.64       -8.34      1.73      1.88        9.71
#Kids male             .         1.19        1.17       -0.82      1.16      1.25        6.47
#Kids house            .         1.50        1.33      -10.26      1.38      1.77       24.16
#Kids work FT          .         1.74        1.79        2.88      1.71      1.88       10.39
One < 10 miles         .         0.55        0.74       32.04      0.60      0.54       -9.30
All < 10 miles         .         0.21        0.32       18.05      0.25      0.18      -14.09
#grandchildren         .         5.75        6.00        3.70      5.69      6.14        7.69
Coresident GC          .         0.09        0.21       23.37      0.12      0.09       -9.32
                                                                                                                45


Table A2.1 (continued)
Altruism, Health, Spouse
Care Parent         0.07                0.06            0.07           2.81        0.07         0.06        -3.42
Volunteer           0.18                0.15            0.17           3.94        0.14         0.21        15.02
Health              2.45                2.71            2.78           4.79        2.73         2.70        -1.98
Disabled            0.07                0.10            0.11           1.08        0.12         0.05       -26.66
Health SP           0.09                0.15            0.16           1.01        0.16         0.14        -3.38
Disabled SP         0.03                0.05            0.07           3.63        0.06         0.03       -12.51
Fulltime SP         0.38                0.28            0.32           6.24        0.35         0.10       -57.59
Parttime SP         0.02                0.02            0.02          -1.38        0.03         0.01       -12.68
Retired SP          0.15                0.30            0.25          -7.36        0.22         0.50        49.05

Pension/Health Insurance
Have DB plan        0.20               0.12             0.10          -5.12      0.15           0.01       -61.20
Have DC plan        0.21               0.14             0.12          -3.88      0.18           0.01       -70.93
Exp pension         0.37               0.24             0.21          -5.82      0.31           0.01       -97.77
Emp. HI             0.74               0.61             0.62           2.14      0.64           0.52       -19.64
Ret. HI             0.30               0.24             0.27           5.24      0.26           0.20       -11.03
Own HI              0.47               0.35             0.31          -5.79      0.36           0.27       -17.10
Spouse HI plan      0.30               0.28             0.33           7.74      0.30           0.26        -6.19
Paymore             0.57               0.48             0.49           1.56      0.50           0.40       -18.02
N                 9,804               30,846           6,750                  27,981         9,615
Note: In the first column we use all non-grandmothers that are between 51 and 61 when they enter the sample. For
the other columns we include only grandmothers between this age range. The variables work FT, work PT,
unemployed, and self-employed are omitted from the “Retired” column due to low numbers of observations
associated with one of the values of the dependent variable (e.g., there are zero observations that work PT among
those that are retired). Because we are interested in those that are “at risk” for caring for grandchildren, the
variables describing children’s and grandchildren’s characteristics are missing for nongrandmothers. We report
weighted means. The number of observations is unweighted. Numbers are in bold if p<0.05
                                                                                                    46


            APPENDIX A3: SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSION AND TABLES

       This appendix reports supplemental results to the analysis presented in the paper

considering the relationship between caring for grandchildren and the retirement decision, using

the subsample of grandmothers. The first section examines the factors that might be related to

the probability of either caring for grandchildren or being retired among grandmothers between

the ages of 51-61 (i.e., those that are “at risk” for both caring and retiring), using a probit model

as outlined in Appendix A2. The second section recognizes that caring is not an absorbing state

by considering transitions into and out of care work.

       Table A3.1 contains results from probit regressions for the likelihood of caring for

grandchildren or being retired given a variety of characteristics, along with the associated

marginal probabilities evaluated at the mean. The dichotomous dependent variable in the caring

regression (left three columns) is equal to one if the individual provided at least 336 hours/year

of care for a grandchild (as noted in the text of the paper). There appears to be complementarity

between grandchild care and volunteering, as the probability that an individual cares for a

grandchild increases by more than four percentage points if she engages in other volunteer work.

There is no significant evidence of this complementarity with respect to parental care, although

the sign of the coefficient is consistent with such an interpretation. Having a grandchild living in

the home increases the probability of caring by more than 11 percentage points, a magnitude

similar to the effect of having grandchildren that live closeby.

       Each additional year of a grandmother’s age decreases her probability of providing

grandchild care by about 0.6 percentage points. A disabled individual is more than 6 percentage

points less likely to provide care for grandchildren than a nondisabled individual. Higher total

income or liquid wealth and having a graduate or professional degree are also associated with a
                                                                                                    47


decreased probability of providing care, reflecting the higher opportunity cost. Although being

retired does not seem to be significantly associated with care work, having retiree health

insurance increases the probability of care work by two percentage points. Surprisingly, other

measures of health (both respondent's and spouse's), job characteristics, and income and asset

levels do not seem to significantly affect the probability of providing care.

       Characteristics of the children also significantly affect the probability of providing

grandchild care. Having children that work full-time significantly increases this probability by

1.4 percentage points. This suggests that caring for grandchildren is associated with children

who may need such assistance (either to take on a full-time job or who have limited resources to

pay for third-party care). Having additional children, children that are married, or children that

are male significantly decreases the probability of caring for grandchildren.

       The right three columns of Table A3.1 contain results from estimation of a probit model

of retirement status. Not surprisingly, workers that are older, have a retired spouse, have retiree

health insurance or are out of the labor force are more likely to be retired, while those who are

married, disabled, or have a spouse that works part-time are less likely to be retired. Although

the probability of retirement appears to be primarily related to standard factors (e.g.,

demographic and job characteristics), there are some important exceptions. In particular, having

a coresident grandchild is associated with a higher likelihood of being retired, while having a

child living at home is associated with a lower likelihood of being retired. None of the other

family characteristics have significant coefficients.

       In summary, using basic probit models, we find no evidence that being retired directly

affects the probability of caring for grandchildren or vice versa, motivating the use of more

dynamic models.
                                                                                   48


Table A3.1: Probit regressions for care and retirement decisions
                          Caring decision                  Retirement decision
                    means std err marg eff              means std err marg eff
 Constant             0.342 0.29                        -5.691 0.46
 Caring*                                                -0.055 0.05       -0.002
 Retired*            -0.065 0.05        -0.017
 New grandchild*     -0.045 0.03        -0.012          -0.004 0.04       -0.000

Work status and job
Part-retired*        0.074     0.07    0.021            0.552   0.06     0.034
Work FT*            -0.107     0.10   -0.029
Work PT*            -0.042     0.09   -0.011
Unemployed*          0.012     0.12    0.003
Out of LF*           0.034     0.09    0.009            1.049   0.09     0.058
Can cut hrs*         0.043     0.04    0.012            0.216   0.08     0.009
Self-employed*       0.094     0.06    0.026
Hrs/week             0.000     0.00    0.000           -0.029   0.00     -0.001

Demographics
Black*                0.113    0.04    0.032            0.266   0.06      0.012
Hispanic*            -0.035    0.05   -0.009           -0.387   0.10     -0.010
Married*              0.061    0.05    0.016           -0.231   0.07     -0.009
Age                  -0.023    0.00   -0.006            0.066   0.01      0.002
High School*         -0.019    0.03   -0.005            0.231   0.05      0.008
Associate*            0.120    0.07    0.034            0.463   0.11      0.027
Bachelors*           -0.070    0.06   -0.019            0.447   0.09      0.025
Grad/Prof*           -0.177    0.08   -0.044            0.672   0.10      0.047

Income and wealth
Earnings             -0.018    0.00   -0.005            0.015   0.01     0.001
Family Income         0.006    0.01    0.002            0.004   0.01     0.000
House value          -0.002    0.00   -0.001            0.007   0.00     0.000
Liquid wealth        -0.005    0.00   -0.001            0.007   0.00     0.000
Pen/Ann wlth.         0.008    0.01    0.002            0.106   0.01     0.004

Family characteristics
#children             -0.036   0.01   -0.010            0.022   0.02      0.001
#live @home            0.008   0.01    0.002           -0.160   0.03     -0.006
#Kids married         -0.094   0.01   -0.025           -0.003   0.02     -0.000
#Kids male            -0.032   0.01   -0.009           -0.015   0.02     -0.001
#Kids house           -0.012   0.01   -0.003           -0.001   0.02     -0.000
#Kids work FT          0.051   0.01    0.014            0.008   0.02      0.000
One < 10 miles*        0.418   0.03    0.110           -0.048   0.05     -0.002
All < 10 miles*        0.022   0.03    0.006           -0.022   0.06     -0.001
#grandchildren         0.028   0.00    0.008           -0.014   0.01     -0.000
Coresident GC*         0.374   0.04    0.113            0.258   0.08      0.012
                                                                                                                 49


 Table A3.1 (continued)
                          Caregiving decision                             Retirement decision
                      means std err marg eff                           means std err marg eff
 Altruism, Health, Spouse
 Care Parent*           0.052 0.04        0.014                         -0.094      0.07       -0.003
 Volunteer*             0.154 0.03        0.044                          0.060      0.05        0.002
 Health                 0.003 0.01        0.001                         -0.016      0.02       -0.001
 Disabled*             -0.251 0.05       -0.062                         -1.013      0.07       -0.018
 Health SP*            -0.033 0.04       -0.009                         -0.080      0.06       -0.003
 Disabled SP*           0.092 0.06        0.026                         -0.062      0.09       -0.002
 Fulltime SP*           0.005 0.04        0.001                         -0.116      0.07       -0.004
 Parttime SP*          -0.122 0.08       -0.031                         -0.347      0.15       -0.009
 Retired SP*           -0.042 0.04       -0.011                          0.507      0.06        0.026

 Pension/Health Insurance
 Have DB plan*        -0.079           0.07       -0.021                 0.145      0.23        0.006
 Have DC plan*        -0.065           0.07       -0.017                 0.272      0.22        0.012
 Exp pension*          0.050           0.08        0.014                -0.962      0.25       -0.028
 Emp. HI*              0.082           0.10        0.022                -0.061      0.17       -0.002
 Ret. HI*              0.077           0.03        0.021                 0.376      0.05        0.016
 Own HI*              -0.063           0.09       -0.017                 0.461      0.16        0.019
 Spouse HI*            0.042           0.09        0.012                 0.045      0.15        0.002
 Paymore*             -0.018           0.04       -0.005                -0.067      0.06       -0.002

Log Pseudo Likelihood:         -36,188,673                                    -13,081,225
Observations used in regression: 22,044
# Caregiving                4,518                                     # Retired                    2,211
# Not Caregiving           17,526                                     # Not retired               19,833
Note: The regressions are estimated over the sample of grandmothers between the ages of 51 and 61 in each wave.
Wave dummies (not shown) are included in both regressions. Robust standard errors are computed using Huber-
White maximum likelihood estimation. bold signifies significance at the 95% level of probability. Variables
marked with an asterisk (*) signify that the marginal effect (“marg eff”) is reported for the discrete change of the
dummy variable from 0 to 1. For the continuous independent variables, the marginal effect is the effect of an
independent variable evaluated at the mean values of the covariates. The variables work FT, work PT, unemployed,
and self-employed are omitted from the retirement regression due to low numbers of observations associated with
one of the values of the dependent variable (e.g., there are zero observations that work PT among those that are
retired). For clarity we use unweighted counts in reporting the numbers of observations.


        While in our paper we focus on entry into care work and hence model the care work

decision as an absorbing state, there is evidence from the literature on caring for spouses and

elderly parents (e.g., McGarry 2006) that many individuals move in and out of care roles as

needed. We therefore consider the probability that a grandmother in wave t will have started or
                                                                                                   50


stopped providing care by wave t+1; estimated coefficients from probit regressions of these

transitions and their associated marginal effects are presented in Table A3.2. Those coefficients

that are significant at the 95% level of confidence are shown in bold.

       The first half of Table A3.2 considers the probability that an individual began caring for

grandchildren between waves, from the subsample of the t+1 grandmothers that was not caring

for their grandchildren in wave t (23,676 grandmother-wave observations). Of these

grandmothers, there were 2,545 episodes where a grandmother began caring between waves

(10.75% of the sample). The decision to start caring does not appear to be significantly related

to income, pension or health insurance characteristics, education, or marital status. Those that

are older or disabled are less likely to begin care work, while those that are out of the labor force

or have children that live nearby are more than four percentage points more likely to begin it.

Having coresident grandchildren increases the probability of initiating care provision by nearly

seven percentage points, while each additional child that works full-time only increases the

probability by 0.9 percentage points. There is also some evidence of altruistic

complementarities; a respondent that volunteers is 1.6 percentage points more likely to begin

caring for grandchildren than one that does not. An effect of similar magnitude is evident among

those that are parental caregivers, although the coefficient is not statistically significant. Having

a new grandchild is also associated with the onset of care work, increasing the probability by 1.8

percentage points.

       The second half of table A3.2 considers the probability that an individual stopped caring

for grandchildren between waves between waves t and t+1, among the 5,377 observations where

a grandmother was already caring in wave t. Among this subsample, more than 55% (2,958)

stopped providing care between waves. Consistent with the results for starting care, each
                                                                                                      51


additional year of the grandmother’s age is associated with a 0.7 percentage point increase in the

probability that a grandmother will stop caring. We find little evidence of a link between care

stoppage and either work or health factors. The only work-related variable that is significant,

receipt of retiree health insurance, is associated with a decreased probability of stopping care

provision of 6.1 percentage points between waves t and t+1, suggesting that this benefit might

ease caregiver burden. None of the health, disability, work, pension, or health insurance

characteristics of either the respondent or spouse significantly affects the probability of stopping

care provision, nor are most of the income variables significant (the one exception is family

income, with higher income associated with a greater likelihood of stopping). Each additional

married child increases the probability that an individual stopped caring between waves by more

than three percentage points. Not surprisingly, having at least one child living nearby or

coresident grandchildren significantly decreases the probability that a grandmother will stop

caring (by 5.5 and 11.5 percentage points, respectively). There is also evidence that having a new

grandchild decreases the probability of stopping care activity, by more than four percentage

points.

          Taken together, the results on caring transitions provide little evidence of an immediate

(e.g., within the two years that occurs between waves) tradeoff between work and caring among

grandmothers nearing retirement age. There is, however, strong evidence that the birth of a new

grandchild influences care provision decisions.
                                                                                           52


Table A3.2: Probit regression for Caring Transitions (N=29,053)

                         Started caring between waves        Stopped caring between waves
                           estimate        marginal effect   estimate         marginal effect
Constant                    0.172                             -1.314
Retired*                   -0.010              -0.002          0.008               0.003
New grandchild*             0.100               0.018         -0.104              -0.041

Work status and job
Part-retired*               0.034               0.006        -0.078               -0.031
Work FT*                    0.011               0.002        -0.060               -0.024
Work PT*                    0.090               0.016        -0.011               -0.004
Unemployed*                 0.260               0.053        -0.073               -0.029
Out of LF*                  0.233               0.041        -0.140               -0.056
Can cut hrs*                0.040               0.007        -0.037               -0.015
Self-employed*              0.031               0.005        -0.024               -0.010
Hrs/week                    0.002               0.000        -0.003               -0.001

Demographics
Black*                      0.168               0.032         0.002                0.001
Hispanic*                   0.038               0.007         0.033                0.013
Married*                    0.055               0.009        -0.079               -0.031
Age                        -0.031              -0.005         0.017                0.007
High School*               -0.038              -0.007        -0.010               -0.004
Associate*                  0.115               0.021        -0.053               -0.021
Bachelors*                 -0.012              -0.002         0.035                0.014
Grad/Prof*                 -0.148              -0.024         0.060                0.024

Income and Wealth
Earnings                   -0.002              -0.000         0.012                0.005
Family Income               0.014               0.002         0.038                0.015
House value                -0.000              -0.000        -0.006               -0.002
Liquid wealth              -0.002              -0.000         0.005                0.002
Pen/Ann wealth              0.007               0.001        -0.001               -0.000

Family characteristics
#children                  -0.022              -0.004        -0.020               -0.008
#live @home                 0.024               0.004        -0.004               -0.002
#Kids married              -0.002              -0.000         0.090                0.036
#Kids male                 -0.041              -0.007        -0.032               -0.013
#Kids house                -0.037              -0.006         0.008                0.003
#Kids work FT               0.051               0.009         0.036                0.014
One < 10 miles*             0.266               0.046        -0.139               -0.055
All < 10 miles*             0.017               0.003         0.060                0.024
#grandchildren              0.006               0.001         0.002                0.001
Coresident GC*              0.336               0.069        -0.288               -0.115
                                                                                                                    53



Table A3.2 (continued)
                              Started caring between waves                  Stopped caring between waves
                               estimate      marginal effect                 estimate        marginal effect
Altruism, Health, Spouse
Care Parent*                     0.088                   0.016                 -0.019                    -0.007
Volunteer*                       0.089                   0.016                  0.092                     0.037
Health                          -0.015                  -0.003                  0.031                     0.012
Disabled*                       -0.179                  -0.028                  0.035                     0.014
Health SP*                       0.010                   0.002                  0.024                     0.009
Disabled SP*                     0.017                   0.003                  0.095                     0.037
Fulltime SP*                    -0.055                  -0.009                 -0.008                    -0.003
Parttime SP*                    -0.097                  -0.016                  0.026                     0.010
Retired SP*                      0.002                   0.000                 -0.003                    -0.001

Pension/Health Insurance
Have DB plan*             0.022                          0.004                  0.034                     0.014
             *
Have DC plan              0.045                          0.008                  0.040                     0.016
Exp pension*             -0.095                         -0.016                  0.109                     0.043
Emp. HI                   0.018                          0.003                  0.371                     0.147
        *
Ret. HI                   0.055                          0.010                 -0.153                    -0.061
Own HI*                  -0.055                         -0.010                 -0.271                    -0.108
Spouse HI*                0.017                          0.003                 -0.330                    -0.131
Paymore*                  0.038                          0.007                 -0.093                    -0.037

Log Pseudo Likelihood:           -24,621,916                                         -11,184,088
Observations used in regression:         23,676                                                     5,377
Started Caregiving:                       2,545                         Stopped caregiving          2,958
Still not Caregiving                     21,131                         Still caregiving            2,419

Note: This table shows the results from two separate regressions: (1) the transition from not caring to caring (left
side of table), and (2) the transition from caring to not caring (right side of table). Robust standard errors are
computed using Huber-White maximum likelihood estimation. Wave dummies (not shown) are included in both
regressions. Variables marked with an asterisk (*) signify that the marginal effect is reported for the discrete change
of the dummy variable from 0 to 1. For the continuous independent variables, the marginal effect is the effect of an
independent variable evaluated at the mean values of the covariates. We use the cumulative sample of grandmothers
(37,596) and require the grandmother to be present in two consecutive waves since independent variables are
measured as of time t-1 (i.e., the previous wave). As a result of this requirement, 8,543 person-wave observations
drop from the sample. Bold signifies p<0.05. For clarity we use unweighted counts in reporting the numbers of
observations.
