                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DOES THE GEOGRAPHIC EXPANSION OF BANK ASSETS REDUCE RISK?

                                          Martin Goetz
                                          Luc Laeven
                                          Ross Levine

                                      Working Paper 20758
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20758


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2014




Martin Goetz gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Center of Excellence SAFE, funded
by the State of Hessen initiative for research LOEWE. The views expressed here are our own and
should not be attributed to those of the IMF or IMF Board. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Geographic Expansion of Bank Assets Reduce Risk?
Martin Goetz, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 20758
December 2014
JEL No. G11,G21,G28

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a new identification strategy to evaluate the impact of the geographic expansion of bank
holding company (BHC) assets across U.S. metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) on BHC risk. We
find that the geographic expansion of bank assets reduces risk. Moreover, geographic expansion reduces
risk more when BHCs expand into economically dissimilar MSAs, i.e., MSAs with different industrial
structures and business cycles. We do not find that geographic diversification improves loan quality.
Our results are consistent with arguments that geographic expansion lowers risk by reducing exposure
to idiosyncratic local risks and inconsistent with arguments that geographic expansion, on net, increases
risk by reducing the ability of BHCs to monitor loans and manage risks.


Martin Goetz                                        Ross Levine
Professor                                           Haas School of Business
SAFE and Goethe University                          University of California at Berkeley
Frankfurt                                           545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
GERMANY                                             Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
goetz@econ.uni-frankfurt.de                         and NBER
                                                    Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
Luc Laeven
Deputy Division Chief
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
and CEPR
Llaeven@imf.org
                                                1


1. Introduction


       Economic theory provides conflicting views on a basic question in banking: Does the

geographic expansion of bank assets reduce risk? Textbook portfolio theory suggests that

geographic expansion will lower a bank’s risk if it involves adding assets whose returns are

imperfectly correlated with existing assets. Diamond (1984) and Boyd and Prescott (1986)

emphasize that diversified banks enjoy cost-efficiencies that can enhance stability. And, if

diversification makes a bank too big, or too interconnected, to fail, implicit or explicit

government guarantees can lower the risk of investing in the bank (Gropp et al., 2010).

       Other theories stress that expansion increases bank risk. Agency-based models of
corporate expansion (Jensen, 1986; Berger and Ofek, 1996; Servaes, 1996; and Denis et al.,

1997) suggest that bankers might expand geographically to extract the private benefits of

managing a larger “empire” even if this lowers loan quality and increases bank fragility.

Furthermore, Brickley et al. (2003) and Berger et al. (2005) stress that distance can hinder

the ability of a bank’s headquarters to monitor its subsidiaries, with potentially adverse

effects on asset quality. And, to the extent that diversification increases complexity, it could

hinder the ability of banks to monitor loans and manage risk (Winton, 1999).

       Empirical assessments of these views have yielded mixed results. Demsetz and

Strahan (1997) and Chong (1991) find that geographical diversified BHCs hold less capital

and choose riskier loans. Acharya et al. (2006) find that as BHCs expand geographically, their

loans become riskier. On the other hand, Akhigbe and Whyte (2003) and Deng and Elyasiani

(2008) find that risk falls as BHCs expand geographically.

       The ambiguity of existing findings might reflect the challenges of identifying an

exogenous source of variation in geographic expansion and accounting for where BHCs

choose to expand. First, if BHCs increase the riskiness of their assets when they expand

geographically, then an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of risk on geographic
diversity will yield an upwardly biased estimate of the impact of geographic expansion on

risk. That is, OLS estimates will understate any risk-reducing effects of geographic expansion
                                                2



due to attenuation bias. Second, BHCs not only choose whether to expand; they choose

where to expand. Textbook portfolio theory suggests that geographic expansion will

appreciably lower risk only if the BHCs expands into “dissimilar” economies—economies

whose asset returns have low correlation with the BHC’s existing investments. Failing to

account for where BHCs expand could yield misleading inferences about the impact of

geographic expansion on risk.

       To address these challenges and assess the impact of geographic expansion on BHC

risk, we develop and use a new instrumental variable strategy. We both identify an

exogenous increase in geographic diversity at the BHC-level and account for BHCs choosing

to expand into more similar or dissimilar local economies. To measure BHC risk, we use the

standard deviation of a BHC’s stock returns, which Atkeson et al. (2014) show theoretically

and empirically is a sound measure of a firm’s risk of default. Furthermore, our results hold

when using the Z-score and other measures of risk. To measure geographic diversity, we use

the distribution of BHC assets across U.S. Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). MSAs have

different business cycle frequencies and industrial structures that we use to measure the

similarity of local economies.

       Our identification strategy has two building blocks. First, we exploit the cross‐state,

cross‐time variation in the removal of interstate bank branching prohibitions to identify an

exogenous increase in geographic diversity. From the 1970s through the 1990s, individual

states of the United States removed restrictions on the entry of out‐of‐state banks. Not only

did states start deregulating in different years, states also signed bilateral and multilateral

reciprocal interstate banking agreements in a somewhat chaotic manner over time. There is

enormous cross‐state variation in the twenty‐year process of interstate bank deregulation,

which culminated in the Riegle‐Neal Interstate Banking Act of 1995. As we discuss and show

below, there are good economic and statistical reasons for treating the process of interstate
bank deregulation as exogenous to bank risk and for using interstate bank deregulation as

an exogenous source of variation in BHC diversity.
                                                3



       The second building block involves embedding this state‐time dynamic process of

interstate bank deregulation into a gravity model of individual BHC investments in “foreign”

MSAs—MSAs other than the MSA where the BHC is headquartered. This methodology yields

a BHC‐specific instrumental variable of cross-MSA diversification. Specifically, in each time

period, we use a gravity model to compute the projected share of assets that each BHC will

hold in each “foreign” MSA and impose a value of zero when there are interstate bank

regulatory prohibitions on a BHC owning a subsidiary in that MSA. Our gravity‐deregulation

model explains bank expansion behavior very well and produces the BHC-specific

instrumental variable that we employ to identify the causal impact of geographic diversity

across different MSAs on risk.

       We start with OLS regressions that confirm past findings and advertise the value of

our instrumental variable strategy. In regressions of BHC risk on BHC diversification, the

results depend on the control variables. In some specifications, diversification enters with a

negative coefficient; while in other specifications, it enters with a positive coefficient. Since

attenuation bias could drive these results, we use the instruments described above to assess

the impact of diversification on risk.

       Using instrumental variables, we find that geographic expansion of BHC assets

materially reduces BHC risk. This finding holds after controlling for a wide‐array of

time‐varying BHC characteristics, such as size, growth, profitability, and the capital‐asset

ratio, as well as BHC fixed effects. Furthermore, we find no evidence that short-run valuation

effects around the time of mergers and acquisitions drive the results. Across an array of

specifications and robustness tests, we find an economically large effect. A one-standard

deviation increase in the geographic diversification of BHC assets across MSAs reduces BHC

risk by 34%, or about 70% of its sample standard deviation.

       We also find that geographic expansion reduces risk more when BHCs expand into
economically dissimilar MSAs—MSAs with different industrial structures and business

cycles—than when they expand into similar MSAs. We use measures of the similarity of
                                               4



industrial structures (Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2001; 2003) and the synchronicity of business

cycles across MSAs (Morgan et al., 2004; Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2013) to measure the degree

to which a BHC expands into an economically dissimilar area. To evaluate the economic

magnitude of the risk-reducing effects from expanding into dissimilar MSAs, we rank all

MSA-pairs by the degree of industrial structure similarity or business cycle co-movement

and compare MSA-pairs with below and above the median similarity. Our estimates suggest

that BHCs that expand into dissimilar MSAs experience a four-fold larger reduction in risk

than those that expand into similar MSAs. Geographic expansion lowers risk by enabling

banks to reduce their exposure to idiosyncratic local risks.

       We also assess an additional channel through which geographic expansion might

influence BHC fragility: changes in loan quality. As noted above, some research suggests that

geographic expansion might reduce the quality of banks loan and the monitoring of those

loans. We, however, find that an increase in the geographic diversity of BHC assets does not

have an impact on loan loss provisions, nonperforming loans, or loan charge-offs. The results

do not indicate that geographic expansion is reducing bank risk by improving loan quality.

       It is important to emphasize the boundaries of our analyses. We do not assess each of

the potential mechanisms linking geographic expansion and risk. Rather, we develop a new

identification strategy that allows us to (a) assess the net impact of geographic diversity on

BHC risk more precisely than past studies, (b) evaluate the hypothesized gains from

diversifying into different local economies, and (c) gauge whether the effects of geographic

on risk are driven by changes in loan quality. The findings indicate that geographic

expansion—especially diversification into dissimilar MSAs—materially reduces BHC risk.

       These findings relate to recent research on the valuation effects of BHC

diversification. DeLong (2001) and Goetz et al. (2013) find that the geographic

diversification of BHCs assets destroys shareholder value, which can arise because insiders
extract private rents. For instance, Goetz et al. (2013) show that diversification increases the

size and lowers the interest rate on BHC loans to executives. In turn, our results indicate that
                                               5



the geographic diversification of BHC assets reduces risk, where the risk-reducing effects of

geographic expansion are particularly pronounced when BHCs enter economically different

markets. Furthermore, we extend and improve on the identification strategy developed in

Goetz et al. (2013) by examining how the cross-MSA expansion of BHCs influences BHC risk

while differentiating by the similarity of MSA economies.

       Our findings relate to long-standing policy deliberations. As emphasized by Bernanke

(1983), Calomiris and Mason (1997, 2003a, 2003b), Keeley (1990), Boyd and DeNicolo

(2005) and recent financial turmoil, the risk-taking behavior of banks affects financial and

economic fragility. In turn, national regulatory agencies have adopted, or are considering

adopting, an array of regulations, including geographic concentration limits, to shape bank

risk. For instance, in the U.S. no BHC is permitted to gain more than a 10% share in the

market for deposits. And the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (2011), in its effort to

contain the financial system’s systemic risk, has proposed capital surcharges for systemically

important banks and considers a bank’s global footprint to be an important indicator of its

systemic importance. Yet, the literature has not offered conclusive evidence on the impact of

restrictions on geographic diversity on the risk taking behavior of individual banks, in part

due to identification challenges.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the data and describes the

process of interstate bank deregulation in the United States. Section 3 presents OLS

regression results of the relation between geographic diversity of bank assets and bank risk.

Section 4 presents instrumental variables regression results based on the removal of

interstate banking restrictions. Section 5 considers heterogeneous effects of diversification

across geographies and markets. Section 6 considers the effects of geographic diversity on

loan quality. Section 7 concludes.
                                                      6



2. Data and interstate bank deregulation

2.1. Sources

          We use balance sheet information on BHCs and their chartered subsidiary banks to

assess the relationship between bank risk and the geographic diversification of BHC assets.

The Federal Reserve collects data on a quarterly basis on BHCs and publishes the data in the

Financial Statements for Bank Holding Companies. Since June of 1986, the Federal Reserve

has provided consolidated balance sheets, income statements, and detailed supporting

schedules for domestic BHCs. Furthermore, all banks regulated by the Federal Deposit

Insurance Corporation, the Federal Reserve, or the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

file Reports of Condition and Income, known as Call Reports, that include balance sheet and

income data. We link bank subsidiaries to their parent BHCs by using the reported identity of

the entity that holds at least 50% of a bank’s equity (RSSD9364). We exclude subsidiaries

that only conduct foreign activities (e.g., Edge corporations).

          The Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP) provides data on the stock prices of

publicly traded BHCs at the quarterly frequency. We use these data to measure BHC risk as

the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of stock returns. We link BHC balance sheet

information to stock prices using CRSP-FRB link from the New York Federal Reserve Bank

website.1

          For interstate deregulation, Amel (1993) and the updates by Goetz, Laeven, Levine

(2013) and Goetz and Gozzi (2014) provide information on changes in state laws that affect

the ability of commercial banks to expand across state borders. Commercial banks in the U.S.

were prohibited from entering other states due to regulations on interstate banking. Over

the period from 1978 through 1994, states removed these restrictions by either (1)

unilaterally opening their state borders and allowing out-of-state banks to enter or (2)

signing reciprocal bilateral and multilateral branching agreements with other states and


1   A current link can be found at: http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/banking_research/datasets.html.
                                                7



thereby allowing out-of-state banks to enter. The Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 repealed

restrictions on BHCs headquartered in one state from acquiring banks in other states. Amel

(1993) reports for each state and year, the states in which a state’s BHC can open subsidiary

banks. After confirming this dating, we extended the data for the full sample period using

information from each state’s bank regulatory authority. Consistent with earlier research on

the liberalization of branching restrictions (e.g., Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996), we exclude

the states of Delaware and South Dakota from these analyses since both states changed their

laws to encourage the formation and entry of credit card banks in 1980, shortly before

removing branching restrictions, which makes it difficult to isolate the independent effect of

interstate banking deregulation on BHC diversification.

       The Bureau of Economic Analysis provides data on social and economic

demographics at the level of MSAs. Defined by the Office of Management and Budget, MSAs

are geographic entities that contain a core urban area of 50,000 or more inhabitants and

include adjacent counties that have a high degree of social and economic integration (as

measured by commuting to work) with the urban core. We use the 2003 definitions of MSAs.

There are 381 distinct MSAs in the United States. Since a few urban areas span two (or more

states), we consider an MSA to have removed its restriction to the entry of banks from other

areas if at least one state of the MSA removed its entry restrictions.



2.2. Geographic diversification

       For each BHC, in each quarter, we determine the cross-MSA distribution of its bank

subsidiaries, weighting the subsidiaries by their assets. We use the location of the BHC’s

subsidiaries across MSAs as reported in the Call Reports and define BHC diversification in

terms of the location of its bank network, not the physical location of the firms and

individuals receiving loans as such information is unavailable.
       We consider each MSA to be a distinct banking market and compute a BHC’s asset

diversification across MSAs as in Berger and Hannan (1989) and Rhoades (1997). Thus, we
                                                 8



only consider BHCs headquartered in an MSA and we only measure diversification of BHC

assets across MSAs. These filters do not exclude much of the US banking system. Publicly

traded BHCs headquartered in MSAs held on average about 85% of US commercial banking

system assets during our sample period. And, of these BHCs, about 95% of their commercial

banking assets are held by subsidiaries in MSAs. Thus, we capture about 80% of the US

commercial banking industry.

       We use two measures of geographic diversity. First, Diversification Dummy is a

dummy variable that equals one if a BHC has subsidiaries in more than one MSA, and zero

otherwise. Second, 1 – Herfindahl Index of assets across MSAs equals one minus the

Herﬁndahl-Hirschman Index of a BHC’s assets across the MSAs in which it has subsidiary

banks. This measures the dispersion of a BHC’s assets across MSAs. Note, the measures of

BHC asset diversification are defined at the MSA level, not at the state level.



2.3. Exposure to Liquidity Risk

       Building on Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) and Gatev, Schuermann, and Strahan

(2009), we control for the liquidity risk of each BHC. Kashyap et al. (2002) focus on the

synergies associated with banks taking deposits and making loan commitments. Banks often

provide liquidity to borrowers through loan commitments, but this exposes them to the

liquidity risk that a borrower draws down a committed line of credit. By combining loan

commitments with deposit-taking, banks can hedge such risks if deposit withdrawals and

loan commitment drawdowns are negatively correlated. Gatev et al. (2009) show that on

average a U.S. BHC’s risk is higher if it has a greater share of undrawn credit lines, but lower

if it has a greater share of demand deposits, indicating that BHCs can hedge liquidity risk. To

measure liquidity risk, we follow Gatev et al. (2009) and include three variables: (1) the

undrawn, but committed, credit lines as a share of BHC loan volume, (2) transaction deposits
as a share of total BHC deposit volume, and (3) the interaction between these two terms (to

account for the mitigating effect of a BHCs’ liability structure on risk).
                                                      9




2.4. Activity diversity

        We account for the diversity of each BHC’s financial activities to focus on the

independent impact of geographic diversity on risk. Following Laeven and Levine (2007), we

use both an index of income diversity and an index of asset diversity. The income diversity

index measures the degree to which the income of the bank is diversified between interest

and noninterest income. The asset diversity index measures the diversity of assets between

interest and noninterest generating assets. The indexes take on values between zero and

one, where larger values imply that the BHC’s income and assets are more diversified.
        In   particular,                                                                    ,   where     Net

interest income equals total interest income minus total interest expenses. Other operating

income includes net fee income, net commission income, and net trading income.
And,                                                   , where Net loans equals gross loans minus

loan loss provisions. Other earning assets include all earning assets other than loans (such as

Treasuries, mortgage-backed securities, and other fixed income securities).



2.4. Other factors

        We also control for an array of bank-specific and MSA-specific traits that influence

bank risk (e.g., Avraham et al., 2012). The analyses control for a BHC’s assets (i.e., bank

size2), Tobin’s q, operating income, capital-asset ratio, and return on assets. We also control

for the concentration of banking assets within an MSA and quarter, and the real growth rate

of average personal income within an MSA. Since reliable estimates of personal income at

the MSA-level are only available at an annual frequency, we use the annual growth rate for

each quarter within a year. Furthermore, in several analyses reported below, we include

MSA- and BHC-fixed effects to account for all time invariant MSA and BHC effects.

2A considerable body of research examines economies of scale in banking, including Berger et al. (1987), Boyd
and Gertler (1993), and Boyd and Runkle (1993).
                                               10




2.5. Sample construction

       We first match subsidiaries of BHCs to their ultimate parent company using

information from the Call Reports. Each subsidiary reports its unique parent company, and

there can be several layers of subsidiaries and parent companies before reaching the

ultimate parent company. We assign a subsidiary to the ultimate parent BHC that owns at

least 50% of the subsidiary’s equity. We only focus on BHCs located in the U.S. and therefore

drop holding companies chartered in Puerto Rico. Furthermore, we eliminate BHCs that

change the location of their headquarters across MSAs during the sample period.

       We next link these data with information on stock prices and market capitalization to

measure the volatility of each BHC’s market capitalization in each quarter. We first obtain

stock prices and outstanding shares from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP)

and calculate market capitalization for each BHC over the period from 1986 through 2007.

For the few cases in which two different classes of shares for a BHC are traded in a quarter,

we use the sum of the capitalizations of each class of share for the BHC. Similar to Gatev at al.

(2009), we compute weekly returns from market values observed on Wednesdays, as this is

the weekday with the fewest public holidays. For each BHC, we then compute the standard

deviation of weekly market returns over a quarter, and use this as our main proxy for BHC

risk. We set a BHC-quarter observation equal to missing if we do not have stock price data

for more than 25% of Wednesdays in a quarter. This reduces the BHC-quarter observations

by less than 3%. Further, we exclude observations below the 1st and above the 99th

percentile of the standard deviation of weekly returns to mitigate the influence of outliers.

       Our final sample contains 25,667 BHC-quarter observations of 788 BHCs. The time

period of our sample ranges from the third quarter of 1986 to the last quarter of 2007 and

includes all publicly traded BHCs, headquartered in one of the 381 MSAs of the United States.
       Table 1 reports descriptive statistics of the main variables, with the sample of 788

BHCs split into diversified and nondiversified BHC-quarter observations. Since BHCs
                                                           11



diversify during our sample period, the same entity can appear in both columns of Table 1,

being categorized as a nondiversified BHC in the quarters before it diversifies and a

diversified BHC afterwards. About 35% of our sample consists of BHC-quarters with

subsidiaries in more than one MSA. Furthermore, about 295 BHCs have assets in more than

one banking market over the sample period. Regarding our risk measures, Table 1 indicates

that diversified banks exhibit a smaller volatility of stock returns. Moreover, diversified

banks tend to (1) be much larger, (2) be more exposed to liquidity risk due to their greater

share of undrawn credit lines, and (3) also have a greater share of transaction deposits. T-

tests indicate that all of these differences are significant at the 1% level.



3. Geographic diversity of BHC assets across MSAs and Risk: OLS results

As a preliminary assessment of the relationship between the risk of a BHC and its geographic

diversification of assets across MSAs, we estimate OLS regressions. The reduced form model

is specified as follows:


       ln( )b,t  Db,t  X 'b, m,t   b  t   b,t                             (1)


where ln( ) b,t denotes the natural logarithm of weekly market returns of BHC b in quarter t,

denotes our measures of a BHC’s geographic diversification, X 'b, m,t is a matrix of

conditioning information, and δ’s are fixed effects, where we use BHC and quarter fixed

effects in various specifications. Throughout the paper, the reported standard errors are

heteroskedasticity robust and adjusted for clustering at the MSA-quarter level, thereby

controlling for potential error correlation within an MSA and quarter. We cluster at this

level, because BHCs in the same MSA and quarter are affected by the same factors. The BHC

fixed effects account for unobserved, time-invariant differences across BHCs and focuses the
analysis on how changes in BHC risk vary with changes in BHC diversification.
                                               12



       Table 2 provides regression results on the relationship between BHC risk and the

cross-market diversification of BHC assets. We separately examine two measures of

geographic diversification: the Diversification Dummy and 1 – Herfindahl Index of assets

across MSAs. We first present the results using the Diversification Dummy, adding bank-

level and MSA-level control variables across regressions (1) through (3). We then repeat the

analysis using the Herfindahl index in regression (4) through (6). In these first six

regressions, we include time fixed effects to account for unobserved time trends at the

national level. Finally, in regressions (7) and (8), we include BHC fixed effects.

       The relationship between geographic diversification and risk depends on whether the

regression includes BHC fixed effects. Without BHC effects, there is a negative association

between geographic diversification and risk, and this relationship holds when using either

measure of geographic diversification or when controlling for an array of BHC and MSA

characteristics. However, the relationship between BHC risk and diversification switches

signs when including BHC fixed effects. The negative relationship between BHC risk and the

Diversification Dummy becomes positive and insignificant when controlling for BHC effects.

Moreover, the relationship between BHC risk and the Herfindahl Index measure of diversity

becomes positive and significant when conditioning on BHC effects. These findings are

consistent with the view that less risky BHCs diversify, but that risk does not change, or

might even increase, after a BHC diversifies geographically.

       Regarding the ability to hedge liquidity risk by holding more transaction deposits, the

findings in Table 2 provide mixed results. Consistent with Gatev et al. (2009), regressions (2)

and (5) indicate that BHCs with a greater share of committed, but undrawn, lines of credit

tend to have greater risk, but this risk falls for BHCs with a greater share of transaction

deposits. However, the significant risk-hedging effect of transactions deposits vanishes when

we control for a wider array of BHC and banking market conditions in regressions (3) and
(6). These results indicate that past findings on liquidity risk might reflect omitted

characteristics of banks and markets.
                                              13



       Endogeneity and selection issues might confound the interpretation of the regression

results in Table 2. First, BHCs choose whether to diversify or not. For instance, assume that

diversification lowers risk, and also assume that when BHCs decide to increase the risk

profile of their assets they diversify geographically to offset that risk. Under these

assumptions, an OLS regression will provide an upwardly biased estimate of the impact of

diversity on risk, yielding either a positive coefficient on diversification or attenuating an

estimated negative effect. Second, BHCs not only choose whether to diversify, they also

choose where to diversify. BHCs can reduce idiosyncratic local economy risk by diversifying

into MSAs with different economies (i.e., imperfectly correlated risks). While including BHC

fixed effect accounts for a BHC’s unobservable characteristics, it does not fully address these

issues. Consequently, we employ an instrumental variable strategy to identify the impact of

diversification on BHC risk.



4. Instrumental variables based on the removal of interstate banking restrictions

       To identify the impact of BHC diversity across MSAs on risk, we need an instrumental

variable that is correlated with the time-varying, cross-MSA dispersion of BHC assets but not

independently correlated with the evolution of BHC risk through other channels. Thus, our

first goal is to construct a valid instrumental variable that explains the geographic diversity

of assets. Our second goal is to use this instrument to evaluate the impact of the geographic

diversity of BHC assets on risk. In the remainder of this section, we first outline our strategy

for constructing an instrumental variable for geographic diversification. We then provide a

detailed description of the two-step process for constructing the instrument. Finally, we use

the instrument to assess the relationship between BHC diversity and risk.
                                              14



4.1. Identification Strategy: Gravity-Deregulation Model

       4.1.1. Overview

       There are two key ingredients in our strategy for constructing such an instrument.

First, we exploit the process through which individual states removed restrictions on

interstate banking with other states. As discussed in detail below, the state-specific

elimination of prohibitions on the entry of banks from other states evolved over decades and

the dynamics differed by state. This first ingredient provides state-year information on the

ability of BHCs in a state to enter every other state. But, the process of interstate bank

deregulation alone does not provide an instrument that differentiates BHCs within a MSA.

       To overcome this shortcoming and construct and instrument at the BHC-level, we

embed the state-specific timing of the removal of interstate banking restrictions into a

gravity model of BHC diversification. This second ingredient—a gravity model of BHC

diversification—in conjunction with interstate bank deregulation yields an instrument for

the time-varying geographic dispersion of each BHC’s assets across MSAs. The well-

established gravity model is built on the empirically confirmed assumption that geographic

proximity facilitates economic interactions. Applying this to banks, Goetz et al. (2013)

showed that BHCs are more likely to expand into geographically close markets than into

more distant ones. BHCs that are close to another banking market might have greater

familiarity with its economic conditions and face lower costs to establishing and maintaining

subsidiaries than farther markets (Aguirregabiria et al., 2013). From this perspective, a BHC

in the southern part of California, e.g. Los Angeles, will tend to invest more in Flagstaff,

Arizona than in Portland, Oregon and a BHC in San Francisco (northern part of California)

might find it correspondingly more appealing to open a subsidiary in nearby Portland,

Oregon.
                                               15



        4.1.2. Interstate Bank Deregulation

        Before describing the construction of the instrument, we provide additional

information on the process of interstate bank deregulation. For many decades, banks in the

U.S. were not allowed to expand across states. States imposed limits on the location of bank

branches and offices in the 19th century, and these impediments restricted the expansion of

banks both within states through branches (intrastate branching restrictions) and across

state lines through subsidiaries and branches (interstate banking restrictions). These

restrictions were supported by the argument that allowing banks to expand freely could lead

to a monopolistic banking system, with detrimental effects for economic development.

Furthermore, the granting of bank charters was a profitable income source for states,

increasing incentives for states to enact regulatory policies.

        Starting in the 1970s, technological and financial innovations eroded the value of

these    restrictions   for   banks.   Particularly,   improvements   in   data   processing,

telecommunications, and credit scoring weakened the advantages of local banks, reducing

their willingness to fight for the maintenance of restrictions on entry by out-of-state banks

and triggering deregulation (Kroszner and Strahan, 1999).

        Maine was the first state to allow entry by out-of-state BHCs in 1978. In particular,

BHCs from other states were allowed to enter Maine if that other state reciprocated and also

allowed entry by BHCs headquartered in Maine. While Maine enacted this policy in 1978, no

other state changed its entry restrictions on out-of-state BHCs until 1982, when New York

put in place a similar legislation and Alaska completely removed its entry restrictions. Over

the following 12 years, states removed entry restrictions by unilaterally opening their state

borders and allowing out-of-state banks to enter, or by signing reciprocal bilateral and

multilateral agreements with other states to allow interstate banking. The Riegle-Neal
                                                      16



Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 was the culmination of this

liberalization process, and removed all remaining barriers to entry at the federal level.3

        Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of the interstate banking deregulation process. For

each year, it shows the percentage of state-pairs among the contiguous U.S. states that have

removed barriers to interstate banking with each other. It also differentiates by the type

deregulation, where (a) unilateral deregulation refers to cases in which at least one of the

states in a state-pair unilaterally allows entry from the other state; (b) reciprocal

deregulation refers to cases in which both states in a state-pair have enacted nationwide

reciprocal agreements with all other states that allow BHCs from reciprocating states to

enter each other’s market; and (c) bilateral deregulation refers to cases in which the two

states in a pair have signed an agreement allowing each other’s banks to enter.

        Although Maine opened up its banking system to all states on a reciprocal manner in

1978, the fraction of state pairs that removed restrictions remained at zero until 1982, when

New York reciprocated and put in place similar legislation. The pace of interstate

deregulation accelerated significantly in the second half of the 1980s, and by 1994 (before

the Riegle-Neal Act removed all remaining barriers at the federal level), 76 percent of the

state pairs in the contiguous states of the US had removed restrictions to bank entry with

each other. Moreover, Figure 1 shows that the most common method for removing entry

restrictions was the unilateral opening of entry to BHCs from all other states (45 percent of

all state pairs). National reciprocal agreements were the second most frequent form of

deregulating interstate banking (about 18 percent of all state-pair deregulations), while only

13 percent of state-pairs had signed bilateral banking agreements in 1994.

        In our analysis, we focus on diversification of assets across MSAs and therefore apply

the dates of interstate banking deregulation at the state level to MSAs within each


3
 In particular, the Riegle-Neal Act allowed both unrestricted interstate banking (effective in 1995) and
interstate branching (in effect in 1997). Interstate banking means the ability of a BHC to own and operate
separate bank subsidiaries in more than one state. Interstate branching means that a bank can expand its
branch network into more than one state without establishing separate subsidiaries.
                                                        17



corresponding state to determine when BHCs located in out-of-state MSAs were allowed to

enter that MSA. Several of the 381 MSAs span more than one state. In such cases, we use the

state with the earliest entry date when determining the date when BHCs from another MSA

can enter the MSA that spans more than one state. For example, the Boston-Cambridge-

Newton MSA includes counties from Massachusetts and New Hampshire while the Los

Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim MSA only includes counties from California. BHCs from

California were allowed to enter the state of Massachusetts in 1991 and the state of New

Hampshire in 1990. Hence we define the date on which BHCs from Los Angeles were allowed

to enter the Boston-Cambridge-Newton MSA as 1990.4

        Figure 2 highlights the geographic distribution of the removal of entry restriction

across metropolitan areas, where we focus on the situation of BHCs located in an MSA in

California. The figure shows for each MSA, the year when BHCs from, say, Los Angeles were

allowed to enter that MSA. Darker colors indicate that the specific MSA was open to entry at

later years. Prior to 1982, BHCs located in Los Angeles could only expand across MSAs that

include Californian counties. Over time, the number of accessible MSAs steadily increases

until in 1995 the passage of the Riegle-Neal Act removed all remaining entry barriers.

        We were concerned that the pattern of MSA-pair specific banking agreements might

be associated with differences in risk between MSAs. When examining all MSA-pair bank

deregulation agreements, however, we find no evidence that there are systematic differences

in the average level of risk between markets prior to deregulation. The average pairwise

correlation between the average standard deviation of market valuation returns of BHCs

across each pair of MSAs before both markets removed their interstate banking restrictions

is close to zero. The evidence is consistent with the assumption that the timing of interstate

agreements is not driven by differences in risk between markets.



4 Our results also hold if we define the year of interstate banking deregulation for a multi-state MSA as the year
in which the last state lowered restrictions on interstate banking.
                                                                     18




4.2. The gravity-deregulation model: two-step process

          We build on the two-step gravity-deregulation identification strategy developed in

Goetz et al. (2013) to assess the impact of geographic diversification on BHC risk. While they

consider exogenous sources of variation in the diversity of BHC assets across states, we seek

to assess the impact of the diversity of BHC assets across a finer market, MSAs, on BHC risk.

Specifically, we use (a) the dynamic process of interstate bank deregulation to differentiate

across states and time and (b) the distance between each BHC’s headquarters and all other

banking markets into which that BHC can legally enter to construct a time-varying, BHC-

specific instrumental variable for the geographic diversity of BHC assets across MSAs.

          In the first step (“zero stage”), we estimate the following equations:


shareb,i , j ,t  1 ln(distance)b, j,t +  2 (ln(distance)b, j,t ) 2   ln(populationi,t / populationj,t )  t   b,i, j ,t
                                                                                                                                  (2)
entryb,i , j ,t  1 ln(distance) b,j,t +2 (ln(distance) b,j,t ) 2   ln(population i,t / population j,t)  t  b,i , j ,t (3)



where shareb,i, j ,t is the percentage of assets of BHC b, headquartered in MSA i, held in its

subsidiaries in MSA j in quarter t; entryb,i, j ,t is a dummy variable that equals one if BHC b,

headquartered in MSA i, owns a subsidiary in MSA j in quarter t and zero otherwise;
ln(distance)b, j,t is the natural logarithm of the miles between BHC b’s headquarters and MSA j;
ln(populationi,t / populationj,t ) is the natural logarithm of the population differential between

BHC b’s home MSA i and MSA j; and δt are quarter fixed effects. The equations allow for a
non-linear effect of distance on BHC diversification by entering ln(distance)b, j,t as a quadratic.

          To account for BHC diversity, the equations consider both distance and comparative

market size. With respect to the pure gravity component, we use the natural logarithm of

miles between each BHC’s headquarters to each other metropolitan area to measure
distance. Furthermore, the “gravitational pull of a market” might also vary positively with its

size, so that BHCs might be more attracted to larger markets than smaller ones. That is,
                                                    19



holding other things constant, BHCs in San Francisco, California will invest more in Portland,

Oregon than in Reno, Nevada. To incorporate relative market size into the gravity model, we

compute the logarithm of the population of the BHC’s home MSA divided by the population

of a foreign MSA (in period t).

        To estimate these equations, we use a fractional logit to estimate the share regression

and a logit to estimate the entry regression. Since the dependent variable in the entry

regression is zero or one, it is natural to use either a logit or probit estimator. We obtain

similar results from both approaches and report the results from logit regressions. With

respect to the share regression, the share of assets a BHC can have in any banking market

lies between zero and one, where a value of one indicates that a BHC holds all of its assets in

one market. Since the dependent variable is bounded between zero and one and we observe

many observations with a value of zero, we follow Papke and Wooldridge (1996) and use a

fractional logit model.5 In estimating these equations, we only include observations in which

it is legally feasible for BHC b with headquarters in MSA i to open a subsidiary in MSA j

during quarter t.

        As reported in Table 3, the gravity model explains BHC investment in “foreign” MSAs.

First, across all specifications, there is a negative relationship between a BHC’s entry into an

MSA and distance to that MSA. We also include additional fixed effects into the gravity model

to examine the robustness of the relationship between distance and a BHC’s investment

decision. Furthermore, as highlighted by column (6), distance exhibits a nonlinear

relationship with a BHC’s share of assets in an MSA. While we find that the predicted share of

assets a BHC has in a foreign MSA decreases more with distance, our results differ when

using the entry dummy. The negative effect of distance on the likelihood if entering another

MSA diminishes with distance. Nonetheless, for the range of distances in our sample, the

5Papke and Wooldridge (1996) propose a fractional logit estimation when examining determinants of
employee participation rates in 401(k) pension plans. Papke and Wooldridge (2008) use a fractional probit
model to estimate the relationship between spending and student performance, measured using test pass rates.
We obtain similar results when using a fractional probit regression.
                                                20



estimated effect of a marginal increase in distance is always negative. Second, there is a

strong negative relationship between a BHC’s entry into an MSA and distance from that MSA.

Third, the size of the “foreign” banking market matters for the investment decisions of a

BHC. BHCs invest less, and are less likely to invest at all, in smaller MSAs.

       In the second step of the gravity-deregulation model, we use the estimates from Table

3 to construct two instrumental variables: one for the projected diversification measure for

each BHC in each quarter (Predicted Diversification Index) and one for the probability that a

BHC enters a particular banking market (Max Entry Probability). For the Predicted

Diversification Index, we use the coefficient estimates from the Table 3 gravity model to

obtain the projected share of a BHC’s assets in an MSA for periods in which regulations do

not prohibit the BHC from investing in the MSA. Using a fractional logit model in the first

step of the gravity-deregulation model to predict shares also ensures that these predicted

shares are between zero and one. For observations in which regulations do prohibit a BHC

from opening a subsidiary in an MSA, we set the projected share equal to zero. Then, we use

these projected shares to compute the Predicted Diversification Index—one minus the

projected Herfindahl index of each BHC assets across markets in each period. We use this

Predicted Diversification Index as the instrument for actual diversification in our first stage

regression to assess the impact of diversification on risk.

       To construct the instrumental variable for the Diversification Dummy—Max Entry

Probability, we first set the value to zero when interstate bank regulations prohibit a BHC

from investing in an MSA. Second, for other observations in which a BHC is legally permitted

to open a subsidiary in the MSA, we (a) predict the probability that the BHC enters every

other MSA and (b) select the maximum value of these projected entry probabilities to

complete the construction of the ‘Max Entry Probability’ variable. By doing this, we estimate

for each BHC b and quarter t, the probability of being active in another banking market while
accounting for the fact that not all banking markets are open to any particular BHC in that

quarter. This becomes the instrumental variable for the Diversification Dummy.
                                                      21



        The first-stage results in Panel B of Table 4 suggest that the instrumental variables

are closely associated with BHC diversity. As expected, a higher probability of entering a

foreign banking market (Max Entry Probability) is positively associated with the incidence of

being active in another MSA. Similarly, we find that a higher level of a BHC’s predicted

geographic diversification (Predicted Diversification Index) is positively associated with

observed diversification at the 1% level even when conditioning on BHC and quarter fixed

effects. Moreover, the F-test results in Table 4, Panel B show that our instrumental variables

explain BHC diversification after controlling for many potential influences. The F-test is

always above 20, even when we condition on BHC fixed effects, indicating that there is a

strong statistical link between deregulation and BHC diversity.6 Overall, the first stage

results show that the gravity-deregulation model explains diversification at the BHC level.



4.3. Results using BHC instruments based on the gravity-deregulation model

        Based on these instruments, we find that geographic diversification significantly

reduces bank risk. As shown in Panel A of Table 4, the second-stage results indicate that both

measures of diversification—the Diversification Dummy and the 1 – Herfindahl Index of

assets across MSAs variable—enter negatively and significantly. The Diversification Dummy

results indicate once a BHC diversifies, this reduces risk. The results from the 1 – Herfindahl

Index of assets across MSAs indicate that as BHCs become more diversified risk decreases.

        The negative effect of geographic diversification on BHC risk also holds when

including BHC fixed effects and when examining the reduced form results. Indeed the

estimated negative effect is larger when including BHC effects. As discussed below, these

estimates are economically large.            Moreover, the strong statistical significance for the

Herfindahl-based index of the diversity of BHCs across MSAs indicates that the pattern of


6 In Table 4, we present regression results from our Table 3 benchmark specification, (i.e. the equation (2)
specification that includes time fixed effects) and using other specifications from Table 3 that account for the
nonlinear effect of distance on the share of assets and entry probabilities.
                                              22



diversification across markets is important when analyzing the impact of diversification on

BHC risk. When identifying exogenous changes in BHC diversity and controlling for BHC

fixed effects, the results indicate that diversity reduces a BHC’s risk. Furthermore, the

reduced form regressions of BHC risk on the instrumental variables are consistent with

these findings: the projected values of BHC diversification computed from the zero-stage

estimates are negatively, and significantly associated with BHC risk as shown in Appendix 1.

       The estimated economic magnitude is large. Consider, for example, the estimates

from column (7) of Table 4 that included BHC fixed effects for Herfindahl-based measure of

the geographic diversity of a BHC’s assets. The estimates indicate that a one-standard

deviation increase in the exogenous component of BHC diversification (0.205) will reduce

BHC risk (the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of weekly stock returns) by 34%

(=0.205*1.6) or about 70% of its sample standard deviation (0.49). The estimates in Table 4

also confirm empirically the concern expressed above: OLS yields strongly biased estimates

of the impact of diversity on risk. The results are consistent with the view that there is a

strong attenuation bias, as banks that diversify geographically also tend to increase the

riskiness of their assets. Thus, by identifying the impact of diversification, the instruments

provide more precise estimates of diversification on BHC risk.



5. Heterogeneous effects of diversification

We now examine whether all geographic diversity is the same. Based on Pyle (1971), we

assess whether the impact of diversification on risk is stronger when the BHC diversifies into

an MSA with different economic characteristics from the BHC’s home market. The choice of

BHCs to diversify into new banking markets, however, is endogenous and may also be driven

by risk and strategic considerations. For example, some banks might diversify into areas that

are more similar to their home market to build on their specialized expertise. However,
similar markets might offer lower diversification benefits.
                                                   23



        The gravity-deregulation model allows us to construct individual instruments at the

BHC-level that account for the expansion of BHCs into different banking markets. That is,

besides having an instrument that identifies an exogenous source of variation in

diversification, we have an instrument that identifies an exogenous source of variation in the

location of that diversification. Hence, we can account for the endogenous selection of

banking markets by BHCs and can identify the exogenous component of diversifying into an

MSA with particular characteristics on that BHC’s risk.

        This analysis also sheds more light on the mechanism through which diversification

affects risk. If greater diversification reduces BHC’s exposure to the idiosyncrasies of local

economies, then we should find that diversification into MSAs with dissimilar economies

should reduce risk more than expansion into economically similar MSAs. That is, we assess

whether a BHC located in MSA m and expanding into n experiences a smaller reduction in

risk from diversification if n’s business cycle and economic structure is similar to m’s.



5.1. Three measures of MSA similarity

        We construct three measures of the economic similarity of MSAs. Since the

integration of states’ banking sectors in the United States over the last decades affected the

co-movement of states’ economic activity (Morgan et al., 2004; Goetz and Gozzi, 2014), we

use only the period between 1969 and 1986 (which is also the period prior to the start of our

sample period) in computing the three measures of MSA similarity.

        First, we measure the similarity of industry structure. For each MSA-pair (m, n), we

compute the negative absolute difference between the MSAs’ share of total employment

across the eight one-digit SIC sectors (Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2001).7




7 These sectors are mining, construction, manufacturing, transportation, trade, services, government, and
finance, insurance and real estate. Data on total employment by industry at the county level come from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis and we aggregate this information to the MSA level.
                                                   24


                                                 i 8
                      Industry differencesm,n    sharei ,m  sharei ,n ,          (4)
                                                 i 1


where sharei,m is the employment share of industry i in MSA m. Greater values indicate that

MSAs within an MSA-pair have more similar industry structures. Since the integration of

states’ banking sectors in the United States over the last decades may have affected industry

structure across MSAs, we use information on employment shares in 1986 to measure

industry differences (Kalemli-Ozcan et al., 2003).
       Second, we measure the similarity of economic growth in MSA pairs. We compute the

co-movement of economic output for each MSA-pair following the procedure outlined in

Morgan, et al. (2004). We use data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis to estimate the

following regression, including separate MSA and year fixed effects:


                      Income growthm,t  m  t   m,t ,                           (5)


where Income growthm,t is the growth rate of real personal income for MSA m in year t. The

residuals  m,t capture deviations of a MSA’s real growth rate in a given year from the MSA’s

conditional mean real growth rate and the average growth rate across all MSAs in that year.

We then compute the co-movement of economic activity between MSA m and MSA n as the
negative of the absolute difference of the residuals (Kalemli-Ozcan, et al. 2013):


                      Co-movementm,n,t    m,t   n,t .                           (6)

Greater values indicate greater similarity in the output fluctuations of the MSAs.

       Third, we measure the similarity of business cycles. We do this by estimating the

correlation of the cyclical component of MSAs’ real personal income growth for each MSA

pair. Using a Baxter and King (1999) band-pass (2, 8) filter, we determine the cyclical

component for each MSA. We then calculate for each MSA pair (m, n) the correlation of the
cyclical cycle components (Baxter and Kouparitsas, 2005).
                                               25



       Based on each of these three measures of MSA similarity, we compute a simple zero-

one indicator, where zero signifies similar economies and one signifies different. We do this

as follows. For MSA m we designate n as having a different industry structure or economic

cycle from m if the measure of similarity between m and n is smaller than the median

computed similarities between m and all other MSAs. Hence, for each MSA we identify two

equally sized groups: MSAs that are similar to m and MSAs that are different.



5.2. Measuring BHC diversity while differentiating by MSA similarity

       Based on our definitions of MSA similarity, we compute measures of the degree to

which a BHC’s assets are diversified geographically, where we now differentiate and

incorporate information on whether the BHC has diversified into MSAs with similar or

different economies from the MSA of the BHC’s headquarters. That is, we compute the share

of “hedged assets” for each BHC, where we compute a BHC’s total share of assets that are

held in banking markets that exhibit different economies based on our aforementioned

definitions. Thus, the share of hedged assets for BHC b in period t is:


        Hb,t = min(asset share in different MSAs, asset share in similar MSAs)2,       (7)



where asset share in different/similar MSAs is the total share of assets held in subsidiaries

located in an MSA that exhibits a different/similar output fluctuation or industry structure as
the BHC’s headquarter MSA. Hb,t is between zero and one, where larger values indicate that

the BHC has a larger portion of its total assets in banking markets that exhibit different
economic activities. Hb,t reaches a maximum if the BHC holds half of its assets in (at least)

two banking markets that are dissimilar based on our definitions. Similarly, this measure is

zero if a BHC has all of its assets in banking markets that are similar according to our
measures.
                                                          26



5.3. Heterogeneous impact of diversification on risk

        We now estimate the following 2SLS regression:


                 ln( )b,t  1Db,t  2 Db,t * Hb,t  X 'b,m,t   b  t   b,t                        (8)



where Hb,t is the share of hedged assets for BHC b in quarter t and Db,t is the Diversification

Dummy for BHC b in quarter t. As before, the excluded instrument for Db,t is the maximum

predicted entry probability from the gravity-deregulation model. We also use the gravity-
deregulation model to construct an instrument for the share of hedged assets ( Hb,t ) by

predicting the asset shares in economically “different” MSAs, based on the three measures of
economic similarity defined above. We use predictions ( Hˆ ) as excluded instruments.
                                                                          b ,t


        The results in Table 5 indicate that geographic diversification reduces risk more

when a BHC diversifies into an economically different MSA—an MSA with different economic

structure or business cycle fluctuations than when it diversifies into an MSA with similar

structure or business cycles fluctuations to its base MSA. Consistent with Table 4, the

Diversification Dummy enters negatively: geographic diversification reduces risk. Moreover,

the interaction between diversification and the share of hedged assets also enters negatively

and significantly: diversification reduces risk more if the BHC diversifies into a banking

market that exhibits a different business cycle.

        Furthermore, there are large benefits from diversifying into different banking

markets. Consider the case of a BHC, headquartered in San Francisco that chooses to

diversify half of its operations. Assume that it can choose either to expand into Las Vegas,

Nevada or Flagstaff, Arizona. Based on our measures of the similarity of MSA industrial

structures, we find that San Francisco and Flagstaff are similar, but the industrial

compositions of San Francisco and Las Vegas differ markedly.8 Using the estimated
8This becomes apparent when examining the largest industry (“Services”) in each of the three MSAs: San
Francisco’s share of total employment in “Services” is about 33.5 percent, which is similar to Flagstaff’s share
(37.1 percent), but very different from Las Vegas’s share (52.3 percent).
                                               27



coefficients from column 1, the predicted reduction from this BHC expanding into Las Vegas

diversification for this BHC is more than four times larger (= (0.785 + 2.799)/0.785) than if

it expands into Flagstaff. Our findings are consistent with the idea that diversification lowers

bank risk, particularly if it enables banks to reduce their exposure to idiosyncratic local

market risks. Our findings also imply that to the extent that state business cycles are

becoming more similar, as documented by Morgan et al. (2004), the risk-reducing effects of

geographic diversity will diminish.



5.4. Mergers and acquisitions and alternative risk measures

       There is considerable M&A activity among banks over the period we analyze. Since

BHCs’ M&As might trigger short-run valuation effects (Graham et al., 2002; Custodio, 2010),

we were concerned that this biases the risk measure. Based on reported merger information

in Call Reports, as well as information provided by CRSP, we therefore drop BHC-quarter

observations in which the BHC engages in a merger, acquisition or sale. Regression results

from this subset confirm the earlier results as we still find that diversification reduces risk,

especially if the BHC increases its share of hedged assets (Table 6).
                                                         28



       To examine the sensitivity of our results to the definition of our risk measure we

remove three systematic risk factors before constructing weekly returns (Gatev et al., 2009)

and compute residual volatility as follows:


       rb,t  b  1,b rm,t  2,b (Baa  Aaa)t  3,b (3-Month T -Bill )t   b,t   (10)



where rm,t is the weekly return on the S&P 500; ( Baa Aaa) is a default risk factor as it

represents the change in the yield on Baa-rated vs. Aaa-rated corporate bonds; and
(3-Month T -Bill ) is the change in yield on 3-month treasury bills and thus an interest rate

risk factor. Note that we estimate this relationship for each BHC separately to account for the

fact that the relationship between these factors and BHC returns differs across banks. Data

on the factors are obtained from the Federal Reserve Economic Data provided by the Federal

Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Similar to before, we take the natural logarithm of the standard

deviation of these residual market returns as our risk measure. Additionally, we compute

each bank’s Z-Score (following Laeven and Levine, 2007) as:


                                            ROAb,t  CARb,t
                                 Z b ,t                                                (11)
                                                  b,t


where ROAb,t is the return on assets from BHC b in quarter t, CARb,t is the capital-asset-ratio

for BHC b in quarter t, and  b,t is the standard deviation of market returns for BHC b in

quarter t. In addition to the standard deviation of market returns, Z includes information

about a BHC’s current level of capital and can therefore be interpreted as the number of

standard deviations profit can fall before a bank is bankrupt (Roy, 1952).

       Regression results using these two alternative measures of bank risk are presented in

Table 6 and confirm our earlier findings and indicate that diversification primarily reduces
                                                29



BHC risk if the BHC also increases its share of hedged assets and thereby reduces its current

exposure to home banking market fluctuations.



6. Loan quality

Thus far we have shown that the riskiness of BHCs decreases with geographic expansion and

that this risk reduction is particularly pronounced for BHCs that expand into MSAs that have

different economic cycles. Does this imply that there are pure diversification benefits from

geographic expansion, or could it be that risk declines with geographic expansion due to

improved asset quality?

       A key channel through which banks can improve asset quality is through the

monitoring of their loans. If banks that expand geographically improve their monitoring of

loans in such a way that it results in lower riskiness of loans, then this could explain the

findings thus far. For example, if banks that expand geographically invest in better risk

management systems, this could enhance their monitoring skills and reduce bank risk. Other

work, however, provides a skeptical take on this monitoring channel . Distance matters in

relationship lending as it is more costly and difficult to monitor distant loans, and it is likely

that the bank’s monitoring effectiveness is lower in new geographic areas (Winton, 1999).

       We test for the relevance of this monitoring channel using three alternative measures

of loan quality: loan charge-offs, nonperforming loans, and loan loss provisions, all expressed

as a fraction of total loans. All three measures are decreasing in loan quality. We regress

these measures of loan quality on our measure of geographic diversity, using the same

instruments for geographic diversification as before. The 2SLS results are presented in Table

7. We follow our earlier specification and include bank fixed effects as we are interested how

diversification changes loan quality within a BHC when that institution expands. We find that

there is no evidence that geographic expansion improves loan quality. If anything, we find
that loan charge offs increase when banks expand geographically, although the effect is

significant only at the 10% level and also only for one specification. Geographic diversity
                                                30



does not enter significantly in the nonperforming loan and loan loss provisioning

regressions. Taken together, these results indicate that geographic expansion does not

improve BHC loan quality. Taken together, our results are consistent with the view that

geographic expansion reduces risk by allowing BHCs to diversify their assets.



7. Conclusions

What is the impact of the geographic expansion of BHC assets on risk? While some theories

suggest that geographic expansion makes it more complex for executives to monitor

activities and manage risk, other theories advertise the cost-efficiencies and risk-reducing

benefits of holding a diversified portfolio of assets.

       This paper develops and uses a new identification strategy to evaluate the net impact

of the geographic expansion of BHC assets across U.S. MSAs on BHC risk and loan quality.

Specifically, we embed cross-state, cross-time variation in interstate bank deregulation into

a gravity model of BHC expansion to create a BHC-specific instrumental variable of its assets

across MSAs over time. We use this instrument to identify the exogenous component of the

geographic diversity of each BHC’s assets across MSAs. Although we use this identification

strategy to evaluate the net effect of geographic diversification on BHC risk and loan quality,

it can be employed to address other questions about bank behavior.

       We find that the diversification of BHC assets across MSAs lowers BHC risk.

Moreover, we discover that the geographic expansion of BHC assets across MSAs reduces

risk more when the BHC diversifies into economically different MSAs. When BHCs expand

into MSAs with different industrial structures and different business cycle fluctuations, risk

falls more than when they expand into economically similar MSAs. At the same time, we do

not find that loan quality increases with geographic expansion. These findings are consistent

with the view that geographic expansion lowers bank risk by enabling banks to diversify
their exposure to idiosyncratic local market risks.
                                                31



References
Acharya, V., Hasan, I., Saunders, A., 2006. Should banks be diversified? Evidence from
      individual bank loan portfolios. Journal of Business 79, 1355 – 1411.

Aguirregabiria, V., Clark, R. C., Wang, H., 2013. Diversification of geographic risk in retail
      bank networks: evidence from bank expansion after the Riegle-Neal Act. Unpublished
      working paper.

Akhigbe, A., Whyte, A. M., 2003. Changes in market assessment of bank risk following the
      Riegle-Neal Act of 1994. Journal of Banking and Finance 27, 87–102.

Amel, D., 1993. State laws affecting the geographic expansion of commercial banks.
       Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Atkeson, A. G., Eisfeldt, A. L., Weill, P., 2014. Measuring the financial soundness of U.S. firms,
      1926-2012. Mimeo, UCLA.

Avraham, D., Selvaggi, P., Vickery, J., 2012. A structural view of U.S. bank holding companies.
      FRBNY Economic Policy Review, July, 65 – 81.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2011. Global systemically important banks:
       assessment methodology and the additional loss absorbency requirement. Rules text,
       November 2011. Available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs207.pdf.

Baxter, M., King, R. G., 1999. Measuring business cycles: approximate band-pass filters for
       economic time series. Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 575 – 593.

Baxter, M., Kouparitsas, M. A., 2005. Determinants of business cycle comovement: a robust
       analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 113 – 157.

Berger, A., Hannan, T. H., 1989. The price-concentration relationship in banking. Review of
      Economics and Statistics 71, 291 – 299.

Berger, A., Hanweck, G., Humphrey, D., 1987. Competitive viability in banking: scale, scope,
      and product mix economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 20, 501 – 520.

Berger, A., Miller, N., Petersen, M., Rajan, R., Stein, J., 2005. Does function follow
      organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks,
      Journal of Financial Economics 76, 237 – 269.

Berger, P., Ofek, E., 1995. Diversification’s effect on firm value, Journal of Financial
      Economics 37, 39 – 65.

Bernanke, B. S., 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of the
      Great Depression. American Economic Review 73(3), 257 – 276.
                                                32




Boyd, J. H., De Nicolo, G., 2005, The Theory of Bank Risk Taking Revisited. Journal of Finance
       60, 1329-1343

Boyd, J. H., Gertler, M., 1993. US commercial banking: trends, cycles, and policy. NBER
       Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Volume 8. MIT Press. 319-377.

Boyd, J. H., Prescott, E. C., 1986. Financial intermediary-coalitions. Journal of Economic
       Theory 38, 211 – 232.

Boyd, J. H., Runkle, D.E. 1993. Size and performance of banking firms. Journal of Monetary
       Economics 31, 47-67.

Brickley, J., Linck, J., Smith, C., Jr., 2003. Boundaries of the firm: evidence from the banking
       industry. Journal of Financial Economics 70, 351 – 383.

Calomiris, C., Mason, J., 1997. Contagion and bank failures during the Great Depression: the
      June 1932 Chicago banking panic. American Economic Review 87, 863 – 883.

Calomiris, C., Mason, J., 2003a. Consequences of U.S. bank distress during the depression.
      American Economic Review 93, 937 – 947.

Calomiris, C., Mason, J., 2003b. Fundamentals, panics and bank distress during the
      depression. American Economic Review 93, 1615 – 1647.

Calomiris, C., Nissim, D., 2007. Activity-based valuation of bank holding companies. NBER
      Working Paper No. 12918.

Chong, B. S., 1991. Interstate banking on commercial banks’ risk and profitability. The
      Review of Economics and Statistics 73, 78–84.

Custodio, C., 2010. Mergers and acquisitions can explain the diversification discount. Mimeo,
      Arizona State University, W.P. Carey School of Business.

DeLong, G., 2001. Stockholder gains from focusing versus diversifying bank mergers. Journal
     of Financial Economics 59, 221–252.

Demsetz, R. S., Strahan, P. E., 1997. Diversification, size, and risk at bank holding companies.
     Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 300 – 313.

Deng, S., Elyasiani, E., 2008. Geographic diversification, bank holding company value, and
       risk. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40, 1217 – 1238.

Denis, D. J., Denis D. K., Sarin, A., 1997. Agency problems, equity ownership, and corporate
       diversification. Journal of Finance 52, 135 – 160.
                                                33


Diamond, D. W., 1984. Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review of
     Economic Studies 51, 393 – 414.

Gatev, E., Schuermann, T., Strahan, P., 2009. Managing bank liquidity risk: how deposit-loan
       synergies vary with market conditions. Review of Financial Studies 22, 995 – 1020.

Gertner, R., Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 1994. Internal vs. external capital markets. Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 109, 1211 – 1230.

Goetz, M., Laeven, L., Levine, L., 2013. Identifying the valuation effects and agency costs of
       corporate diversification: evidence from the geographic diversification of US banks.
       Review of Financial Studies 26, 1787 – 1823.

Goetz, M.R, Gozzi, J.C., 2014, Financial Integration and the Co-Movement of Economic
       Activity: Evidence from U.S. States, Mimeo, Goethe University Frankfurt

Graham, J., Lemmon, M., Wolf, J., 2002. Does corporate diversification destroy value? Journal
      of Finance 57, 695 – 720.

Gropp, R., Hakenes, H., Schnabel, I., 2011. Competition, risk-shifting, and public bail-out
       policies. Review of Financial Studies 24, 2084 – 2120.

Houston, J., James, C., Marcus, D., 1997. Capital market frictions and the role of internal
      capital markets in banking. Journal of Financial Economics 46, 135 – 164.

Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P., 1996. The finance-growth nexus: evidence from bank branch
       deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 639 – 670.

Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers,
       American Economic Review 76, 332 – 329.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B. , Yosha, O., 2001. Regional integration, industrial
      specialization and the asymmetry of shocks across regions. Journal of International
      Economics 55, 107 – 137.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., Yosha, O., 2003. Risk Sharing and industrial specialization:
      regional and international evidence. American Economic Review 93, 903 – 918.

Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Papaioannou, E., and Peydro, J.L., 2013. Financial regulation, financial
      globalization, and the synchronization of economic activity. Journal of Finance 68,
      1179 – 1228.

Kashyap, A., Rajan, R., Stein, J., 2002. Banks as liquidity providers: an explanation for the
      coexistence of lending and deposit-taking. Journal of Finance 57, 33 – 73.
                                               34


Keeley, M., 1990. Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. American Economic
       Review 80, 1183 – 1200.

Kroszner, R., Strahan, P., 1999. What drives deregulation? Economics and politics of the
      relaxation of bank branching restrictions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1437 –
      1467.

Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2007. Is there a diversification discount in financial conglomerates?
      Journal of Financial Economics 85, 331 – 367.

Morgan, D., Rime, B., Strahan, P., 2004. Bank integration and state business cycles. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 119, 1555 – 1584.

Papke, L. E., Wooldridge, J. M., 1996. Econometric methods for fractional response variables
       with an application to 401 (K) plan participation rates. Journal of Applied
       Econometrics 11, 619 – 632.

Papke, L. E., Wooldridge, J. M., 2008. Panel data methods for fractional response variables
       with an application to test pass rates. Journal of Econometrics 145, 121 – 133.

Pyle, D.H., 1971. On the theory of financial intermediation. Journal of Finance 26, 737 – 747.

Rhoades, S., 1997. Have barriers to entry in retail commercial banking disappeared?
      Antitrust Bulletin 42, 997 – 1013.

Servaes, H., 1996. The value of diversification during the conglomerate merger wave. Journal
      of Finance 51, 1201 – 1225.

Winton, A., 1999. Don’t put all your eggs in one basket? Diversification and specialization in
      lending. Mimeo, University of Minnesota.
                                                                                                                 35


                                                                                              Figure 1
                                                            Evolution of Interstate Banking Deregulation
This figure shows the cumulative fraction of state pairs in our sample that had removed barriers to bank entry among each other by each year over the period 1976-1994, differentiating between different
methods for removing restrictions. Unilateral deregulation refers to cases in which (at least) one of the states in a given pair unilaterally allowed entry by bank holding companies from all other states.
Reciprocal deregulation are cases in which states enacted nationwide reciprocal agreements with all other states. In these cases, the date of effective deregulation for a given state pair depends not only
on the decision of the state that deregulated on a reciprocal manner, but also on the other state’s decision to reciprocate. Bilateral deregulation refers to cases in which the two states in a given pair
allowed entry by signing a bilateral interstate banking agreement. The sample covers the 48 contiguous states of the United States, excluding Delaware and South Dakota.
                                                                                                                 36


                                                                     Figure 2
                              Evolution of Entry Restrictions across US urban areas for banks located in California
This figure shows the evolution of the removal of entry restrictions across metropolitan statistical areas for bank holding companies located in California. Darker colors indicate that these urban areas allowed entry to
Californian banks earlier. For this figure, we consider the 48 contiguous states of the United States.
                                                                                                                              37




                                                                                                              Table 1
                                                                                                          Summary Statistics
This table shows summary statistics for the used samples. Banks are 'nondiversified' if they have subsidiaries in only one MSA 'Diversified' banks have subsidiaries in at least two MSAs. The sample ranges from the second quarter of 1986 to the
last quarter of 2007.



                                                                                        Nondiversified bank holding companies                                                         Diversified bank holding companies

                                                                              N         Mean        Std. Dev.        Min.        Max.        Median                       N         Mean         Std. Dev.       Min.         Max.       Median

(Standard deviation of weekly market returns over
quarter)*100                                                               16,705        3.97          2.20          0.88        15.05         3.44                     8,962        3.91          2.15          0.88        14.99         3.37
(Standard deviation of weekly residual market returns over
quarter)*100                                                               16,705        3.92          2.13          0.63        15.62        3.40                      8,962        3.68          2.07           0.75        15.82        3.16
Total Loan Charge-Offs / Total Loans (%)                                   16,221        0.11          0.15            0         1.14          .06                      8,749        0.17          0.17             0         1.15         0.12
Nonperforming Loans / Total Loans (%)                                      14,803        1.07          1.23            0         8.04         0.67                      6,779        1.16          1.16             0         8.00         0.81
Loan Loss Provisions / Total Loans (%)                                     15,856        0.11          0.15            0         1.33         0.07                      8,627        0.15          0.16             0         1.32         0.10
Tobins Q                                                                   16,290       105.27         5.73         94.66       128.30       104.30                     8,726       105.05         5.63          94.67       128.30       103.81
Loan Commitments / (Loan Commitments + Loans)                              16,567        0.18          0.10          0.00        0.97         0.17                      8,815        0.24          0.13           0.00        0.83         0.22
Transactions Deposits / Total Deposits                                     15,980        0.23          0.13          0.00        1.00         0.22                      8,939        0.27          0.09           0.00        0.75         0.27
Return on Assets                                                           16,097        0.25          0.15         -0.73        0.65         0.26                      8,688        0.26          0.15          -0.72        0.65         0.27
1 - Herfindahl Index of Assets across MSAs                                 16,705          0             0             0           0            0                       8,962        0.39          0.24           0.00        0.93         0.40
Income Diversity                                                           16,393        0.63          0.13          0.03        1.00         0.62                      8,824        0.72          0.13           0.02        1.00         0.73
Asset Diversity                                                            16,705        0.36          0.14          0.05        1.00         0.34                      8,961        0.38          0.12           0.08        0.97         0.35
=1 if BHC has international activity                                       16,705          0             0             0           1            0                       8,962          0             0              0           1            0
Total Equity (in million $)                                                16,705         288          1360            1        35200          66                       8,962        2403          9861             6        147000         353
Total Assets (in million $)                                                16,705        3728         20400           73        563000        759                       8,962       31800         130000           95       2360000        4445
Net Interest Income (in million $)                                         16,402         29            146          -78         4202           7                       8,827         236           842           -65        12900          42
Total Operating Income (in million $)                                      16,402         80            503            1        14500          15                       8,827         715          2680          -685        45700          100
Capital / Assets                                                           16,705          9             4             0          85            8                       8,962          8             4              1          74            8
                                                                                 38


                                                                                      Table 2
                 Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Risk - OLS Regressions
This table reports OLS regressions at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the standard deviation
of weekly stock market returns for US holding companies, measured over a quarter. A BHC's stock market return is based on a BHC's market capitalization is measured as the
change in a BHC's market capitalization between two Wednesdays within a quarter. Only BHC-quarters with at least 75% of nonmissing stock market returns are included.
'Diversification Dummy' is an indicator variable taking on the value of one if a BHC has assets in another MSA in a quarter. 'Income Diversity' is 1 - |(Net Interest Income - Total
Interest Income) / Total Operating Income |, 'Asset Diversity' = 1 - |Total Loans and Leases / Total Assets|. All regressions include year fixed effects, and metropolitan statistical
area (MSA) fixed effects when indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in in parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one
percent, respectively.




                                                          (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)             (8)


Diversification Dummy                                 -0.031***        -0.025***       -0.025***                                                             0.010
                                                        (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)                                                            (0.011)

1 - Herfindahl Index of Assets across                                                                   -0.055***        -0.049***        -0.045***                          0.044*
MSAs
                                                                                                          (0.013)          (0.014)         (0.014)                           (0.023)


ln(Total Assets)                                        -0.003         -0.010***       -0.304***          -0.004*        -0.010***        -0.303***        -0.084**         -0.084**
                                                        (0.002)         (0.003)          (0.026)          (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.026)          (0.038)          (0.038)
Loan Commitments / (Loan Commitments                                   0.326***         0.175***                         0.322***         0.173***           0.058            0.069
+ Loans)
                                                                        (0.066)          (0.066)                           (0.066)         (0.066)          (0.090)          (0.090)
Transactions Deposits / Total Deposits                                 0.239***          0.103*                          0.239***           0.103*           -0.036          -0.033
                                                                        (0.055)          (0.057)                           (0.055)         (0.057)          (0.082)          (0.082)
Commitments / (Commitments + Loans) *                                  -0.574***          -0.117                         -0.570***          -0.110           0.054            0.027
Transactions Deposits / Total Deposits
                                                                        (0.206)          (0.209)                           (0.206)         (0.209)          (0.262)          (0.261)
Tobin's q                                                                                 0.001                                             0.001            0.001            0.001
                                                                                         (0.001)                                           (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)
Income Diversity                                                                       -0.317***                                          -0.322***        0.138***         0.147***
                                                                                         (0.030)                                           (0.030)          (0.042)          (0.042)
Asset Diversity                                                                        -0.108***                                          -0.113***          -0.016          -0.016
                                                                                         (0.029)                                           (0.029)          (0.050)          (0.049)
=1 if BHC has international acticity                                                      0.015                                             0.014            0.001            0.004
                                                                                         (0.012)                                           (0.012)          (0.018)          (0.018)
Herfindahl Index of Assets in MSA                                                       -0.028**                                          -0.028**           0.017            0.018
                                                                                         (0.013)                                           (0.013)          (0.021)          (0.021)
Return on Assets                                                                       -0.622***                                          -0.622***       -0.434***        -0.432***
                                                                                         (0.030)                                           (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.030)
Capital / Assets                                                                       -0.013***                                          -0.013***        -0.005**         -0.005**
                                                                                         (0.002)                                           (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.003)
ln(Total Operating Income)                                                              0.307***                                          0.306***         0.100***         0.097**
                                                                                         (0.026)                                           (0.026)          (0.038)          (0.038)
Annual Growth of Real Personal income in                                                  -0.015                                            -0.011           -0.269          -0.273
MSA
                                                                                         (0.179)                                           (0.179)          (0.169)          (0.169)
                                                                                          0.269                                             0.271            -0.265          -0.268
Annual Growth of Real Personal income in
MSA (lag)                                                                                (0.182)                                           (0.182)          (0.173)          (0.173)


Quarter Fixed Effects                                      x                x                x               x                x                x                x               x

BHC Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                               x               x



Observations                                            25,667           24,639          23,619           25,667           24,639           23,619          23,619           23,619
R-squared                                               0.173            0.173            0.212            0.173            0.173           0.212            0.349            0.349
                                                                              39


                                                              Table 3
                                             Gravity Model of Geographic Diversification
This table reports average marginal effects from a fractional logit (columns 1 to 5) or a logit regression (column 6). The dependent variable is the share of assets a BHC has
in a MSA (columns 1 to 5) or a dummy variable taking on the value of one whether a BHC has a subsidiary in a MSA (column 6). 'Miles between HQ and MSA' are the
miles between a BHC's HQ and a MSA. 'Population Difference' is the natural logarithm of the ratio of a foreign MSA's total population to the BHC's home MSA's
population. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.



                                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                 (5)                   (6)


              Dependent variable:                                             Share of assets in MSA                                                        =1 if Entry



ln(Miles between HQ and MSA)                             -0.352***          -0.351***          -0.302***           -0.302***          -0.260***             -1.809***
                                                           (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.008)                (0.018)


[ln(Miles between HQ and MSA)]^2                                                                                                      -0.008***              0.109***
                                                                                                                                       (0.001)                (0.002)


Population Difference                                    -0.077***          -0.077***          -0.123***           -0.143***          -0.150***             -0.709***
                                                           (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.015)            (0.016)                (0.033)



Quarter Fixed Effects                                                             x                  x                  x                  x                     x

Home-Market Fixed Effects                                                                            x                  x                  x                     x

Foreign-Market Fixed Effects                                                                                            x                  x                     x




Observations                                           8,326,674          8,326,674          8,326,674          8,326,674          8,326,674           7,538,835
                                                                                                                            40




                                                                         Table 4
                               The Impact of Geographic Diversification on Bank Holding Company Risk - 2SLS Regressions
This table reports results from a 2SLS regression at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of weekly stock market returns for US
holding companies, measured over a quarter. A BHC's stock market return is based on a BHC's market capitalization is measured as the change in a BHC's market capitalization between two Wednesdays within a quarter. Only BHC-
quarters with at least 75% of nonmissing stock market returns are included. The endogenous variables are 'Diversification Dummy' and '1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across MSAs'. The employed instruments are reported in the table
and are based on a gravity-deregulation model. 'Max Entry' is a the maximum of predicted entry probabilities for entering a foreign market. 'Predicted Diversification Index' is the predicted 1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across MSA
obtained from a gravity-deregulation model. The benchmark model is provided in column 2 of Table 3. We also construct the instrument adding a quadratic term for distance to this model. Regression models (1) to (4) include quarter
fixed effects, model (5) to (8) include quarter and BHC fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.



                                                                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                      (5)                  (6)                   (7)                  (8)



                                                                                                      Panel A: Second Stage


Diversification Dummy                                              -0.127***             -0.133**                                                           -0.623***            -0.888***
                                                                     (0.048)              (0.052)                                                             (0.224)              (0.339)


1 - Herfindahl Index of Assets across MSAs                                                                    -0.808***            -0.752***                                                           -1.611**              -1.740**
                                                                                                               (0.119)               (0.116)                                                            (0.628)               (0.677)



Bank and Macro Controls                                                 x                    x                     x                    x                        x                    x                     x                    x

Quarter Fixed Effects                                                   x                    x                     x                    x                        x                    x                     x                    x

Bank Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                               x                    x                     x                    x

Excluded Instruments:

Max Entry Probability (benchmark)                                       x                                                                                        x

                                                                                             x                                                                                        x
Max Entry Probability (+ quadratic distance effect)
Predicted Diversification Index (benchmark)                                                                        x                                                                                        x
Predicted Diversification Index (+ quadratic distance                                                                                   x                                                                                        x
effect)
                                                                                          41




                                                                          Panel B: First Stage



                                                                              1 - Herfindahl Index of assets                                  1 - Herfindahl Index of assets
                Dependent Variable:               Diversification Dummy                                             Diversification Dummy
                                                                                      across MSAs                                                     across MSAs



Max Entry Probability (Model II)             0.431***                                                          0.449***
                                             (0.021)                                                           (0.070)
Max Entry Probability (Model IV)                             0.338***                                                          0.266***
                                                             (0.018)                                                           (0.059)
Predicted Diversification Index (Model II)                                 0.120***                                                         0.088***
                                                                           (0.006)                                                          (0.016)
Predicted Diversification Index (Model IV)                                                    0.123***                                                        0.086***
                                                                                              (0.007)                                                         (0.016)


Observations                                     23,286          23,286         23,625             23,625          23,286          23,286       23,625             23,625
F-Test                                            430.6           369.0         345.6              353.6            40.83           20.34        29.90             27.65
                                                                                                                            42



                                                               Table 5
         The Impact of Geographic Diversification on Bank Holding Company Risk by Diversification Potential- 2SLS Regressions
This table reports results from a 2SLS regression at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of weekly stock market returns for US holding
companies, measured over a quarter. A BHC's stock market return is based on a BHC's market capitalization is measured as the change in a BHC's market capitalization between two Wednesdays within a quarter. Only BHC-quarters with at
least 75% of nonmissing stock market returns are included. The endogenous variable 'Diversification Dummy' is an indicator variable taking on the value of one whether a BHC has assets in another MSA; 'Share of hedged assets' is the
fraction of total BHC assets that are held in MSAs that exhibit different business cycles based on the measure provided in the column header. Two MSAs within an MSA-pair (i,j) are supposed to exhibit a similar business cycle if (a) the
negative absolute difference in the employment shares across industries between i and j are below the within MSA i- median (columns 1 and 2), (b) the negative absolute difference in the residual real personal income growth between i and j
are below the within MSA i- median (columns 3 and 4) or (c) the correlation of a Baxter-King filtered business cycle series between i and j are below the MSA i-median (columns 5 and 6). These endogenous variables are instrumented by
instruments obtained from a gravity-deregulation model as well as the interaction of these predicted entry dummy (see Table 3) and the predicted share of hedged assets based on predicted share across all MSAs obtained from a gravity-
deregulation model. 'Max Entry Probability' is the maximum of predicted probabilities of entering a foreign market. 'Predicted Share of Hedged Assets' is the total fraction of a BHC's predicted assets that are held in MSAs that are different
based on the measures provided in the column header. The benchmark model to construct these instruments is provided in column 2 of Table 3. We also construct the instrument adding a quadratic term for distance to this model. All
regressions include year fixed effects, and metropolitan statistical area (MSA) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent,
respectively.

                                                                                      (1)                       (2)                             (3)                       (4)                            (5)                       (6)



                                                                                                                                        Negative absolute difference in residual                 Correlation of Baxter-King (5,2) filtered
                Hedge-/Output Similarity - measure:                               Difference in employment shares
                                                                                                                                                     growth rates                                             business cycle


Diversification Dummy                                                              -0.785**                   -1.112*                       -1.310***                  -2.119*                        -1.139**                  -1.226**
                                                                                    (0.362)                   (0.627)                         (0.505)                  (1.209)                         (0.474)                   (0.576)

Diversification Dummy * Share of Hedged Assets                                     -2.799**                   -3.739*                        -1.511*                     -2.137                      -2.719***                 -2.872***
                                                                                    (1.388)                   (2.164)                        (0.847)                    (1.670)                        (0.976)                   (1.013)

Bank and Macro Controls                                                                x                         x                               x                         x                              x                         x

Quarter Fixed Effects                                                                  x                         x                               x                         x                              x                         x

Bank Fixed Effects                                                                     x                         x                               x                         x                              x                         x

Excluded Instruments

Max Entry Probability (benchmark)                                                      x                                                         x                                                        x

Max Entry Probability * Predicted share of hedged Assets                               x                                                         x                                                        x
(benchmark)

Max Entry Probability (+ quadratic distance effect)                                                              x                                                         x                                                        x

Max Entry Probability * Predicted share of hedged Assets (+                                                      x                                                         x                                                        x
quadratic distance effect)


Observations                                                                        23,280                    23,280                         23,280                     23,280                         23,280                    23,280
F-Test (1st instrument)                                                              25.92                     14.70                          20.62                      10.34                          24.82                     14.63
F-Test (2nd instrument)                                                              17.55                     12.19                          99.16                      71.66                          72.64                     49.10
                                                                                           43


                                               Table 6
             The Impact of Geographic Diversification on Bank Holding Company Risk by
                      Diversification Potential- 2SLS Regressions - Robustness
This table reports results from a 2SLS regression at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm
of the standard deviation of weekly stock market returns for US holding companies, measured over a quarter. A BHC's stock market return is based on a BHC's market
capitalization is measured as the change in a BHC's market capitalization between two Wednesdays within a quarter. Only BHC-quarters with at least 75% of
nonmissing stock market returns are included. The endogenous variable 'Diversification Dummy' is an indicator variable taking on the value of one whether a BHC has
assets in another MSA; 'Share of hedged assets' is the fraction of total BHC assets that are held in MSAs that exhibit different business cycles based on the measure
provided in the column header. Two MSAs within an MSA-pair (i,j) are supposed to exhibit a similar business cycle if (a) the negative absolute difference in the real
personal income growth between i and j are below the within MSA i- median (column 1), (a) the negative absolute difference in the residual real personal income
growth between i and j are below the within MSA i- median (column 2) or (c) the correlation of a Baxter-King filtered business cycle series between i and j are below
the MSA i-median (column 3). These endogenous variables are instrumented by instruments obtained from a gravity-deregulation model as well as the interaction of
these predicted entry dummy (see earlier Tables) and the predicted share of hedged assets based on predicted share across all MSAs obtained from a gravity-
deregulation model. 'Max Entry Probability' is the maximum of predicted probabilities of entering a foreign market. 'Predicted share of hedged Assets' is the total
fraction of a BHC's predicted assets that are held in MSAs that are different based on the measures provided in the column header. The benchmark model to construct
these instruments is provided in column 2 of Table 3. We also construct the instrument adding a quadratic term for distance to this model. All regressions include year
fixed effects, and metropolitan statistical area (MSA) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, *** mean
significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.


                                                                                  (1)                                 (2)                                 (3)


                                                                          Difference in                      Negative absolute
                                                                                                                                              Correlation of business
       Hedge-/Business Cycle Similarity - measure:                      employment shares                  difference in residual
                                                                                                                                                       cycle
                                                                         between markets                        growth rates


                                                                                                  ln(stdev of observed weekly returns)

Diversification Dummy                                                          -0.817*                            -1.512**                             -1.159*
                                                                               (0.456)                             (0.704)                             (0.624)

Diversification Dummy * Share of Hedged Assets                                 -2.931*                              -2.012                            -3.284**
                                                                               (1.696)                             (1.263)                             (1.493)

Observations                                                                   20,653                              20,653                              20,653
F-Test (1st instrument)                                                         21.49                               16.65                               22.32
F-Test (2nd instrument)                                                         17.99                               69.71                               52.82
                                                                                                   ln(stdev of residual weekly returns)

Diversification Dummy                                                           -0.620                            -1.602**                             -0.952*
                                                                               (0.410)                             (0.817)                             (0.561)

Diversification Dummy * Share of Hedged Assets                                 -2.963*                             -2.659*                            -3.346**
                                                                               (1.517)                             (1.458)                             (1.354)

Observations                                                                   20,640                              20,640                              20,640
F-Test (1st instrument)                                                         21.97                               17.19                               22.67
F-Test (2nd instrument)                                                         18.47                               69.12                               53.43
                                                                                                                 ln(Z-Score)

Diversification Dummy                                                          0.927*                              1.549**                             1.278*
                                                                               (0.485)                             (0.705)                             (0.657)

Diversification Dummy * Share of hedged assets                                 3.118*                               1.894                              3.421**
                                                                               (1.796)                             (1.268)                             (1.566)

Observations                                                                   20,653                              20,653                              20,653
F-Test (1st instrument)                                                         21.49                               16.65                               22.32
F-Test (2nd instrument)                                                         17.99                               69.71                               52.82

Bank and Macro Controls                                                           x                                    x                                   x

Quarter Fixed Effects                                                             x                                    x                                   x

Bank Fixed Effects                                                                x                                    x                                   x

Excluded Instruments

Max Entry Probability(Model II)                                                   x                                    x                                   x

Max Entry Probability(Model II) * Predicted share of                              x                                    x                                   x
hedged Assets (Model II)
                                                                                                                         44




                                                                                      Table 7
                         The Impact of Geographic Diversification on Loan Quality - 2SLS Regressions
This table reports results from a 2SLS regression at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is given in the column header: Loan
Charge Offs/ Total Loans in the share of total loan charge-offs in the BHC's total loan portfolio; Nonperforming loans / Total Loans is the share of nonperforming loans in the BHC's
total loan portfolio Loan Loss Provisions / Total Loans is the share of Loan loss provisions in the BHC's total loan portfolio. The endogenous variables are 'Diversification Dummy'
and '1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across MSAs'. The employed instruments are reported in the table and are based on a gravity-deregulation model. 'Max Entry' is a the maximum of
predicted entry probabilities for entering a foreign market. 'Predicted Diversification Index' is the predicted 1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across MSA obtained from a gravity-
deregulation model where we also add a quadratic term for distance to this model. All regression models include quarter fixed effects and BHC fixed effects where indicated.
Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in in parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.

                                                             (1)                  (2)                    (3)                  (4)                     (5)                  (6)


                                                                                                     Nonperforming Loans / Total                  Loan Loss Provisions / Total
                                                       Loan Charge Offs / Total Loans
                                                                                                               Loans                                        Loans



1 - Herfindahl Index of Assets across MSAs                  0.300              0.397*                   0.644               0.532                    0.236               0.293
                                                           (0.187)             (0.210)                 (1.152)             (1.204)                  (0.166)             (0.182)


Bank and Macro Controls                                       x                   x                       x                    x                       x                    x

Quarter Fixed Effects                                         x                   x                       x                    x                       x                    x

Bank Fixed Effects                                            x                   x                       x                    x                       x                    x


Excluded Instruments:

Predicted Diversification Index (benchmark)                   x                                           x                                            x
Predicted Diversification Index (+ quadratic                                      x                                            x                                            x
distance effect)
                                                                                                                        45




                                                                             Table A1
                                      Predicted Geographic Diversification and Bank Holding Company Risk - Reduced Form
This table reports results from an OLS regression at the bank holding company level over the period Q2/1976-Q4/2007. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the standard deviation of weekly stock market returns for US holding
companies, measured over a quarter. A BHC's stock market return is based on a BHC's market capitalization is measured as the change in a BHC's market capitalization between two Wednesdays within a quarter. Only BHC-quarters with at
least 75% of nonmissing stock market returns are included. The variables are 'Max Entry Probability' and 'Predicted Diversification Index'. 'Max Entry' is the maximum value of predicted entry probabilities for entering a foreign market.
'Predicted Diversification Index' is the predicted 1 - Herfindahl Index of assets across MSA obtained from a gravity-deregulation model. The benchmark model is provided in column 2 of Table 3. We also construct the instrument adding a
quadratic term for distance to this model. Regression models (1) to (4) include quarter fixed effects, model (5) to (8) include quarter and BHC fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA-quarter level, and reported in in
parentheses. *, **, *** mean significance at ten, five, and one percent, respectively.




                                                                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                     (5)                     (6)                     (7)                  (8)


Max Entry Probability (benchmark)                                     -0.054***                                                                          -0.280***
                                                                        (0.021)                                                                            (0.092)
                                                                                           -0.045**                                                                              -0.236***
Max Entry Probability (+ quadratic distance effect)                                         (0.018)                                                                                (0.074)
Predicted Diversification Index (benchmark)                                                                   -0.097***                                                                                  -0.142***
                                                                                                               (0.013)                                                                                     (0.050)
                                                                                                                                 -0.092***                                                                                    -0.150***
Predicted Diversification Index (+ quadratic distance
effect)                                                                                                                            (0.013)                                                                                     (0.052)


Bank and Macro Controls                                                    x                   x                   x                  x                       x                       x                       x                    x

Quarter Fixed Effects                                                      x                   x                   x                  x                       x                       x                       x                    x

Bank Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                            x                       x                       x                    x


Observations                                                            23,280              23,280             23,619              23,619                  23,286                 23,286                   23,625              23,625
