                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 REGIONAL TRANSFERS

                                       Raphael Corbi
                                     Elias Papaioannou
                                        Paolo Surico

                                     Working Paper 20751
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w20751


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                         December 2014, Revised March 2017




This paper supersedes NBER WP No. 20751 "Federal Transfer Multipliers: Quasi-Experimental
Evidence from Brazil". For useful comments, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Josh Angrist, Sascha
Becker, Markus Brueckner, Antonio Ciccone, Giancarlo Corsetti, Emmanuel Farhi, Manolis
Galenianos, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Rick Mishkin, Emi Nakamura,
Jonathan Parker, Danny Shoag, Alp Simsek, Jon Steinnson, Guido Tabellini, Ivan Werning,
Pierre Yared, Katia Zhuravskaya, Guido Imbens, Carlos Viana de Carvalho and participants at
many conferences and seminars. Corbi and Surico gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the Newton Advanced Fellowship Scheme (award AF160119) and the European Research
Council (Agreements 263429 and 647049). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raphael Corbi, Elias Papaioannou, and Paolo Surico. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regional Transfers
Raphael Corbi, Elias Papaioannou, and Paolo Surico
NBER Working Paper No. 20751
December 2014, Revised March 2017
JEL No. E32,E62

                                         ABSTRACT

We exploit a series of discontinuities, at several population thresholds, in the allocation
mechanism of federal transfers to municipal governments in Brazil to identify the causal effect of
municipal spending on local labor markets, using a ‘fuzzy’ regression discontinuity design. Our
estimates imply a cost per job of about 8; 000 US dollars per year, mostly driven by employment
in services, and a local income multiplier of around two. A currency union model with nominal
rigidities and liquidity constraints implies that the stimulative effects would have been
substantially smaller if local government spending was financed by local tax revenues rather than
regional transfers.

Raphael Corbi                                   Paolo Surico
London Business School, Economics               London Business School
Regent's Park, Sussex Place                     Regent's Park
London, NW1 4SA, United Kingdom                 NW1 4SA
rcorbi.phd2008@london.edu                       London (United Kingdom)
                                                psurico@london.edu
Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com
1 Introduction
The ongoing political crisis in the Euro-area has brought the design of scal policy to the

front stage of the public debate, generating renewed interest in policy and academic circles on

the role of regional transfers in large currency unions (Farhi and Werning, 2016, Nakamura

and Steinsson, 2014). This debate goes back to the early contributions of Robert Mundell

(1961, 1973) and Peter Kennen (1971). Besides important theoretical issues, there is limited

applied research quantifying the impact of regional transfers on local economies inside a
                  1
currency union.

   In this paper we examine the impact of transfers-driven municipal expenditure on local

labor markets in Brazil, where municipal receipts of federal transfers change abruptly at nu-

merous pre-determined population thresholds, allowing for a `fuzzy' Regression Discontinuity

Design (RDD). While municipalities belonging to the same population bracket receive the

same amount of transfers in a given year and state from the federal government, municipali-

ties with a few inhabitants above (below) the upper (lower) bound of each bracket receive, on

average,   20%   more (less). Hence, population uctuations around the legislated cutos pro-

vide locally exogenous variation to identify the causal eects of externally-nanced municipal

government spending on economic activity. Our analysis exploits variation from more than

3, 000   municipalities over the period    1999 − 2014    using high-quality microdata covering the

bulk of private and municipal public sector employment contracts. The focus on numerous

small geographical units over time allows controlling for time-invariant municipal factors, re-

lated to geography, history, local cultural and institutional features, and for country-wide and

state trends, related to monetary policy, federal scal policy, and business cycles. This con-

trasts favorably with empirical studies on government spending at the national level, where

aggregate confounding factors are harder to net out. The focus on regional transfers allows

us to draw a distinction between external and internal sources of public nance, a critical

issue for policy making (see Ramey (2016) and Chodorow-Reich (2016)).                    In this regard,

we calibrate Farhi and Werning (2016) currency union model with regional trade, nominal

rigidities, and liquidity constraints and contrast our fuzzy-RD estimates to the counterfactual

that would have emerged if municipal spending was funded by local tax revenues rather than

regional transfers, as in our set up.

  1 Chodorow-Reich    (2017) summarizes some recent empirical studies that we discuss below.



                                                     2
    Results Preview.         Our analysis yields ve main ndings. First, changes in local govern-

ment expenditure stemming from `locally' exogenous shifts in federal transfers are associated

with a signicant boost in local private and public sector employment. A USD                   30, 000   in-

crease in municipal spending is associated with an extra job in the local public sector and

three extra jobs in the private sector, implying a cost per job of about         7, 500 − 8, 000 USD per
year. Second, the eect on wages in muted; pre-existing employees in the public sector experi-

ence a modest pay rise, whereas compensation per worker in the private sector is not aected.

Third, most of the private sector employment response comes from services, a result in line

with theoretical works stressing the stimulative eects of local spending and regional trans-

fers on non-tradeables (e.g., Farhi and Werning, 2016). Fourth, a simple production function

mapping of the fuzzy-RD employment eects into income yields local income multipliers in

the range of   1.6 to 2.4 (Chodorow-Reich, 2016).           Fifth, our counterfactual simulations using a

workhorse New-Keynesian currency-union model predict that the estimated multiplier would

have been between      0.8   and   1.4   if local government spending was nanced instead by local

tax revenues. Sixth, the eects of regional transfers are somewhat larger in more developed

Southern states and in smaller municipalities.



    Related Literature.            Our work is related to the recent literature that examines the

impact of government spending on local economic outcomes by exploiting cross-sectional
           2
variation.     Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) interact state-level military procurement and

spending with country-level changes in military build-ups to identify the impact of scal

shocks on state output. Shoag (2013) uses variation in the idiosyncratic component of U.S.

states' portfolio of dened-benet pension plan asset returns as an `instrument' for local

spending. Serrato and Wingender (2016) exploit federal spending reallocations across U.S.

counties driven by unanticipated revisions to local population estimates to identify the ef-

fects of county-level government spending.              These studies report local multipliers over the

post-WWII period in the range of          1.4 to 2.6.   Clemens and Miran (2012) nd however subna-

tional government spending multipliers below one; Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2010) and

Fishback and Cullen (2013) also nd much lower multipliers for the post-Great Depression

spending across U.S. states and for WWII military purchases across U.S. counties, respec-

   2 SeeChodorow-Reich (2017) for an overview of geographic cross-sectional multipliers. Ramey (2013, 2016)
reviews the broader literature that quanties the aggregate eects of scal policy.



                                                        3
          3
tively.       Becker, Egger and von Ehrlich (2010, 2013) examine the medium-run growth eects

of EU structural fund grants, documenting positive but quite heterogeneous eects.

    We share with these recent studies the geographic cross-sectional approach and the ef-

fort to push on causation via exploiting some form of "quasi-random" variation. Our rst

contribution is to provide evidence on the impact of local scal policy in a large emerging

market against the backdrop of an empirical literature dominated by estimates for the United

States and some other advanced economies, like Italy and Japan (Notable exceptions are the
                                                 4
cross-country works of Kraay, 2012, 2014).           Moreover, we examine the impact of direct trans-

fers from the federal government to localities rather than swings on local spending from an

exogenous shock, like military buildup or higher stock returns. Second, building on advances

in labor economics (Angrist and Lavy, 2001; van der Klaauw, 2002; Hahn, Todd and Van der

Klaauw, 2001) we apply a new in applied macroeconomics `fuzzy' regression discontinuity
                                                             5
approach to identify the eects of local scal policy.           In this regard our work connects with

empirical works in political economy that examine the eect of federal transfers in Brazil on

various political outcomes applying RD methods (Ferraz and Finan, 2010; Brollo, Nannicini,

Perotti and Tabellini, 2013; Litschig and Morrison, 2013, Gadenne, 2016). Third, we nest our

RD estimates in a canonical currency union model to approximate the impact of municipal

spending if it was funded via local taxes rather than outside (federal in our application) trans-

fers. This is important both because it allows quantifying the impact of regional transfers

in currency unions against a reasonable counterfactual and because it connects the paper's

results to the broader literature on the eects of government spending on aggregate economic

activity (Farhi and Werning, 2016; Ramey, 2016).



    Structure         The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present the insti-

tutional framework behind the allocation of regional transfers from the federal government

to Brazilian municipalities and discuss the main data. In Section            3   we present the fuzzy-RD

   3 As for recent government interventions, Feyrer and Sacerdote (2012) use state variation in the seniority
of the U.S. Congressmen as an `instrument' for local government expenditure. Chodorow-Reich, Feiveson,
Liscow and Woolston (2012) exploit pre-crisis variation on Medicare/Medicaid allocations to identify the
eects of the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) on employment.
   4 Acconcia, Corsetti and Simonelli (2014) exploit cuts in public spending triggered by the dismissal of
Italian province governments suspected of maa inltration. Porcelli and Trezzi (2014) use variation on
public reconstruction activity across Italian municipalities after an earthquake. Bruckner and Tuladhar
(2014) exploit geographical variation within Japanese prefectures.
   5 See Fuchs-Schundeln and Hassan (2016) for an overview of works exploiting natural experiments in
business cycle and growth research.

                                                      4
framework and discuss the identifying assumptions. In Section                     4   we examine the impact of

federal transfers on employment and wages in the municipal public sector. Section                       5   reports

the baseline results linking private sector employment and mean wages with regional trans-

fers. First, we present the fuzzy-RD local estimates. Second, we approximate the cost per job

and associated employment multipliers for the local economy. Third, we map the employment

multiplier into an income multiplier using a simple, intuitive production function framework

(Chodorow-Reich, 2017). Fourth, we present counterfactual simulations of the impact of local

government expenditure under alternative funding, using a New-Keynesian currency-union

model with nominal rigidities and nancial constraints (Farhi and Werning, 2006). In Section

6   we examine the eects of local spending on employment and average wages in agriculture,

manufacturing, and services. In Section              7   we explore heterogeneity across regions and city

size and present various sensitivity checks. Section             8   concludes.




2 Institutional Framework and Data
2.1 The FPM Transfers Scheme
The Federative Republic of Brazil is organized at three levels of government:                          the federal

union,      26 states and 1 federal district, and 5, 565 municipalities.          The executive and legislative

powers are organized independently at all three levels, while the judiciary is organized at the

federal and state level. Municipal governments are managed by an elected mayor (Prefeito)

and an elected council (Camara dos Vereadores), which are in charge of a signicant por-
                                                                                                                  6
tion of public goods provision, related to education, health, and small-scale infrastructure.

Brazilian municipalities have limited ability to raise taxes, which on average correspond to

only   6%     of total revenues in our sample of municipalities with less than              50, 000   inhabitants.

Municipalities are highly dependent on transfers from the states and the federal government.

A major role is played by an automatic federal scal transfer scheme - the Fundo de Par-

ticipação dos Municipios (FPM). FPM is the largest program of transfers to municipalities

accounting for almost         80%    of all types of federal transfers and        31%    of municipal revenues.

FPM transferred         R$29.5   billion Brazilian Reais (U S$14.8 billion in current prices) from the

    6 For   size and administrative organization, Brazilian municipalities are akin to U.S. counties.



                                                           5
                                                                                                           7
national government to municipalities in                2006,    the middle year of our sample.                 The pool of

resources for the FPM fund amounts to                   22.5%    of total revenues raised through the federal

income tax and the industrial products tax.

    The FPM was introduced in             1965      as a constitutional amendment by the military govern-

ment to distribute resources in an orderly and transparent fashion (and weaken local political

elites). The allocation mechanism was shaped by subsequent legislation in                             1981 (decree 1881)
and was rectied by the Federal Constitution of                   1988   (Art. 159 Ib). Since then, there have

been no changes.

    In each year, FPM funds are allocated to municipalities according to a predetermined

mechanism that relies on local population estimates and the state which the municipality

belongs to.     First, a xed share of total FPM funds is assigned to each of the                                   26   states.

Second, each municipality is assigned a coecient depending on pre-specied population

brackets. Let    F P Mik     be the federal transfers received by municipality                   i   in state   k   in a given

year. The allocation mechanism is:


                                                                      λi
                                               F P Mik = F P M k P
                                                                      ik   λi

where     F P M k is the amount of (xed) resources allocated to state k .8 λi is the FPM coecient
                                                               λ                 i
of municipality    i   based on its population. The fraction P
                                                                                     λi
                                                                                          is simply the share of         F P Mk
                                                                             ik

that goes to municipality        i   in state   k   in a given year. Figure 1 plots FPM coecients across

the various population brackets. The width of the population brackets is                               3, 396   inhabitants

for the three rst cutos (10, 188,             13, 584,   and   16, 980)   and it doubles to           6, 792      people for

cities larger than     16, 981   residents.

    There are two interesting features of the FPM allocation mechanism. First, municipalities

in the same bracket (in a given year and state) should get the exact same amount of trans-

fers, independently of the exact number of inhabitants. Second - and most importantly for

our identication - federal transfers change discontinuously at the cutos. For instance, the

population of     Anita Garibaldi, a municipality in the southern state of Santa Catarina, uc-

tuated between      9, 991   and     10, 193   during   2002 − 2007.     The population increased by only                    13
   7 Incomparison, Bolsa Familia, the largest conditional cash transfer program in the world targeting low-
income households, distributed R$8.2 billion in 2006 prices (U S$4.1 billion in 2016 prices).
   8 The state shares of FPM transfers (reported in Appendix Table 1) are based on population/output per
capita in 1991 and have not been altered ever since. The FPM formula applies to all municipalities with
population less than approximately 150 thousand inhabitants that are not state capitals.


                                                            6
                        Figure 1: FPM Coecients and Population Brackets



inhabitants between      2002          and    2003   (from   10, 180   to   10, 193).   As population crossed the rst

threshold (10, 188) the FPM coecient increased from                           0.6   to   0.8   and so did transfers from

R$1, 204, 762    in   2002   to   R$1, 324, 306        in   2003.   The population in           2004   fell by   38   inhabitants

to   10, 155.   Since it crossed back the rst cuto, FPM transfers dropped to                                   R$1, 098, 906.
Nova Trento, another municipality in the same state of similar size, also experienced a small

increase in population from              9, 943 to 10, 006.     As it did not cross the threshold, FPM transfers

fell from   R$1, 204, 762     to       R$1, 111, 936,   as in   2003   there was a brief recession due to political
                                                                                                                 9
turmoil caused by the national election that lowered the size of FPM program.

      The FPM coecients are based on yearly population estimates produced by the federal

statistical agency, IBGE - Instituto Brasileiro de Geograa e Estatistica (Brazilian Institute

of Geography and Statistics) - and supervised by a federal court. IBGE calculates municipal

population for non-census years taking into consideration past censuses, regional birth and
                                                                                                                               10
death rates, migration trends and other features using a publicly known methodology.

Figure 2 describes the time-line of the allocation.                         Population estimates for year               t−1   are

announced by October              31st    .   On this basis the Federal Budget Court publishes the FPM

coecients for all municipalities.               Then local authorities form the budget for scal year                         t.
The budget is approved by municipal councils by the end of the year and FPM funds are

transferred during year           t.
     9 In
        the Appendix we exemplify the non-linear allocation mechanism of federal transfers discussing four
additional examples. All monetary values throughout the paper are in Brazilian Reais (BRL) in constant
prices of 1998. At the time of writing that is equivalent to 3.2 BRL or U S$1 in current prices.
  10 See IBGE website. http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/populacao/estimativa_pop.shtm




                                                                7
                                        Figure 2: FPM Allocation Timelines



2.2 Grouping municipalities around the discontinuities
As the number of municipalities falls with population (Appendix Table                        2)   and because re-

liance on federal transfers is smaller for larger cities, we follow Brollo, Nannicini, Perotti

and Tabellini (2013) and focus on cities around the thresholds                   1 − 7,   thereby examining the

eect of federal transfers on the local economy for municipalities with a population between

6, 793   and      47, 544.   This results into an unbalanced panel of         43, 466     observations, covering

3, 279   municipalities over        1999 − 2014.     Our sample covers     60%     of Brazilian municipalities,

accounting for        28%     of Brazilian population, which was close to             175 (202)   million in   2000
(2014).      Since we have numerous discontinuities, each municipality-year observation is as-

signed to the nearest population cuto.               We construct seven population intervals centered

on each discontinuity (Figure 1). The intervals are              [6, 793-11, 887], [11, 887-15, 283], [15, 283-
20, 377], [20, 377-27, 169], [27, 169-33, 961], [33, 961-40, 753]          and    [40, 753-47, 544].   Appendix

Table    2   reports the number of observations (municipality-years) grouped by whether they

are above or below each of the seven thresholds.

   Table      1    illustrates the richness of the experiment.           Panel    A   shows that    1, 410   of the

3, 279   municipalities (43%) did not change population bracket in any given year.                           1, 087
municipalities experience only positive jumps (33%),                93   cities experienced movements only

to a lower population bracket (3%) and                689   municipalities (21%) experienced at least one

positive and one negative jump. As we focus on the neighborhood around the seven cutos,

in Appendix Table            3 we tabulate similar statistics narrowing the sample in a 4%-population-
bandwidth around each cuto. Around one-third of the municipalities in our `local' sample

uctuates around the cutos without crossing them (705 of                  2, 305),    while two-thirds move to

a higher or lower FPM population interval or both.

   Table      1   - Panels    B   and   C   report the number of municipalities that remain in the same




                                                            8
population bracket or move across brackets by year and by cuto, respectively. Almost all

movements are either to the immediately higher (+1) or immediately lower (−1) population

brackets.    The larger number of positive jumps should not come as a surprise, as during

the sample period Brazil experienced considerable population growth (1.1% per annum on

average). Most of the upward or downward jumps regard cities falling within thresholds                        1−4
(up to   27, 169).   There are fewer movements around thresholds            5, 6,   and   7;   yet the number of

jumps in any population bracket relative to the number of observations is roughly constant.



2.3 Data and Summary Statistics
Municipal public nances are retrieved from the FINBRA database and FPM transfers from
                           11
the National Treasury.          Population estimates are provided by the IBGE. Our main source for

local labor market outcomes (income and employment) is the                 Relação Anual de Informações

Sociais (RAIS), spanning over         1999 − 2014.12       This is an administrative dataset assembled

yearly by the Brazilian Ministry of Labor.            Eectively, this is a high-quality census of the

Brazilian formal labor market that contains detailed contractual information on 26.2 million

workers of a universe of 27.6 million in 2000, according to the census, and on all 2.2 million

registered rms (De Negri          et al., 2001; Saboia and Tolipan, 1985; Amorim et al, 2006).

We aggregate earnings and employment information at the municipal level separately by

private or public sector (local government only), and according to job tenure and sector

of the economy. Providing accurate information in RAIS is required for workers to receive
                                                                                                         13
payments from government benet programs and rms face nes for failing to report.

    In Table     2 - Panel A, we report summary statistics for population, municipal public nance
and local expenditure. For income per capita only, we present average values (retrieved from

  11 Municipal   public nance and FPM transfers data are available from the Ministry of Finance, at
http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br/pt_PT/contas-anuais
  12 While data on municipal GDP are available at yearly frequency from IBGE over our sample period
(see Corbi, Papaioannou and Surico, 2014), they are not observed but estimated based on past surveys and
censuses. This makes the use of municipal GDP as measure of local economic activity unattractive for our
purpose for two reasons. First, it does not capture yearly changes in the sectorial structure of local economies,
keeping the share of each industry constant across years, which is particularly worrysome in a set up that
exploits within-variation. Second, these historical data are also used to calculate the population estimates
and would introduce a mechanical link between the running variable (population) and the outcomes.
  13 RAIS covers nearly all formally employed workers with a signed work-card, providing access to benets
and oering legal labor protection rights. It omits interns, in-house workers and other minor employment
categories. Self-employed and independent professionals recruiting employees are also included (Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak, 2015b). These data have been used by Dix-Carneiro (2014), Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and
Redding (2017), Krishna et al. (2014), Lopes de Melo (2013), and Menezes-Filho and Muendler (2011).

                                                       9
the Census) for the year        2000:   these increase with population and amount to an overall
                                                                                14
average around      1, 900   Brazilian Reais (constant        1998   prices).        For the same year, income

per capita at the national level was BRL          3, 600.15   FPM transfers is the most important source

of funds for the municipalities in our sample, accounting for            31% of revenues.     Other important

sources are state-level transfers and federal transfers (net of FPM), which account for                   23%
and   14%,   respectively. Local taxes revenues account for            6%.   Turning to spending, the main

categories are Local Administration (16%), Education (33%), Health (22%) and Housing &

Urban Infrastructure (9%). There are institutional constraints preventing municipalities for
                                                                                                     16
borrowing and overspending, so local governments virtually run balanced budgets.

    In Table   2 - Panel B , we record total earnings in the municipal sector for pre-existing and
newly-hired employees. 'New-hires' (recruited in current year) account for                   16% of total earn-
ings in the municipal sector and `old-hires' (at least          1 year tenure) account for 84%.       Panel   B
also gives municipal earnings in agriculture, manufacturing, and services. Earnings in agri-

culture account for    12% of total private sector earnings.          Manufacturing and services account

each for     44%.   Table   2-Panel C   and   D   report the corresponding statistics for employment

and average wages.




3 Identication
In this section we rst describe the fuzzy regression discontinuity design that allows us to

isolate the eect of municipality spending driven by regional transfers on local labor markets

outcomes. Then we discuss and present supportive evidence of the identifying assumptions.

  14 While  municipal GDP is available at yearly frequency from IBGE (see Corbi, Papaioannou and Surico,
2014), these data are not directly measured but estimated using historical surveys and censi. This is unattrac-
tive for our purpose for two main reasons. First, the construction of the municipal GDP estimates assume
that the share of each industry in the local economy remains constant across years. This is particularly
worrisome in a set up that exploits within-municipality variation. Second, these historical surveys and censis
are also used to estimate municipal population, thereby introducing a mechanical link between the running
variable (local population) and the potential outcome (local GDP).
   15 This disparity reects bigger cities' higher income. For example, income per capita Sao Paulo and Rio
de Janeiro, which account for almost 20% of the country's population, was around BRL 18, 900 in 2013.
   16 More specically, the median (average) surplus is only 0.1% (0.2%) of municipal GDP.




                                                       10
3.1 Empirical Framework: Fuzzy RD Design
3.1.1 Source of Exogenous Variation
The allocation of FPM transfers to municipal governments is a non-linear function of popula-

tion. While level and changes in population are likely to depend on local economic conditions

and other hard-to-observe factors, federal transfers change abruptly at several pre-determined

population thresholds.         Hence population movements around the cutos can be used as a

source of locally exogenous variation to estimate the causal eects of regional transfers on

labor market outcomes in the neighborhood of thresholds (Angrist and Pischke, 2008). In

Figure 3a, we plot actual FPM transfers against population. The solid (red) vertical lines

represent the cutos of the FPM allocation mechanism (Figure 1).               Small dots represent

municipality-year observations.          Thick (black) lines denote running-mean smoothing over

population bins of       200   inhabitants.    There are visible jumps when population crosses the

FPM cutos. There is also considerable variability, as total FPM funds have grown over time

and because of non-negligible dierences in FPM funds across states.

   Federal transfers are not shaped exclusively by the FPM allocation mechanism.              This

mis-assignment of funds has many causes, from simple misreporting to the fact that through-

out the 1990s some municipalities split into two, but (temporarily) kept their former FPM
                                          17
coecient through court disputes.              Figure 3b repeats 3a using this time law-implied FPM

transfers instead of actual.       Law-implied transfers are the exact amount each municipality

would have received if the allocation mechanism was perfectly enforced; hence the sharper

jumps at the seven FPM cutos.


3.1.2 Empirical Specications
If actual FPM transfers are the only relevant factor that change discontinuously at the cutos,

we can estimate the impact of locally exogenous movements of municipalities across popula-

tion thresholds on labor market outcomes by running variants of the following specications

 17 In   the Appendix we discuss that in detail these small discrepancies.




                                                      11
                     (a) Actual Transfers                                    (b) Law-Implied Transfers


                 Figure 3: Actual and Law-Implied FPM Transfers around the cutos



in the neighborhood (h) of the seven cutos (c):


                                                    c
                           FS      :   T i,t = f (Pi,t−1 ) + γF S T̃ i,t + δi + δct + δst + εi,t                   (1)

                                                    c
                           RF      :   Y i,t = f (Pi,t−1 ) + γRF T̃ i,t + δi + δct + δst + εi,t                    (2)




                       ∀Pi,t−1 ∈ [c(1 − h), c(1 + h)]; h{4%, 3%, 2%)

    The rst-stage (FS) specication associates actual FPM transfers (Ti,t ) with law-implied

FPM transfers (T̃i,t ). Under perfect assignment, the coecient on law-implied transfers (γF S )
                                                             2
should be one and the in-sample t perfect (R                    = 1).   The reduced-form (RF) specication

links labor market outcomes (Yi,t ) - total earnings, employment, and average wages - to

law-implied transfers.

    δst   are state-year dummies that capture aggregate developments (national and state level)

such as federal tax proceeds, common monetary policy, and regional business cycles. Their

inclusion is necessary to account for upward trends in wages and earnings and for the increase

in the total pot of FPM due to the growth of the Brazilian economy.                                Municipal xed-

eects    δi   account for time-invariant factors determining municipal scal policy and economic
                                                                                                                     18
conditions, related to geography, ecology, culture, local institutional quality, corruption, etc.

The municipal constants also account for state-level dierences on FPM shares.                           δct are cuto-
  18 Naritomi,  Soares, and Assuncao (2012) show that there are sizeable dierences across Brazilian munici-
palities on institutional quality that are related to the type of colonization and local geographic features.


                                                          12
year constants, accounting for dierent levels and trends of outcomes and transfers across

municipalities of dierent size.
                                 c
    The RD-polynomial       f (Pi,t−1 ) is dened on normalized population (the `running' variable)
and its inclusion accounts for how far/close municipalities are from the closest FPM cuto
 c
( ) in the previous year (t     − 1).   Following Angrist and Lavy (1999), Hahn, Todd and Van

der Klaauw (2001), van der Klaauw (2002), and subsequent works in a similar context to

ours (e.g., Brollo, Nannicini, Tabellini, and Perotti (2013)), we combine the estimation of

the rst-stage and the reduced-form specications in an Instrumental Variable (IV) set-up,

which isolates the eects on local labor market conditions of locally exogenous changes in
                                                                                                            19
federal transfers, stemming from the enforceability of the law, close to the FPM cutos.

The fuzzy-RD model reads:


                                         c
                       IV : Y i,t = f (Pi,t−1 ) + γIV T̂ i,t + δi + δct + δst + εi,t


                         ∀Pi,t−1 ∈ [c(1 − h), c(1 + h)]; h{4%, 3%, 2%)

    T̂i,t   denotes the component or federal transfers implied by FPM's non-linear allocation

mechanism) in each year.

    We estimate two variants of this specication, which restrict estimation in the neigh-

borhood of the seven cutos using three bandwidths (h                 = 4%, 3%      and   2%).20   First, we

estimate simple OLS (reduced-form) and IV (fuzzy-RD) models without including any RD

polynomials. This approach is transparent, simple and straightforward to implement (An-

grist and Lavy, 1999). However, it may yield imprecise estimates, as the bandwidth narrows,

and not account well for dierences in population when the bandwidth is wide. Second, we

estimate "local regressions" with a "rectangular kernel". These models include cuto-specic

linear RD polynomials on normalized population, allowing for dierent slopes of the "running
                                                                             21
variable" for municipalities below and above the discontinuities.

  19 SeeAngrist et al. (2014), Hinnerich and Pettersson-Lidbom (2012, 2014), and Pettersson-Lidbom (2012).
  20 The use of relative size neighborhood as opposed to absolute is due to the fact that the number of
municipalities decrease in population size. In order not to lose too many observations as we narrow the sample,
we allow neighbourhoods to grow with population as in Litschig and Morrison (2012). For example, consider
the rst and fourth cuto (10, 188 and 23, 772). A 2%-neighbourhood include 1, 141 and 801 observations,
respectively. If we were to use an absolute neighbourhoods of 200 inhabitants, we would have 1, 139 and 360
observations, further decreasing the weight of larger municipalities.
  21 Imbens and Lemieux (2008) write "from a practical point of view, one may just focus on the simple




                                                      13
    The simplicity of the FPM mechanism and the fact that transfers within a state and
                                                                                                  22
year depend only on population estimates render this setup ideal for our purpose.                      Another

attractive feature of the FPM law is the presence of many discontinuities. Thus our results

are not subject to the usual critique of RDD estimates that, since the identied eects are

local, they may not apply far from the discontinuity. It would seem of some interest to point

it out that, unlike earlier contributions exploiting the allocation of federal resources across

municipalities in Brazil to study other outcomes, our design makes the identication strategy

particularly strong. By exploiting within-municipality variation, we account for unobserved

features, something key as in a large and heterogeneous country, municipalities dier across

many dimensions.

    We report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the micro-region level,

which the IBGE denes as "groups           of economically integrated municipalities sharing borders

and structure of production ".23        This approach accounts for residual auto-correlation and

spatial spillovers across nearby municipalities with economic links. This adjustment yields

more conservative estimates as standard errors are larger as compared to simply clustering

at the municipality level or the state level.



3.2 Identifying Assumptions
Our RD design relies on four main identifying assumptions, which we discuss below.


3.2.1 Federal Transfers at the Discontinuities
A   sine qua non requirement is that FPM transfers change when municipalities cross FPM

population thresholds. While fuzzy-RD does not require that the law is perfectly enforced,

there has to be some enforcement.            This is akin to the `strong rst-stage-t' assumption

in classical two-stage least squares.        Figure   4   plots actual FPM transfers averaged over           75
rectangular kernel, but verify the robustness of the results to dierent choices of bandwidth ". Lee and Lemieux
(2010) argue that it is "more transparent to just estimate standard linear regressions (rectangular kernel) with
a variety of bandwidths, instead of trying out dierent kernels corresponding to particular weighted regressions
that are more dicult to interpret ". For completeness, however, we also report in the specications using
all observations (both far and close to discontinuities) and conditioning on high-order RD polynomials (as
Brollo, Nannicini, Tabellini and Perotti, 2013), obtaining similar results (Appendix Table 16).
   22 Indeed, Eggers, Freier, Grembi and Nannicini (2016) argue that "population-threshold RDD may be the
best available research design for studying the eects of certain policies ".
   23 See IBGE (1990, page 10). Our sample comprises 547 micro-regions with an average of 21 micro-regions
per state and 5 municipalities per micro-region.


                                                      14
                            Figure 4: FPM Transfers around the cutos



inhabitants bins around the pooled cutos. There is clear evidence that the law shaping FPM

transfers is enforced, though even with averaged-data there is evidence of mis-assignment.

    In Table   3, we assess the link between actual and law-implied transfers.         Panel   A specica-
tions include state and year dummies to account for the xed state shares and time variation

on the size of the FPM program that changes as the Brazilian economy and federal proceeds

grow. We do not include municipality xed-eects, as we want to examine how well the law

shaping FPM allocations is enforced.            Besides log specications, we also report models in
                                            24
levels, exactly as dictated by the law.           The estimates in row (1) show that - in line with

the allocation mechanism - there is an almost one-to-one relationship between law-implied

and actual transfers. The coecient remains stable as we narrow the bandwidth. The same

applies when use the logarithm of actual and law-implied transfers (row (2)). We also es-

timate least-absolute deviation (median) regressions to account for outliers. The coecient

on law implied-transfers in row (3) is      1    and tightly estimated. The model-t is not perfect,

as the rules are not fully enforced (Figure 3a-3b and Figure 4).               The marginal     R2   - once

we net out state and year xed eects - is around          0.83 − 0.92.   Since the specications that

link employment and wages to FPM transfers in Table             3-Panel B   include municipality xed-

eects, we report xed-eect estimates in levels and log levels. The pattern is similar, with
                                 25
the coecient close to unity.

  24 We thank Josh Angrist for making this clarications and for advice on the technical aspects of the RDD.
  25 The same applies when we estimate the specications in rst-dierences, though these models come with
an eciency loss (Appendix Table 5). The OLS and LAD specications yield estimates of 1, while the log
dierence models yield somewhat attenuated elasticities of around 0.94. We also examined the link between


                                                     15
3.2.2 Municipal Government Revenues and Expenditure
A related necessary condition for identication is that municipal revenues and expenditure

change abruptly at the cutos.

   Table   4 - Panel A reports level and log-OLS estimates with municipality xed-eects and
LAD estimates without xed-eects of law-implied FPM transfers on municipal revenues.

Columns (2)-(4) estimates are reasonably stable and move closer to            1 as we narrow the band-
width. When we add the         1st -order RD polynomial in columns (5)-(7),      the OLS estimates fall

and become somewhat imprecise (0.6−0.78). LAD estimates that account for outliers remain

in the range of   0.9−1.1.    Log-OLS results are also stable with point estimates not statistically

dierent from the share of FPM in municipal revenues (0.31, Table             2).   Figure 5a provides a

graphical illustration of these estimates when we pool across all cutos. There is an evident

jump of municipal revenues for municipalities on the right of the pooled discontinuities.

   Table   4   - Panel   B   reports corresponding estimates for municipal expenditure. OLS and

LAD estimates in columns (2)-(4) are close to            1.   While the estimates fall when we add the

cuto-specic constants and linear polynomials, we cannot reject a coecient of unity. Log-

OLS estimates are around         0.30,   close to the share of FPM transfers to municipal spending.

Figure 5b plots average municipal expenditure below and above the pooled discontinuities.

While relatively more noisy than FPM transfers, municipal spending visibly changes discon-
                                  26
tinuously across the cutos.


3.2.3 Other Sources of Municipal Revenues around the FPM Thresholds
Another condition for identication is that, besides FPM transfers, no other relevant for labor

markets covariates move abruptly at the FPM thresholds. All factors aecting employment,

wages and total earnings should be continuous at the cutos (Imbens and Lemieux, 2008; Lee

and Lemieux, 2010, 2014). This RD assumption is similar to the "exclusion restriction" in

an IV setting requiring that the `instrument' (law-implied FPM transfers around the cutos

actual FPM and law-implied FPM transfers across each of the seven cutos. There is a strong link across
cutos (Appendix Table 6) and geographic regions (Appendix Table 24).
  26 We also examined how these estimates vary across each of the seven cutos separately (Appendix Tables
7 and 8): the discontinuities in the the FPM allocation mechanism aect transfers, revenues and expenditure
across each cuto. In Appendix Table 24, we show that the link between FPM/transfers and spending do not
dier across broad geographic regions. In Appendix Table 9, we split total municipal spending into current
wage, current non-wage, and capital expenditure. All types of expenditure jump when municipalities cross
to higher FPM population intervals. In Appendix Table 10, we report estimates distinguishing between the
main expenditure categories. All types of expenditure increase/fall, as cities cross FPM cutos.

                                                    16
                   (a) Municipal Revenues                            (b) Municipal Expenditure


                          Figure 5: Municipal Revenues and Expenditure



in our application) should aect the outcomes only via determining the endogenous variable

(actual FPM transfers and associated municipal spending). While this assumption cannot

be directly tested, there are many pieces of supportive evidence.

      First, since our identication strategy explores within-municipality variation in trans-

fers and labor market outcomes, concerns related to selection or that cities may dier sys-

tematically across geographic, institutional or other features (which apply to cross-sectional
                                               27
approaches) are not particularly severe.            Furthermore, Gadenne (2017) shows that munici-

palities moving to an adjacent FPM population bracket are similar to those that do not cross

the cutos across many political economy features, such as the political alignment of the

mayor and councillors to the federal government, political competition, and mayoral terms.

      Second, to the best of our knowledge there is no other federal or state grant scheme
                                                                                  28
that follows a similar to FPM discontinuous allocation mechanism.                      One may worry that

municipal governments gaining extra FPM funds may decide not to spend them. Likewise,

municipalities that receive less FPM funds may obtain additional funding from the state or

other federal transfer programs. These issues are, however, unlikely in our setting: municipal-

ities run balanced budgets and their expenditure tightly adjusts to their revenues. In Table

5   we test whether FPM transfers correlate with state transfers, non-FPM federal transfers

    27 Brollo,
             Nannicini, Tabellini and Perotti (2013) provide cross-sectional evidence that municipalities just
above and just below FPM thresholds do not dier on many time-invariant characteristics.
   28 After 2004 local councillors pay increases abruptly (by 50%) for municipalities with more than 10, 000
inhabitants, a value close to the rst threshold of 10, 188. Ferraz and Finan (2011) show that the character-
istics of councillors dier at this cuto. We have thus veried that our ndings are not sensitive to excluding
observations centered on the initial cuto. See Appendix Table 14.


                                                      17
             (a) State Gov Transfer     (b) Federal Gov Transfers (non-FPM)     (c) Local Tax Revenues


                         Figure 6: Types of Municipal Revenues around the cutos



and local tax revenues close to the seven population cutos.                  Starting with the evolution

of state-level government transfers in Panel            A,   the local regression estimates are small and

statistically indistinguishable from zero. These patterns, which apply with OLS in levels and

log-levels and LAD, show that state transfers do not vary systematically at the population

cutos where FPM transfers change sharply. The picture is similar when we study the evo-

lution of non-FPM federal transfers and local tax revenues around the FPM discontinuities

in Panels      B   and   C.   The local regression estimates are small, change sign, and are all sta-

tistically indistinguishable from zero. Figures 6a-6c provide visualization of these patterns.
                                                                    29
There is no abrupt change at the FPM discontinuities.


3.2.4 Precise Systematic Manipulation
RD design strategies rely on the assumption that if individuals (municipalities) have imprecise

control over the running variable (population), this implies that variation in treatment status

(i.e., be above or below the FPM cutos) will be randomized in a neighborhood of the

threshold (Lee and Lemieux, 2010). If there is precise manipulation of population estimates

and this correlates with the labor market outcome, then the estimates will not identify the

causal eect of regional transfers. Although it is impossible to directly test such assumption,

we comment here for brevity and report in the appendix three sets of exercises.

    First, we examine whether the density of population and population changes are con-

  29 Local tax rates are not used as a stabilisation tool. Increasing local tax rates is politically costly for
mayors and local legislatures (Oliveira-Junior, 2014). A federal law has been proposed recently to establish
rules forcing municipalities to increase periodically their tax rates so to protect local mayors from public
pressure to keep taxes low (Projeto de Lei do Senado (PLS) 46/2016). Smaller municipalities lack technical
capacity to eciently enforce such taxation. A national eort led by the Brazilian Development Bank has
been introduced to help small municipalities modernize their tax system management (Gadenne, 2017).


                                                        18
tinuous at the cutos. While the Mc Grary density plots uncover some manipulation, it is

restricted only to years when population censuses were conducted.       So we re-run all spec-

ications excluding census years and nd almost identical results.      Moreover, we estimate

fuzzy-RD specications focusing solely on municipality-years with either no movement across

FPM intervals or falling into lower population intervals. Again the results are similar. We also

estimate restrictive specications that, on top of municipality xed-eects, add municipality-

term-specic mayoral constants so to account even more for unobservables. The results are

again similar.     Second, we perform a falsication test to check whether lagged `treatment'

variables (actual FPM, revenues and expenditure) vary abruptly at FPM cutos. We nd

that they do not, implying that municipalities narrowly above the FPM thresholds are not

more likely to have been above or below the threshold in the previous year. Third, we con-

duct a placebo test in which all cutos are moved by    750   inhabitants, and examine whether

the `treatment' variables jump at the `fake' discontinuities.    In line with our identication

strategy, there are no swings at the `fake' cutos.




4 Employment and Wages in the Public Sector
We start our analysis by examining the responses of employment and wages in the munic-

ipal public sector to locally exogenous (at the FPM cutos) swings in regional transfers.

This serves three purposes. First, it provides evidence on the composition of the municipal

government expenditure on public sector wages and employment. Second, linking swings of

federal transfers to municipalities with their spending patterns is interesting from a political

economy standpoint. Third, it provides a benchmark against which, in the next section, we

will evaluate the eects of regional transfers on private sector outcomes.



4.1 Baseline Eects
In Table   6,   we report RD specications that associate total municipal earnings, employment

and wages to law-implied transfers. Since the `rst-stage' link between actual and law-implied

FPM transfers is strong, with estimates statistically indistinguishable from one, we simply

report OLS estimates in logs.      IV (`fuzzy' RD) estimates are similar and thus we do not

report them for brevity. Columns (2)-(4) record local linear regression coecients that re-

strict estimation in the neighborhood of the seven discontinuities using progressively smaller




                                                19
             Figure 7: Total Earnings of Public Sector Employees around the cutos



bandwidths (4%,      3%   and   2%).   Columns (5)-(7) display otherwise identical specications

including linear polynomials on population distance from the discontinuity, allowing for dif-

ferent slopes above and below cutos and cuto-specic constants (rectangular kernel). For

comparability, in column (1) we report full sample estimates (i.e. both close and far from the

discontinuities).

   Let us start with the specications for total earnings of municipal public sector employees

in row (1).    The coecient implies that a one-percentage-point increase in FPM transfers

generate an extra    0.21%−0.26% increase in the total earnings of all municipal employees.           The
                                                           30
elasticity is stable across the various specications.          Figure 7 gives a graphical illustration

of the jump (fall) in the earnings of municipal (public-sector) employees when municipalities
                                           31
move to a higher (lower) FPM cuto.

   We decompose total municipal earnings into employment and average wage per worker

to examine whether local authorities recruit more people or whether they raise wages for

existing municipal employees in response to changes in federal transfers. Rows (2)-(3) report

the estimates.      Swings in regional transfers close to the FPM discontinuities aect both

municipal employment and the wage rate.

  30 These estimates are close to the ones in row (2) of Appendix Table 9, which reports the coecient of
law-implied FPM transfers on the total municipal wage bill. This is a non-trivial test as total earnings of
municipal employees and the total wage bill of municipalities come from completely dierent datasets (RAIS
- Ministry of Labor administrative dataset and FINBRA - Public Finance of Municipalities, respectively).
  31 The pattern is similar, though attenuated, using a model in rst-dierences (see Appendix Table 11).




                                                    20
                     (a) Employment - New Hires                        (b) Employment - Old Hires




                    (c) Wage per worker - New Hires                  (d) Wage per worker - Old Hires


             Figure 8: Public Sector Employment and Wage Rate (New vs Old Hires)



4.2 New-hires vs Old-hires
We further explore the relationship between regional transfers and municipal sector employ-

ment and wages, distinguishing between `new-hires' and `old-hires' recruited in current or

previous years. Panel           A   of Table   7   reports estimates focusing on `old-hires' whereas Panel

B   refers to `new-hires'. The elasticity of FPM transfers to total earnings is signicantly pos-

itive for both groups of municipal employees. The increase in total earnings of pre-existing

municipal employees, when cities jump to a higher FPM bracket, comes from higher average

wages.      The jump in total earnings of the newly-hired is reected on higher employment.

Local governments, on average, hire more people (at the same wage rate they hired workers

in the previous years) and increase the wage of pre-existing employees when faced with an
                                                                                     32
increase in federal transfers. Figures 8a-8d illustrate these patterns.

    32 Similar   results are obtained using an empirical model in rst-dierences (see Appendix Table 12).




                                                           21
5 Employment and Wages in the Private Sector
We rst present the baseline fuzzy-RD estimates of the eects of regional transfers on the

private sector.    Second, we calculate the cost of a new private sector job.       Third, using a

simple accounting method we map the employment estimates into a local income multiplier.

Fourth, we examine how the multiplier estimates change if local spending was self-nanced

(e.g. by local tax revenues) using a currency union model.



5.1 Baseline Eects
In Table   8   - Panel   A   we report `reduced-form' estimates (equation (3)) linking total labor

earnings, employment and average wage per employee with law-implied FPM transfers. Panel

B   records the corresponding fuzzy-RD estimates, which combine the reduced-form with the

corresponding rst-stage estimates associating actual with law-implied FPM transfers (Table

3-Panel B ,    row (2)).

    The elasticity between law-implied transfers and total private sector earnings is around

0.15   across the various specications. Since the rst-stage t is strong and the elasticity of

actual and law-implied FPM transfers is close to unity, the fuzzy-RD estimates are similar,

ranging from     0.1 − 0.19.   Conditional on unobserved time-invariant municipal factors, Brazil-

wide and state-specic trends as well as cuto-specic time trends, a twenty percent increase

in federal transfers (roughly the step in the FPM allocation function, equation (1)) is associ-

ated with a    3% − 4%       boost in private-sector labor income. This corresponds to roughly the

mean of earnings growth. Figure 9 gives a graphical illustration of this core result. There is

an evident jump (fall) in total labor earnings of private sector employees when municipalities

move to a higher (lower) FPM population interval.

    We then examine whether the impact of regional transfers on the local economy stems from

increased private sector hiring (employment) or via higher wages. The estimates in rows (2)

and (3) reveal that regional transfers aect mostly employment. The coecients of log law-

implied FPM on log private employment are always signicant at standard condence levels.

The FPM private employment elasticity ranges between           0.10 − 0.21.   Figure 10a illustrates

the higher level of private employment on the right side of the pooled FPM discontinuities.

In contrast, Figure 10b shows no evident change in average wages at the pooled FPM cutos.

In line with this illustration, the transfers-wages elasticities in row (3) are small (0.02 − 0.06)




                                                   22
                 Figure 9: Private Sector Total Labor Earnings around the cutos



and typically insignicant.




                          (a) Employment                              (b) Wage per Worker


       Figure 10: Total Earnings, Employment and Wage Rate in the Private Sector




5.2 Cost per job
In Table    9   - Panel   A   we map our ndings into estimates of the cost of a job in the private

sector (Table     8)   and in the public sector (Table     6).33   Estimating the cost of a job in the

private sector and local government allows us to compare our federal transfer estimates for

Brazil with studies that have exploited variation in other countries and settings.

   In Panel     A we report fuzzy-RD coecients (columns (1) and (3)) and the associated num-
ber of jobs created for an increase of      BRL 30, 000 (at constant 1998 prices) in FPM transfers
(columns (2) and (4)). This amount roughly corresponds to                1%   of average FPM transfers.

 33 These   are calculated using the elasticity formula and are based on the IV fuzzy-RD estimates.

                                                     23
An additional      BRL 30, 000   of municipal government spending is associated with around one

extra public-sector job and three extra private-sector jobs. Given that the elasticities of re-

gional transfers with respect to public and private sector employment are around                 0.15,   this

dierence reects the fact that - in terms of number of employees - the size of the private

sector is roughly three times the size of the public sector (see Table          2).
      Alternatively, our results can be framed in terms of the average cost of an extra job

per year.       The third row of Table     9   shows that for the local economy to increase by an

additional headcount, FPM transfers need to raise on average by an amount between                    6, 100
and    8, 700 BRL    at constant   1998   prices (or by about 8,000     U SD   at constant    2016   price).

The average cost per job implied by our RD estimates across a sample of relatively small

Brazilian municipalities is roughly one fourth of the corresponding calculation of about USD

30, 000   that Serrato and Wingender (2016) report across US counties (which are comparable
                                          34
in size to Brazilian municipalities).          This is consistent with the real wage and productivity

gaps between Brazil and the U.S. that can be found in national statistics (as for instance

reported by the World Bank Indicators database).



5.3 Local Income Multiplier
Several recent works on the local eects of scal policy present their results in terms of local

multipliers (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Acconcia             et al., 2014; Serrato and Wingender,

2016 and Shoag, 2013). Chodorow-Reich (2017) summarizes this body of research and pro-

poses a simple and intuitive way to convert local employment multipliers to income/output

multipliers. Assuming a neoclassical production function linking output (Yt ) to employment

(Et ), hours worked (Ht ) and productivity (A), without capital adjustment in the short-run

[Yt   = A(Ht Et )1−ξ ],   output and employment multipliers are linked by the following simple

expression:
                                                   Y
                                µY = (1 − ξ)(1 + χ) µE .                              (3)
                                                   E
where µY denotes the output/income multiplier and µE is the employment multiplier, namely

the inverse of the estimated cost of a job reported in Table           9.   The parameter    χ   represents

  34 Focusing on the impacts of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 which was
aimed to mitigate the economy from the collapse of economic activity, Chodorow-Reich et al (2012) estimate
a cost per job in the range of 16, 000 − 50, 000 USD, while Dube et al. (2012) estimate is close to 25, 000
USD and Feyrer and Sacerdote (2012) estimate is closer to 50, 000 (though with a wide range). Adelino et al.
(2012) estimate a cost per job of around 21, 000 USD and Shoag (2013) estimates a cost per job of around
35, 000 USD. USD. See Chodorow-Reich (2017) for an overview of these works.

                                                      24
the elasticity of hours per worker to total employment and                ξ   refers to the share of capital in

the production function.

      Following Chodorow-Reich (2017), we parameterize this expression using Brazilian data

to approximate the local income multiplier.               More specically, we set the capital share,                   ξ,
to    1/3   as standard in the literature and also in line with the evidence on Brazil (Bugarin,

Ellery-Jr and Gomes, 2004). Following Santos (2016) we set the elasticity of hours to total
                                                                 Y
employment,         χ, to 0.12.    Finally, income per worker,
                                                                 E
                                                                   , takes the value of      BRL 21, 152, which
the average reported in the 2010 Brazilian Census.

      In Table      9-Panel B     we report the local income multiplier. This ranges between                     1.9   and

2.6   across specications:          a   BRL 1, 000   increase in municipal spending funded by federal

transfers is associated with an increase in local output of around                  BRL 2, 200.       We also varied

the parameters in formula (3), allowing the share of capital,                 ξ,   to go from   0.3   to   0.4   and the

hours employment elasticity,             χ, from 0 (no adjustment of hours) to 0.5, which is the estimate
for the US. The local income multiplier is now centered around                     2,   ranging between       1.6 − 2.4
for our preferred specication in column (4). Our estimates are in line with the evidence from

other recent studies focusing on developed countries, which report local output multipliers

between       1.4   and   2.5   (see for instance Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014; Acconcia                   et al., 2014;

Serrato and Wingender, 2016; Shoag, 2013).



5.4 Insights from a Currency Union Model
We now examine how our empirical ndings compare with the predictions of a macroeconomic

model of government spending nanced by regional transfers in a currency union. We also

assess the extent to which the size of the estimated eects depend on the way expenses are

paid for, whether via transfers from the central government or via local tax revenues. This

is important because as Ramey (2016) notes the constants and time xed-eects "dierence

out the eects of the nancing" as the FPM program is funded by taxes at the federal level.

To this end, we employ the theoretical setup of Farhi and Werning (2016), which provides

closed-form solutions to local multipliers under alternative nancing rules. This theoretical

model, which builds on Gali and Monacelli (2008), Corsetti, Kuester and Muller (2013) and

Nakamura and Steinsson (2014), nests neoclassical and Keynesian eects of scal policy in a
                                                                     35
currency union under complete and incomplete markets.

 35 We      are grateful to Emmanuel Farhi and Ivan Werning for kindly sharing the codes for their model.


                                                         25
5.4.1 Model and Parameterization
In a nutshell, households with constant-elasticity-of-substitution (love for variety) preferences

over dierentiated goods derive utility from private consumption, government expenditure,

and leisure. Firms compete monopolistically and face a xed probability of resetting prices in

each quarter. Agents can only trade a risk-free bond and their consumption is tilted toward

locally produced goods.         The local government engages in public spending, which can be

nanced via taxes either at the local or at the currency union level. The nominal interest

rate is xed, consistent with our empirical specications where the time-eects absorb, among
                                                       36
other things, variation in monetary policy.

    In an eort to limit our degrees of freedom, we borrow most parameter values from Farhi
                         37
and Werning (2016).           For steady state values, we set the real interest rate to                       8%     and the

local government spending-output ratio in Brazil to                      10%,   which correspond to our sample

average. The persistence of municipal government spending is set to                         0.5,   consistent with the

estimates of an AR(2) process in our sample.                     The `home-bias' parameter (i.e., fraction of

non-locally produced consumption goods and services) is equal to                          0.4,   the fraction of hand-

to-mouth consumers amounts to               0.25,   and the fraction of rms resetting prices is                   0.25   per

quarter (consistent with the average duration of individual price spells for CPI goods and

services reported by Barros        et al., 2009). Since there exists uncertainty around the values of

these parameters and because Brazilian municipalities are likely to dier along many hard-to-

observed dimensions, in our quantitative analysis we vary the values of each of the following

parameters (keeping all other coecients xed at their baseline values): (i) the fraction of

the consumption basket that is not locally produced ranges between                               0.30   and   0.7;   (ii) the

fraction of "hand-to-mouth" consumers varies from                    0   to   0.25;   and (iii) the fraction of rms

resetting prices goes from      0.1   to   0.9.

5.4.2 Results
In Figure 11, we report the one-year cumulated response of local output to a government

spending shock as large as        1%   of steady state output. The top, middle and bottom panels

  36 For brevity we do not sketch fully their model. Details can be found in Farhi and Werning (2016), Gali
and Monacelli (2008), Corsetti, Kuester and Muller (2013), Nakamura and Steinsson (2014).
  37 In particular, the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution is set to 1, the elasticity of labor supply to 3,
the elasticity between local and foreign goods to 1, and the elasticity of varieties to 6. These values are also
in line with earlier works (e.g. Nakamura and Steinsson, 2014).


                                                            26
Figure 11: Externally-Financed vs Locally-Financed Multipliers




                             27
display the magnitude of the local multipliers as we alter respectively the parameter capturing

home bias in consumption, the share of hand-to-mouth consumers and the share of price

resetting rms. Each panel presents two lines: the blue-circled lines summarize the eects on

local output of municipal government spending nanced by regional transfers from currency

union-wide tax revenues (as in our estimates); the red lines plot the local output eects of
                                                                                       38
municipal spending if this was nanced instead by raising local taxes.                      Hence, the dierence

between blue and red lines can be interpreted as the contribution of the source of public

nance to the impact of scal policy on the local economy.

    Several interesting results emerge from Figure 11. First, the eect of government spend-

ing on local economic activity varies with key model parameters reecting features of the

Brazilian economy that are hard-to-observe at the municipal level.                       The impact of public

expenditure is stronger for relatively closed economies (top panel), when more agents face

liquidity constraints (middle panel) and when prices are less exible. Second, the externally-

nanced multiplier ranges between             1.2   and   2.8.   Under the baseline parameterization (i.e.,

when the shares of liquidity-constrained consumers and price resetting rms are around                         0.25
and municipalities' openness around            0.4),   the local multiplier is close to      2:   thus, the model

predictions confront well with the fuzzy-RD estimates in Table                   9,   which refer to the eects

on the local economy of externally-nanced (via the FPM program of regional transfers)
                                         39
municipal government spending.                Third, if local public expenditure was nanced instead

by local tax revenues, then the multiplier would have been signicantly lower, in the range

[0.8, 1.4].40   The model simulations reveal that locally-nanced multipliers are between                      20%
and   50%   smaller than externally-nanced multipliers. The gap is smaller for municipalities

more open to trade and less constrained in their access to nancial markets.

  38 The   red line may also be interpreted as the locus of national scal multipliers for a small open economy
operating in a liquidity trap (i.e., with a xed nominal interest rate) and under a xed exchange rate regime.
As emphasized by Farhi and Werning (2016), the national multiplier in a liquidity trap is likely to be larger
under a exible exchange rate regime as the initial devaluation associated with the scal expansion triggers
also an expenditure-switching eect.
   39 The intuition behind these large eects on local output come from the fact that government spending
is nanced externally and therefore Ricardian eects are modest. Furthermore, home-bias in consumption
implies that federal transfers yield Keynesian demand eects that are suciently large to dominate the
(negative) neoclassical wealth eect. Farhi and Werning (2016) show that the neoclassical channel becomes
relevant only when the terms-of-trade appreciate considerably.
   40 Interestingly, this range of values is consistent with the estimates of the national (and therefore internally-
nanced) multiplier surveyed by Ramey (2011a) and reported by Ramey and Zubairy (2017).




                                                          28
6 Sector Analysis
We now investigate the impact of regional transfers on private sector labor market outcomes

across dierent sectors of the Brazilian economy. Table           10   reports local RD estimates that

associate law-implied FPM transfers with total earnings, employment, and average wage per

employee in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services (see Table             2).
   The focus of Panel    A is on agriculture.   The coecients of log transfers on log total earnings

in row (1) are unstable, small, and statistically indistinguishable from zero. Similarly, there

is no association between regional transfers and employment or average wages in agriculture

(rows (2) and (3)).

   In Panel    B   we report estimates for manufacturing. The elasticities of total earnings in

manufacturing with law-implied FPM transfers in row (1) are all positive but statistically

insignicant. When we decompose manufacturing earnings to employment and average wages,

there is some evidence of a positive eect of transfers on manufacturing employment. The

estimates in row (2) are positive, implying potentially sizeable eects (elasticity range      0.09 −
0.27).   However, the estimates are rather inaccurate and statistically indistinguishable from

zero.    The elasticity of mean manufacturing wages to FPM transfers in row (3) is close to

zero, changes sign and never passes standard signicance levels. Overall, there seems to be

a weak positive link between regional transfers and employment in the manufacturing sector

while we detect virtually no eect on wages.

   In Panel    C   we present results for services. There appears to be a strong association be-

tween total earnings in services and federal transfers (row (1)).           The coecient is positive

and highly signicant across all bandwidths, both in the simple local regressions reported in

columns (2)-(4) and in the specications with linear polynomials in columns (5)-(7).              The

elasticity is tightly estimated, ranging from      0.15 − 0.20.   A twenty percent increase in FPM

transfers roughly the average jump when a municipality moves across FPM cutos is associ-

ated with a   3% − 4%    increase in total earnings for the service sector. This is to be compared

with an average/median growth in earnings of around               10%.   As the specications in rows

(2)-(3) show, this eect is driven by employment. As municipalities move to a higher FPM

population interval (and therefore local revenues and municipal spending rise accordingly)

private sector employment in services increases considerably. There is a local multiplier ef-

fect as an increase (decrease) in local public spending is strongly associated to a hike (fall)

in employment. In contrast, the impact of regional transfers on average wages in services is


                                                   29
              (a) Agriculture                 (b) Manufacturing                   (c) Services


               Figure 12: Employment in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services



small and statistically insignicant.
                                                                                                           41
   Figures 12 provide visual evidence of the sector-specic patterns in private employment.

Figure 12a shows that employment in agriculture does not change abruptly at the FPM cut-

os. Figure 12b shows some evidence of a jump in manufacturing employment for municipal-

ities moving to a higher FPM population interval. In line with the noisy estimates in Table

10-Panel B ,   the jump is visible but not sharp. Figure 12c exhibits a clear jump in municipal

employment for services.

   Overall, the results point out that the eect of FPM transfers on local private sec-

tor earnings and employment (Table           9)   is driven mostly by services, a result in line with

New-Keynesian models that predict strong demand-driven eects of scal transfers on non-

tradables (Farhi and Werning, 2016, 2017). There is little evidence of an impact on wages

and employment in agriculture and there is only a weak eect on manufacturing employment.




7 Further Evidence and Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, we explore some potentially interesting dimensions of heterogeneity and dis-

cuss some necessary robustness checks that corroborates the inference from our analysis.



7.1 Heterogeneity
There are considerable dierences on economic, institutional and nancial development be-

tween the South and the North of Brazil. Perhaps due to geographic dierences, isolation and

dierent colonial history, the southern states are more developed than northern states. We

 41 We   report the RD plots for sectoral total earnings and wage per employee in Appendix Figures A.13.



                                                     30
thus examine the link between local labor market outcomes and regional transfers separately

for municipalities in the southern and the northern states.             Table    11   records reduced-form

estimates. As the link between law-implied, actual FPM transfers and municipal expendi-

ture is similar in the two sub-samples (Appendix Table            24   - Panel   A),   heterogeneity in the

reduced-form reects dierential eects of local government spending on the local economy.

The elasticity of law-implied FPM transfers and total earnings in the private sector (Panel

A)   is positive and signicant for both southern and northern municipalities. The elasticity

in the southern municipalities is somewhat larger (0.16         − 0.24   compared to         0.01 − 0.16)   and

more precisely estimated. The same holds when we examine private employment (Panel                          B ).
The estimated coecient in our preferred specications at the               3% − 4%         bandwidth imply

that in southern cities a       20%    increase in federal transfers is associated with        3% − 3.6%    in-

crease in private employment. The elasticities of northern municipalities, however, are lower

and less signicant. This pattern is consistent with the evidence in Becker, Egger and von

Ehrlich. (2013), who show that the eects of regional transfers are larger in European regions

with above-average levels of human capital endowment and quality of government. Finally,

in Panel C, we show that there is virtually no link between regional transfers and the wage

rate in both samples. For a RD-graph visualization of these patterns see Appendix Figure

A.14a-A.14b.

     Our sample includes smaller and larger municipalities, with non-negligible dierences in

income per capita (Table         1).     We re-estimate the reduced-form specications allowing the
                                                                                       42
impact of federal transfers to dier for smaller and larger municipalities.                 Following Brollo,

Nannicini, Tabellini and Perotti (2013), we pool all municipalities around cutos                 1−3    (pop-

ulation range   6, 793   to   20, 377)   and municipalities in cutos   4 − 7 (20, 378 − 47, 537).      Table

12   reports the results. The estimates on total private sector earnings is signicantly higher

in smaller municipalities (Panel         A).   The employment specications (Panel          B ) yield a clearer
pattern: economically sizeable eect of transfers on private employment in smaller municipal-

ities and substantially weaker (and in most specications statistically indistinguishable from

zero) in larger ones. There is some weak evidence of a positive association between transfers

and average wage per employee in larger cities (Panel          C ).
  42 Therst-stage link between law-implied and actual FPM transfers (and municipal spending) is homoge-
neous across city size (Appendix Table 24 - Panel B ).




                                                      31
7.2 Robustness Checks
We perturbe the baseline empirical model across various dimensions to examine the robustness

of the estimates.        For brevity, we discuss and report these results in the Supplementary

Appendix and just summarize them below.

    First, we estimate rst-dierences specications. Changes in law-implied FPM transfers

are signicantly correlated with increases in municipal employment new-hires and average

wages of old-hires.        Changes in regional transfers close to the FPM cutos boost private

employment, especially in services.

    Second, we drop observations around the rst cuto (10, 188) as it is close to the disconti-

nuity in the pay of local politicians (10, 000) after         2004   (Ferraz and Finan, 2011). This does

not aect any of our results (Appendix Table           14).
    Third, we drop census years (2001,         2008   and   2011)    as there is evidence of manipulation
                                                                                                       43
of population in those years. Even though manipulation does not invalidate the RDD                            , the

estimates are similar to the baseline results, though a bit noisier (Appendix Table                 15)   .

    Fourth, we drop observations of municipalities `moving up' to a higher FPM population

bracket and explored the link between transfers and earnings/employment in municipalities

that either stay in the same bracket or `move down'.                 By doing so, we minimize concerns

that manipulation (to get transfers) is related to the outcomes.                 Both public and private

sector employment respond to the fall in regional transfers (Appendix Table                16).   The private

employment eect comes mainly from the service sector (Appendix Table                    21).
    Fifth, to control for mayor's ability, we replaced municipal with mayor-specic xed-
           44
eects.         Although the estimates are less accurate, the coecients are quite similar, revealing

a boost of private employment in response to increased FPM transfers (Appendix Table                          17),
mostly driven by services (Appendix Table           22).
    Sixth, we estimate RD specications with higher-order polynomials in population. The

reduced-form and IV elasticity between total earnings in the private sector (and especially

private employment) and FPM transfers are highly signicant and, if anything, are larger

than the local regression estimates (Appendix Table             18).
  43 Lee and Lemieux (2014) write: "If individuals - even while having some inuence - are unable to precisely
manipulate the assignment variable, a consequence of this is that the variation in treatment near the threshold
is randomized as though from a randomized experiment."
   44 Gadenne (2017) shows that mayor's characteristics, political orientation and connectedness to the federal
government are similar at the two sides of the FPM cutos. So in practice this is not a major concern.


                                                      32
    Seventh, we examine whether there are regional spillovers, augmenting the baseline speci-

cation with outcome aggregated at the regional (meso-region) level. There is little evidence

of spillover eects (Appendix Table      19).45
    Eighth, we investigate whether the increase in federal transfers has delayed eects. While

there is some inertia, the bulk of transfers' impact on public and private sector employment

occurs within the year (Appendix Table        20).


8 Conclusions
We study the labor market eects of regional transfers in a large currency union, Brazil,

applying a `fuzzy-RD' design that exploits for identication the highly non-linear alloca-

tion mechanism of funds from the federal government to municipalities.              Federal transfers,

municipal public revenues and spending change abruptly at various pre-determined popula-

tion cutos, according to yearly population estimates provided by the independent federal

statistical agency and court of auditors.

    The fuzzy-RD estimates appear clear-cut. As municipalities cross the pre-assigned pop-

ulation cutos shaping federal transfers, there is a signicant boost in private sector income

and employment. For every      30, 000   USD increase in municipal government receipts from the

federal government, the local economy witnesses an extra job in the public sector and three

extra jobs in the private sector. Existing workers in the public sector also experience a pay

rise.    As for the private sector, the eect on wages is mild and insignicant.         The sizeable

impact of federal transfers on private employment stems from the service sector and, to a

lesser extent, in manufacturing. We also nd that the stimulative eects of local government

spending funded by regional transfers from the federal government are somewhat stronger in

the southern states and in relatively smaller municipalities.

    To oer insights on the transmission of scal policy and the role of regional transfers in a

currency-union, we employ a New-Keynesian open-economy model with incomplete markets,

nancial frictions and nominal rigidities. We show that the model can replicate our estimates

of the local eects of scal policy on economic activity. We also use the model to predict

the impact of municipal spending if this was nanced by local taxes rather than external

  45 A meso-region is a subdivision of states dened by the IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics) which congregates a few municipalities in a given geographical area with economic and social
similarities. They do not constitute any sort of political or economic entities.


                                                     33
transfers.   In this case, local multipliers are considerably smaller, suggesting that regional

transfers could be a useful stabilization tool in a currency union.




                                               34
References
[1] Acconcia, Antonio, Giancarlo Corsetti and Saverio Simonelli. (2014). Maa and Pub-

   lic Spending: Evidence on the Fiscal Multiplier from a Quasi-experiment,     American

   Economic Review, 104(7), pp. 2185-2209.


[2] Amorim, Bruno M. F., Andre L. Souza, Luciana M. S. Servo, Paulo Furtado, Eduardo

   Pontual Ribeiro (2006) Base de Dados:        Apresentação e Opções Metodologicas, in

   Criação, Destruição e Realocação de Empregos no Brasil, Carlos Henrique Corseuil and

   Luciana M.S. Servo, IPEA, BrasÃlia.


[3] Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy. (1999). Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Eect

   of Class Size on Scholastic Achievement,   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (2), pp.

   533-575.


[4] Barros, Rebecca, Bonomo, Marco, Carvalho, Carlos and Matos, Silvia. (2009). Price Set-

   ting in a Variable Macroeconomic Environment: Evidence from Brazilian CPI, mimeo.


[5] Becker, Sasha, Peter Egger and Maximilian von Ehrlich. (2013). Absorptive Capacity

   and the Growth and Investment Eects of Regional Transfers: A Regression Discon-

   tinuity Design with Heterogeneous Treatment Eects,      American Economic Journal:

   Economic Policy 5 (4), pp. 2977.


[6] Becker, Sasha, Peter Egger and Maximilian von Ehrlich. (2010). Going NUTS: The

   eect of EU Structural Funds on Regional Performance,     Journal of Public Economics

   94 (2), pp. 578590.


[7] Brito, Fausto and Jose Alberto Carvalho. (2006). As migracoes internas no Brasil: as

   novidades sugeridas pelos censos demogracos de 1991 e 2000 e pela PNADS recentes.

   Anais do XV Encontro Nacional de Estudos Populacionais, ABEP, Caxambu, MG.


[8] Brollo, Fernanda; Tommaso Nannicini; Roberto Perotti, and Guido Tabellini. (2013).

   The Political Resource Curse,   American Economic Review, 103 (5), pp. 1759-96.


[9] Brueckner, Markus. and Anita Tuladhar. (2013). Local Government Spending Multi-

   pliers and Financial Distress: Evidence from Japanese Prefectures,   Economic Journal,

   Volume 124, Issue 581, pp. 1279-1316.


                                            35
[10] Clemens, Jerey and Stephen Miran. (2012). Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational

    Government Spending. American        Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(2): 46-68.


[11] Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel; Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui Woolston.

    (2012). Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment?               Evidence

    from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act,         American Economic Journal: Eco-

    nomic Policy, 4 (1), pp. 118-145.


[12] Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel. (2017). Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Multipliers: What

    Have We Learned? Harvard      University mimeo.


[13] Corbi, Raphael, Elias Papaioannou, and Paolo Surico. (2014) Federal Transfer Multi-

    pliers: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Brazil,       NBER working paper, 20751.


[14] Corsetti, Giancarlo, Keith Kuester and Gernot Muller. (2013). Floats, Pegs and the

    Transmission of Fiscal policy. In   Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Performance, ed. C

    espedes Luis Felipe and Jordi Gali , Central Bank of Chile series on Central Banking,

    Analysis and Economic Policy, Volume 17.


[15] De Negri, João Alberto, Paulo Furtado de Castro, Natalia Ribeiro de Souza, and Jorge

    Saba Arbache, Mercado Formal de Trabalho: Comparação entre os Microdados da RAIS

    e da PNAD,      IPEA Texto Para Discussão, 2001, (840).


[16] Dix-Carneiro,    Rafael,   (2014)   Trade    Liberalization   and   Labor   Market   Dynam-

    ics, Econometrica, 82 (3).


[17] Dix-Carneiro, Rafael and Kovak, Brian, (2015) Trade Liberalization and Regional Dy-

    namics NBER working paper


[18] Eggers, Andrew, Ronny Freier, Veronica Grembi, and Tommaso Nannicini (2017) Re-

    gression Discontinuity Designs Based on Population Thresholds: Pitfalls and Solutions.

    The American Journal of Political Science, forthcoming.


[19] Ellery-Jr, Roberto, Bugarin, Mirta N.S. and Gomes, Vitor (2005) Long-run Implications

    of the Brazilian Capital Stock and Income Estimates,      Brazilian Review of Econometrics

    v.25, no.1, pp. 67-88 May 2005




                                                  36
[20] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. (2016). Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and

    Currency Unions,   Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2, Pages 2417-2492.


[21] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. (2017). Fiscal Unions, mimeo, Harvard University

    and M.I.T.


[22] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. (2008). Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Ef-

    fect of Brazil's Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes,    Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 123 (2), pp. 703- 745.


[23] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. (2011a). Motivating Politicians: The impacts of

    Monetary Incentives on Quality and Performance, mimeo, PUC-Rio and Berkeley.


[24] Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. (2011b). Electoral Accountability and Corruption

    in Local Governments:      Evidence from Audit Reports,    American Economic Review,

    101 (6), pp. 1274-1311.


[25] Feyrer, James and Bruce Sacerdote. (2012). Did the Stimulus Stimulate? The Eects

    of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, mimeo, Dartmouth College.


[26] Filho, Joaquim and Mark Horridge. (2010). Climate Change Impacts on Agriculture

    and Internal Migrations in Brazil, mimeo, ESALQ/USP and Monash University.


[27] Fishback, Price and Joseph Cullen. (2013). Second World War spending and local eco-

    nomic activity in US counties: 193958,    Economic History Review 66(4), pp. 975992.


[28] Fishback, Price and Valentina Kachanovskaya,.(2010). In Search of the Multiplier for

    Federal Spending in the States During the Great Depression, NBER WP 16561.


[29] Fuchs-Schuendeln, N. and Hassan, T.A. (2016). Natural Experiments in Macroeco-

    nomics in   Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume 2, Pages 923-1012


[30] Gadenne, Lucie. (2017). Tax Me, But Spend Wisely: Sources of Public Finance and

    Government Accountability      American Economic Journal, Vol. 9, pp. 274-314


[31] Gali, Jordi, and Tomasso Monacelli. (2008). "Optimal and Monetary and Fiscal Policy

    in a Currency Union,"     Journal of International Economics, 76 (1), pp. 116-132.



                                               37
[32] Gelman, Andrew and Guido Imbens (2014). "Why High-order Polynomials Should not

    be Used in Regression Discontinuity Designs", NBER WP 20405.


[33] Hahn, Jinyong; Petra Todd, P. and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. (2001). Identication and

    Estimation of Treatment Eects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,      Econometrica,

    69 (1), pp. 201-209.

[34] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Steven J. Redding,

    (2017) Trade and Inequality: From Theory to Estimation, Review       of Economic Studies,

    2017, 84(1): 357-405


[35] IBGE. (1990). Divisao Regional Do Brasil em Mesorregioes and Microrregioes Geogra-

    cas,   Volume 1.

[36] Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux. (2008). Regression Discontinuity Designs: A

    Guide to Practice,    Journal of Econometrics 142 (3), pp. 615-635.

[37] Kenen, Peter, (1969). The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View, in

    R.A. Mundell and A.K. Swoboda, eds.,       Monetary Problems of the International Econ-

    omy, Chicago University Press.

[38] Kraay, Aart. (2012). How Large is the Government Spending Multiplier?         Quarterly

    Journal of Economics, 127 (2): pp. 829-887.

[39] Kraay, Aart. (2014). Government Spending Multipliers in Developing Countries: Ev-

    idence from Lending by Ocial Creditors,       American Economic Journal: Macroeco-

    nomics, 6 (4), pp. 170-208.

[40] Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. (2010). Regression Discontinuities Designs in

    Economics,    Journal of Economic Literature, 48 (2), pp. 281355.

[41] Lee, David S., and Thomas Lemieux. (2014). Regression Discontinuities Designs in the

    Social Sciences, in   Economics Regression Analysis and Causal Inference, Henning Best

    and Christof Wolf, Sage, 2014.


[42] Litschig,   Stephan. (2012). Are Rules-based Government Programs Shielded from

    Special-interest Politics?   Evidence from Revenue-sharing Transfers in Brazil,    Journal

    of Public Economics, 96 (1112), pp. 1047-1060.


                                              38
[43] Litschig, Stephan and Kevin M. Morrison. (2013). The Impact of Intergovernmental

    Transfers on Education Outcomes and Poverty Reduction,     American Economic Journal:

    Applied Economics, 5 (4): pp. 206-40.


[44] Gori-Maia, Alexandrei, and Menezes, Esther. (2014). Economic growth, labor and pro-

    ductivity in Brazil and the United States: a comparative analysis. Revista   de Economia

    Politica, 34(2), 212-229


[45] McCrary, Justin. 2008. Manipulation of the running variable in the regression disconti-

    nuity design: A density test. Journal   of Econometrics 142(2):698-714.


[46] Menezes-Filho, Naercio and Marc-Andreas Muendler, (2011). Labor Reallocation in

    Response to Trade Reform, NBER WP, (17372)


[47] Monasterio, Leonardo (2013). O FPM e a Estranha Distribuicao da Populacao dos Pe-

    quenos Municipios Brasileiros, Discussion Papers 1818, Instituto de Pesquisa Economica

    Aplicada - IPEA.


[48] Mundell, Robert (1961). A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,       American Economic

    Review, 51 (4), pp.657?665.


[49] Mundell, Robert (1973). The Economics of Common Currencies, in H.G. Johnson and

    A.K. Swoboda, eds.,   Uncommon Arguments for Common Currencies, Allen and Unwin.


[50] Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. (2014). Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evi-

    dence from U.S. Regions,   American Economic Review, 104 (3), pp. 753-792.


[51] Oliveira-Junior, Luiz Antonio de (2014) Potencial de arrecadacao do IPTU: analise

    nacional e do municipio de Santo Andre Fundacao     Getulio Vargas, mimeo.


[52] Pettersson-Lidbom, Per. (2012). Does the Size of the Legislature Aect the Size of

    Government: Evidence from Two Natural Experiments,         Journal of Public Economics,

    96 (1), pp 269278.


[53] Porcelli, Francesco and Riccardo Trezzi. (2014). Reconstruction Multipliers, Finance

    and Economics Discussion Paper 2014-79. Divisions of Research & Statistics and Mon-

    etary Aairs Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C



                                               39
[54] Ramey, Valerie. (2011a). Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?,      Journal

    of Economic Literature, 49 (2), pp. 67385.


[55] Ramey, Valerie. (2011b). Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's All in the Tim-

    ing,   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (1), pp. 1-50.


[56] Ramey, (2016). Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation,in the           Handbook of

    Macroeconomics, eds. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2016.

    Vol. 2, 71-162.


[57] Ramey, Valerie and Zubairy, Sarah (2017). Government Spending Multipliers in Good

    Times and in Bad: Evidence from U.S. Historical Data, forthcoming in the       Journal of

    Political Economy


[58] Saboia, João L. M. and Ricardo M. L. Tolipan, A relação anual de informações sociais

    (RAIS) e o mercado formal de trabalho no Brasil: uma nota, Pesquisa       e Planejamento

    Economico, 1985, 15 (2), 447-456.


[59] Santos, Fernando Siqueira (2015) Okun Law And Labor Productivity In Brazil, Pro-

    ceedings of the 43rd   Brazilian Economics Meeting ], number 232


[60] Serrato, Juan Carlos Suarez, and Philippe Wingender. (2014). Estimating Local Fiscal

    Multipliers, mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.


[61] Shoag, Daniel. (2013). The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the

    Multiplier from State Pension Plan Returns, mimeo, Harvard University.


[62] Van der Klaauw, Wilbert. (2002). Estimating the Eect of Financial Aid Oers on Col-

    lege Enrollment: A Regression-Discontinuity Approach,       International Economic Review

    43, pp. 1249-1287.


[63] Van der Klaauw, Wilbert. (2008). Regression-Discontinuity Analysis: A Survey of Re-

    cent Developments in Economics,     Review of Labor Economics and Industrial Relations,

    22 (2), pp. 219245.




                                              40
A Supplementary Appendix
The Appendix is split into six parts.                 In Section       1,   we report summary statistics and de-

scriptive evidence. In Section             2,   we discuss two pair of municipalities as illustration of the

mechanics of the FPM allocation mechanism.                        Additional tests of the identication strat-

egy are recorded in Section           3.    In Section     4,   we describe in detail the construction of the

law-implied FPM Transfer measure. In Section                      5,   we report tests regarding systematic ma-

nipulation while the last Section presents and discusses various sensitivity checks.



A.1 Summary Statistics
In Appendix Table       1,   we report some key characteristics of Brazilian states. The table gives

the xed state shares (percentages) of the FPM program (based on population and income

per capita in    1991),   the number of municipalities per state in our sample and the average

municipal population.

     In Appendix Table        2,    we provide descriptives on the distribution of Brazilian munici-

palities around each FPM population cuto. Summary statistics for the sample that covers

municipalities with a population between                6, 793 and 47, 537 inhabitants are recorded in Panel
A.   In Panel   B,   we report the summary statistics for the restricted sample in the neighbor-

hood of   4%    -inhabitants bandwidth around each of the seven FPM discontinuities. This is

the sample we use in the RDD estimates.

     In Appendix Table        3,   we summarize sample characteristics in the neighborhood of the

discontinuities using a       4%-inhabitants          bandwidth (the Table "mirrors" Table              1).   Panel    A
reports the number of municipalities that move to lower and higher FPM brackets (`treatment'

group) and the number of municipalities that do not change population bracket (`control'

group).   Approximately        31% (705           out of   2, 305)     of the municipalities in the local sample

consists of cities whose population uctuates around the cutos without crossing any FPM

threshold.   Nearly    49%     of the sample (1, 140 cities) move (only) to a higher FPM bracket

during the period     2000 − 2014; and about 6% of municipalities move to a lower FPM bracket.
The remaining     14% (327         municipalities) move to a higher FPM interval in some year(s) but

to a lower FPM interval in some other year(s). In Appendix Table                          3   - Panel   B   and   C,   we

report the number of municipalities that remain in the same population bracket or move

across brackets by year and by cuto, respectively, focusing again on the `local' sample.




                                                             41
     Summary statistics of the main variables in the local sample that we use in our RD spec-

ications are in Appendix Table               4.   No discernible pattern emerges relative to the descriptive

statistics in the full sample (both close and far from the FPM population cutos) in Table                            2.

A.2 Examples of the FPM Allocation Mechanism
To illustrate the discontinuous nature of the FPM allocation mechanism, we discuss two sets

of examples where FPM transfers change from one year to the next, as municipalities cross

the pre-determined population cutos depicted in Figure                           1.   Dierences in FPM transfers

for a given municipality over two consecutive years are driven by two (possibly opposing)

forces: (i) the move, if any, to a higher or lower population FPM interval, (ii) the growth of

the national economy which, when positive (as in the case of Brazil over our sample period),

translates into higher scal revenues at the federal level and thus a larger total pot of money

available for the FPM program (which is independent of municipal population estimates).

     Consider two pairs of municipalities in the state of                    Minas Gerais 46 over the years        2010
and   2011       displayed in Figure A.1.            The rst pair consists of Bela Vista and Centralina.

These municipalities experienced a slight drop in population over that period. On the one

hand, Bela Vista population went from                   10, 333   to   10, 004   inhabitants. The small decline was

nevertheless sucient to cross the FPM population cuto of                          10, 188 residents and to have its
FPM coecient          λ reduced from 0.8 to 0.6.           Accordingly, FPM transfers fell from          R$2, 328, 037
in   2010   to   R$2, 014, 811    in   2011.     The drop was smaller than 20% (which is the drop in the

FPM coecient) because during 2010-2011 the total FPM pot of funds increased considerably

as Brazil growth was close to              4%.     On the other hand, the population of Centralina fell from

10, 557     to   10, 266   inhabitants, but the municipality remained in the same population bracket

over the same period.           Although its FPM coecient was unchanged (λ                       = 0.8),    Centralina

witnessed an increase in federal transfers from                   R$2, 328, 037     to   R$2, 686, 415   due to a larger

pot of FPM funds at the national level. Note also that the two cities received the exact same

amount from the FPM program in                     2011,   exactly as the law dictates.

     The second pair of cities in              Minas Gerais, Caetanopolis and Pedralva, experienced a

slight increase in population. On the one hand, the population of Pedralva went up by                               116
inhabitants, from          11, 351   to   11, 467.   This population change was not large enough to move

  46 Minas Gerais is the largest state in number of municipalities (853) and the second largest in population
(20 million inhabitants). It neighbors 6 dierent states, including Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro.


                                                              42
                     Figure A.1: Example of the FPM allocation mechanism



the city to a higher population bracket. As such, the increase in FPM transfers was moderate

- from   R$2, 328, 037   to   R$2, 686, 415,      simply reecting the overall raise in the total pot of

funds at the national level. On the other hand, Caetanopolis population increased only by

178   inhabitants from   10, 040     to   10, 218,   which was enough to move Caetonopolis to a higher

FPM population bracket (λ increased from               0.8 to 1.0).   Accordingly, FPM transfers increased

considerably from    R$1, 746, 027        to   R$2, 686, 415,   reecting both the higher FPM coecient

and the increase in the total proceeds of the FPM program at the federal level.

   As discussed in Section       3,   a necessary condition for identication is that not only federal

transfers but also municipal expenditure change abruptly at the FPM cutos.                    Figure A.2

mirrors Figure A.1 but with expenditure instead of transfers. On the one hand, municipal

spending from    2010    to   2011    increases in both Bela Vista and Centralina as the Brazilian

economy was growing and the FPM program expanded. Centralina increased spending rela-

tively less than Bela Vista, as it received less from the FPM program. Similarly, municipal

spending raised in both Caetanopolis and Pedralva over that period. But the public spend-

ing hike in Caetanopolis was sharper as this municipality beneted also from an increase in

federal transfers.




                                                         43
                 Figure A.2: Expenditure and FPM allocation mechanism



A.3 Identifying Assumptions
In this section we provide further evidence on the validity of the identifying assumptions

behind the fuzzy-RD empirical design.


A.3.1 Federal Transfers
In Appendix Table   5, we report estimates associating actual and law-implied FPM transfers in
log-dierences (columns (1)-(3)), OLS-dierences (columns (4)-(6)) and least-absolute devia-

tion (LAD)-dierences (columns (7)-(9)). While taking rst-dierences comes at an eciency

loss, these models further account for outliers and unobserved characteristics.    Changes in

actual transfers closely match changes in law-implied transfers. OLS and LAD estimates are

very close to unity; and log-dierences are only slightly attenuated (0.94). In these specica-

tions, we do not include any RD polynomial and we just progressively narrow the bandwidth.

The results are similar if we add RD polynomials in both years or simply control for changes

in population.

   In Appendix Table    6,   we examine the relationship between actual and law-implied trans-

fers by cuto. The rst two rows report coecients pooling thresholds 1-3 and 4-7 (as Brollo,

Nannicini, Perotti, and Tabellini, 2013). The following seven rows reports estimates for each

cuto separately. All estimates are close to unity, suggesting that the FPM allocation mech-




                                               44
                            Figure A.3: FPM Transfer around each threshold



anism is on average enforced. Appendix Figure A.3 provides visual evidence of the jumps of

federal transfers at FPM cutos.


A.3.2 Municipal Revenues
In Appendix Table          7,   we examine the relationship between municipal revenues and law-

implied transfers by cuto.          The rst two rows report coecients from specications that

pool thresholds        1−3   and   4 − 7.   Appendix Figure A.4 provides visual illustrations of these

patterns. Rows (3)-(9) give cuto-specic estimates. For brevity, we just report logarithmic

specications. All variables are in logs, so the coecients should be close to the share of FPM

transfers over revenues and expenditure for the relevant sample (reported on the right in each

table). The estimates on law-implied FPM transfers are positive and highly signicant. The

estimates are close to the corresponding shares across all cutos, though the estimates for

cutos   6   and   7   are somewhat noisy, as the number of observations around these thresholds

is small (see Appendix Table         2).




                                                       45
              (a) Threshold 1-3                              (b) Threshold 4-7


             Figure A.4: Municipal Expenditure around thresholds 1-3 and 4-7



A.3.3 Municipal Expenditure
In Appendix Table   8, log municipal spending is associated with log law-implied FPM transfers
by cuto. In the rst two rows, we pool thresholds    1−3 and 4−7, while the other rows report
cuto-specic estimates. The elasticities are positive and highly signicant. The estimates

loose signicance only in the narrow bandwidth (2%) of large cities (cutos 6-7), which are

only a few in our sample. Overall the cuto-specic estimates show that as municipalities

move to higher (lower) population FPM intervals, local government expenditure increases

considerably across both small and large cities.

   In Appendix Table      9,   we examine the pervasiveness of municipal spending, as munici-

palities move across FPM cutos.       The table reports estimates of how law-implied transfers

aect current expenditure (net of wages), wage bill, and capital expenditure. All main types

of municipal expenditure move as cities cross the FPM population cutos shaping regional

transfers from the federal government. Figure A.5 provides visual illustrations of this pattern.

   Similarly, the focus of Appendix Table     10   is on the main categories of municipal spend-

ing, namely public administration, education, health, housing & urbanism, and others. All

coecients are positive and highly signicant, suggesting that the increase in municipal ex-

penditure triggered by a "locally" (close to the FPM cutos) exogenous increase in transfers

is spread across all budget categories




                                                46
               (a) Current (wage)                (b) Current (non-wage)                  (c) Capital


                    Figure A.5: Types of Municipal Expenditure around the cutos



A.4 Mis-assignment and Law-Implied FPM Transfers
Actual FPM Transfers do not always exactly correspond to what they should be based of

the FPM allocation rule. This explains why the association between actual and law-implied

FPM transfers simply based on the allocation formula does not yield a perfect in-sample t

(Table   3).    Yet, mis-assignment is not systematic as the estimated coecients linking actual

and law-implied FPM transfers is one and tightly estimated (Tables                 3−4, Appendix Table 6).
There are many reasons behind the imperfect enforcement of the FPM allocation mechanism.

     In the 1990s some municipalities split into two, but temporarily managed to keep their

former FPM coecient through court disputes. In an eort to correct for such distortions,

the federal government (through a Complementary Law LC 91/97) mandated that all munic-

ipalities should be framed in the correct population brackets with their relevant coecients

by   2008.     To prevent immediate disruption to the public nances of the municipalities in-

volved, the law established a transition period to the new regime, so that in the period

1999 − 2007       some municipalities still received FPM transfers which were not consistent with

their population estimate.

     Law LC 91/97 determined that FPM transfers for these municipalities should be cal-

culated using a modied FPM coecient (λ̃t ), which equals a weighted average of their

coecient in       1997 (λ97 )      and their "correct" coecient in year    t (λt ).   The weight     αt   given to

the "correct" FPM coecient (λt ) would start at                α99 = 0.2 and increase by 0.1 per year until
                                                                                                                  47
2008  when the correction would be complete. Such correction aects 1, 503 municipalities.
                                              k
     Hence the law-implied FPM Transfer F
                                        \ P M i,t for municipality i in state k and year t is
calculated by:

 47 We   have re-estimated all specications dropping these muicipalities altogether nding similar results.


                                                          47
                                                       i
                                 k             λ̃
                          F
                          \ P M i,t = F P Mtk P t                                                          (4)
                                                     ik   λ̃it

                         where   λ̃it = αt λit + (1 − αt )λi97
                                         (
                                             0.2 + (t − 1999) ∗ 0.1        if   t < 2008
                           and   αt =
                                             1                             if   t ≥ 2008

A.5 Systematic Manipulation
We provide here three set of results to support the identication assumption, which require

that the local variation in the assignment to treatment is as-good-as random in the neigh-

borhood of the cutos (Lee and Lemieux, 2010).


A.5.1 Population Density Test
We begin by testing whether the density of population estimates is continuous at the cutos.

Figure A.6a presents the McCrary (2008) density test for all years in our sample (1999                      −
2014).      Figures A.6b and A.6c split the sample into (a) census years (2001,                   2008, 2011)
and (b) non-census years while Figure A.7 reports visualizations for each year.                       A clear

pattern emerges:        manipulative sorting behavior seems to be present in census years but

there is no such evidence in non-Census years.                    It would seem that municipal authorities

seek to attract new residents (or simply changing the numbers) just in time for the ocial

counting (Monasterio, 2013). In contrast, little manipulation seems to happen during non-

census years. This is consistent with the fact that population estimates in these years are

calculated by IBGE (an independent federal institute) using a publicly known methodology

that incorporates data from past censuses, administrative records from migration, births and

deaths. [Below we show that the results are unaected by using data only from non-census

years].

   Motivated by the use of within-municipality variation for identication (see Gadenne,

2017), we consider whether the probability of crossing a FPM cuto is dierent from the

probability of crossing any other population cuto by plotting changes in population between

years   t   and   t−1   as a function of distance to the cuto at time              t − 1.   This is akin to a

manipulation test on population changes instead of levels. Figure A.8 provides supporting


                                                     48
(a) All years                    (b) Census years           (c) Non-census years


Figure A.6: McCrary Density Test - Census and non-Census years




                Figure A.7: McCrary Density test for each year




                                       49
              Figure A.8: Population change as a function of population in t-1



visual evidence.   Changes in population are quite similar at the two sides of the pooled

FPM cutos.    Municipalities that eventually cross FPM cutos and receive a higher FPM

coecient do not experience on average higher population growth than municipalities that

do not cross the population cutos. This test further supports our identication design that

exploits within-municipality variation on FPM, expenditure, and local economy outcomes.


A.5.2 Falsication Tests
To further evaluate the validity of our analysis, we performed complementary tests following

the suggestions in Eggers, Freier, Grembi and Nannicini (2016). First, we undertake a falsi-

cation test in which lagged `treatment' variables are viewed as outcomes in an RDD analysis.

Figure A.9a replicates our identication hypothesis, namely that current FPM transfers re-

spond strongly to the allocation mechanism discontinuity as dened by FPM law.            Figure

A.9b mirrors that but with lagged FPM. Consistent with the view that that municipalities

narrowly above the threshold are not more likely to have been above the threshold in the

previous year, lagged FPM does not vary abruptly at the cuto. Figure A.10 and A.11 repeat

the exercise for lagged municipal revenues and expenditure. The patterns are similar: there

is no jump of revenues and expenditure at the FPM thresholds when one uses lagged values.


A.5.3 Placebo Tests
We also conducted placebo tests in which all cutos are articially and counterfactually

moved to the right (and left) of the population distribution by   750   inhabitants (and also   500


                                             50
          (a) Current FPM                         (b) Lagged FPM


    Figure A.9: Current and Lagged FPM Transfers around thresholds




        (a) Current Revenues                    (b) Lagged Revenues


 Figure A.10: Current and Lagged Municipal Revenues around thresholds




       (a) Current Expenditure                 (b) Lagged Expenditure


Figure A.11: Current and Lagged Municipal Expenditure around thresholds




                                  51
                                  Figure A.12: Standard Placebo Test



and   1000).   This is shown in Figure A.12 where we articially move the FPM cutos to the

right by    750   inhabitants. FPM Transfers do not jump at the `fake' discontinuities.



A.6 Sensitivity Analysis
In this section we report results and discuss various perturbations and checks that assess the

robustness of our estimates.



      Public Sector Labor Market.                First, we estimate rst-dierence specications to fur-

ther account for unobserved characteristics. In Appendix Table             11,   we report estimates that

link local public sector labor market outcomes with law-implied FPM transfers. Columns (1)-

(3) report log-dierence specications; columns (4)-(6) refer to OLS dierence specications,

while columns (7)-(9) report LAD-dierences models.               Point estimates from log-dierences

specications are around      0.1   and   0.07   for earnings and employment, respectively. These are

somewhat smaller than the baseline specication estimates (in log levels reported in Table

6).   OLS dierence specications yield positive but imprecise estimates. Yet, when we run

"median" regressions to account for extreme values the estimates become signicant.

      In Appendix Table     12,   we report similar estimates separating the eect for `old-hires',

i.e. those who have been hired over one year earlier, and `new-hires'. A similar pattern to

Table   7   albeit more noisy emerges. Estimates from log-dierences specication corroborate

the view that earnings for both old and new-hires are positively aected by transfers. Most

of the aggregate eect seems to come from an increase in average wage of the old-hires and




                                                       52
an increase in the number of new-hires.



       Private Sector Labor Market.                    In Appendix Table    13,   we record rst-dierences

specications for private sector earnings, employment, and average wages. The results are

clear-cut and much in line with the baseline estimates (Table               8).   Locally exogenous changes

in federal transfers signicantly aect local private sector earnings and employment. Point

estimates from log-dierences specications are around                 0.10-0.15,   slightly smaller than the

ones from our baseline specication (in log levels). OLS and LAD rst-dierence specications

yield a similar pattern. Increases in regional transfers close to the FPM discontinuities are

associated with increases in total private labor income, stemming almost exclusively from

a boost in private employment.                 A benet of these (non-log) rst-dierences specications

is that they are easily interpretable. For instance, the OLS estimates imply                   2.1 − 2.7   extra

private sector jobs for a         U S$30, 000 increase in spending, comparable to our baseline estimate
of   2.5 − 3     in Table   9.   LAD estimates imply somewhat smaller eects.



       Excluding Observations around the rst threshold.                          Our empirical strategy as-

sumes that no feature other than federal transfers change abruptly at the FPM discontinu-

ities.    As detailed in Section          2,   this is the case in our sample of relatively small Brazilian

municipalities, with one exception: a               2000   Constitutional amendment which was enforced

in    2005      placed caps on the salaries of local council members and made these caps change

discontinuously at some population cutos. While most of these population cutos for salary

cups are only relevant for large cities (not included in our sample), the rst cuto of the FPM

transfer allocation mechanism (10, 188) is close to the rst discontinuity on the salary cap

(10, 000). Hence we re-estimate our main specications excluding observations of municipali-
                                     48
ties around the rst cuto.               The results are reported in Appendix Table     14.   Although there

is strong link between federal transfers and private sector employment in small cities centered

around cuto         1,   the coecients on law-implied transfers resemble closely our rst-stage and

reduced-form estimates.



       Excluding Observations from Census Years.                      A key identifying assumption is that

local authorities should not be in a position to precisely manipulate population estimates so as

     48 Ferraz
           and Finan (2011) show that higher wages of local politicians triggered by the 2005 change are
associated with increased political competition, legislative productivity and public goods provision.


                                                            53
to receive more FPM transfers. Since there is some cross-sectional evidence of manipulation

in Census years, we repeated estimation excluding census years (2001,            2008     and   2011).   In

Appendix Table       15,   we report the RD estimates excluding Census years, which comes at

a non-negligible eciency loss as the total number of observations in the sample drops by

some    25%.     The elasticity of actual and law-implied FPM transfers is still          1.    Municipal

expenditure also respond to law-implied FPM transfers: the elasticity is around            0.31,     similar

to the share of FPM transfers to municipal expenditure (Panel        A).   The estimates on earnings

and employment in the public sector (Panel          B)   are quite similar to the baseline estimates

(Table   6).    In Panel   C,   we record the RD estimates for the private sector.        The elasticity

of earnings with respect to law-implied FPM transfers is around            0.08 − 0.16,   similar to the

baseline estimate. The elasticity for private employment is around         0.10, somewhat attenuated
and less precisely estimates than the baseline estimate (of       0.15).


   Excluding Observations of Municipalities that `move up' a Population Bracket.
In a further sensitivity analysis, we run specications dropping municipalities that `move up'

into a higher population bracket. In so doing, we restrict our focus exclusively to variation

across municipalities that either stay in the same bracket or `move down' a bracket. This is

of particular interest as the notion of potential systematic manipulation is a concern about

(`articial' or at least induced)     increases in population, as a municipal government that tried

to play down its number of inhabitants would receive less federal transfers.               In Appendix

Table    17,   we report estimates that are very similar to the baseline estimates of spending,

public/private sector earnings and employment.           In addition, Appendix Table           21   conrms

that the bulk of the eect comes from employment in the service sector.



   Controlling for mayor-specic xed eects.                 We address a concern regarding may-

ors' characteristics such as ability and political connectedness which, if correlated to labor

market outcomes, can be potentially problematic for our empirical strategy. Controlling for

municipality xed-eects in this case is unlikely to solve the issue as mayors' terms typically

last four years. We proceed to re-estimate our baseline results replacing municipal xed-eects

with mayor-specic xed-eects in each municipality. This is equivalent to municipality xed-

eects interacted with mayor-term dummies. Appendix Table             18   reports estimates that are

very similar to the baseline results of spending and public sector earnings and employment.




                                                   54
Estimates on private sector employment remain positive but become less precisely estimated.

In Appendix Table       22,   we show a positive and statistically signicant eect on employment

in the service sector.



    Global Regression Discontinuity High-Order Control Function Approach.                           Some

previous works in political economy that exploit the non-linear allocation of federal transfers

to Brazilian municipalities apply a regression discontinuity approach that uses all observa-

tions, both close and far from the cutos. Brollo, Nannicini, Tabellini, and Perotti (2013)

condition on high-order polynomials of population estimates to control for the continuous part

of the allocation mechanism. While this approach is sensitive to the polynomial order and

tends to make inference challenging (Gelman and Imbens, 2014), Appendix Table               16   reports

the `global control function' RD estimates with law-implied FPM transfers and municipal

expenditure expressed in logs (Panel A), public sector (Panel B) and private sector (Panel C)

labor outcomes. The link between outcomes and law-implied FPM transfers is present when

we use observations both close and relatively further away from the seven discontinuities.

The estimates tend to be signicant and fairly larger than our baseline specications.



    Regional Spillovers.          In keeping with other studies on `local' scal multipliers such as

Serrato and Wingender (2014), Acconcia, Corsetti, and Simonelli (2014) and Shoag (2012),

we examined whether there are regional spillover eects of federal transfers in nearby mu-

nicipalities.    To this end, we augment the baseline specications with dependent variables
                                                                                           49
aggregated at the regional level (meso-region) net of own-municipality outcomes.                The idea

is to investigate whether an exogenous change in FPM transfers in a given municipality aects

expenditure and labor market outcomes in neighboring cities.            The estimates in Appendix

Table    19   reveal that spillover eects are statistically indistinguishable from zero. Spillovers

may also arise because of labor relocation and migration. Since we do not have data on inter-

municipality migration, directly tackling this issue is challenging.         Yet, socio-demographic

analyses of the Brazilian labor market reveal that the migration trends from small rural ar-

eas to large cities that were evident in the 1980s and 1990s slowed down considerably during

the 2000s (Brito and Carvalho, 2006; Filho and Horridge, 2010). Furthermore, as our sample

  49 A meso-region is a subdivision of states dened by the IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics) which congregates a few municipalities in a given geographical area with economic and social
similarities. They do not constitute any sort of political or economic entities.


                                                   55
consists of small municipalities (less than 50,000 inhabitants), signicant migration between

such small cities seems unlikely, especially at annual frequency.                 Finally, the estimates in

this section are also consistent with the view that exogenous shock to local spending do not

signicantly cause labor reallocation from nearby municipalities.



   Delayed Eects.          We investigate whether increases in transfers may have a delayed

eect on labor market outcomes. In Appendix Table               20, we record coecients of law-implied
transfers at year   t   on outcomes at year     t + 1.   All estimates are positive but insignicant.

This is in line with the view that the most of the eect is contemporaneous.



   Sector-specic Analysis.            We have also examined whether the eect of FPM trans-

fers aect dierently the three main sectors of the local economies. As before we estimate

specications in rst-dierences. Appendix Table          23    reports the log-dierence specications

in columns (1)-(3), as well as OLS and LAD dierence specications in (4)-(9). Changes in

federal transfers and municipal government spending are signicantly correlated with changes

in private sector employment and earnings. The magnitudes and signicance are very similar

to our baseline model estimates in levels reported in Table               10.   This pattern is also robust

to excluding municipalities that `move up' a population bracket and including mayor-specic

xed-eects (Appendix Table       21   and   22).


   Geography and Size.            In Appendix Table        24   - Panel A, we show the link between

law-implied and actual FPM transfers (and municipal expenditure) is similar across geo-

graphic regions (north and south).           The same is true across smaller (Thresholds 1-3) and

larger (Threhsolds 4-7) as evidenced by Panel B. We present visual evidence regarding the

heterogeneity of the eect of transfers according to geography and size as discussed in section

6 on the main text. Point estimates from Tables           10   and   11   show that federal transfers have

a larger and more signicant eect on private sector earnings and employment in small mu-

nicipalities, mainly in the southern areas. Appendix Figures A.14a-A.14b corroborate those

ndings showing that average earnings and employment change abruptly once southern mu-

nicipalities cross a threshold, while the jump is less sharp for northern regions. An even more

striking pattern is revealed by Appendix Figures A.14c-A.14d in which the eect seems to be

concentrated in smaller cities.




                                                    56
       (a) Earnings in Agriculture          (b) Wage per Worker in Agriculture




      (c) Earnings in Manufacturing         (d) Wage per worker in Manufacturing




         (e) Earnings in Services             (f) Wage per Worker in Services


Figure A.13: Private Sector Earnings and Wage per Worker in each sub-sector




                                      57
    (a) Employment - South                 (b) Employment - North




(c) Employment - Thresholds 1-3        (d) Employment - Thresholds 4-7


Figure A.14: Private Sector Employment by Geography and Size




                                  58
                                                           Table 1 - Descriptive Evidence

                      Panel A: Distribution of Municipalities; "Control" and "Treatment" Groups
                                                                   Moves to Higher Bracket
                                       No Movement                         Bracket                                                                      Total

   No Movement                                          1410                                                  1087                                      2497
Moves to Lower Bracket                                   93                                                    689                                       782

           Total                                        1503                                                  1776                                      3279


                    Panel B: Municipality Moves to a Higher or Lower Population Bracket by Year
                                         Movements to a Lower (-) and Higher (+) Population Bracket
           Years                         -2       -1            no change            +1          +2                                                    Total
           1999                          0                33                       1,921                        90                 0                   2,044
           2000                          0                32                       2,438                       103                 0                   2,573
           2001                          0                26                       2,528                        79                 0                   2,633
           2002                         21               202                       1,997                       455                28                   2,703
           2003                          1                26                       2,657                        83                 1                   2,768
           2004                          0                17                       2,536                        91                 0                   2,644
           2005                          1                37                       2,417                       194                 0                   2,649
           2006                          0                18                       2,729                       111                 0                   2,858
           2007                          0                12                       2,752                        82                 0                   2,846
           2008                         25               281                       2,229                       315                15                   2,865
           2009                          0                 2                       2,701                       225                 0                   2,928
           2010                          0                 6                       2,851                        78                 0                   2,935
           2011                          3               139                       2,431                       256                 6                   2,835
           2012                          0                21                       2,662                        30                 0                   2,713
           2013                          0                18                       2,749                        50                 1                   2,818
           2014                          1                 5                       2,387                       261                 0                   2,654

           Total                        52               875                      39,985                      2,503               51                  43,466


                 Panel C: Municipality Moves to a Higher or Lower Population Bracket by Bracket
                                         Movements to a Lower (-) and Higher (+) Population Bracket
         Brackets                        -2       -1            no change            +1          +2                                                    Total
     6,793–10,188                       0                 0                        9,813                       478                11                  10,302
    10,189–13,584                       0                210                       7,614                       486                19                   8,329
    13,585–16,980                        9               197                       5,477                       462                 6                   6,151
    16,981–23,772                       22               175                       7,823                       396                 3                   8,419
    23,773–30,564                        1               139                       4,305                       298                 6                   4,749
    30,565–37,356                        6                73                       2,683                       215                 6                   2,983
    37,357–44,148                        8                40                       1,732                       168                 0                   1,948
    44,149–47,537                        6                41                        538                         0                  0                    585

           Total                        52               875                      39,985                      2,503               51                  43.466
  Panel A reports the number of municipalities that move across FPM population brackets and the number of municipalities that stay in the same FPM population bracket
  across the sample period 1999-2014. Panel B and C reports the number of municipalities that stay in the same FPM population bracket and the number of municipalities
  that move to a higher or lower FPM population bracket per year and per bracket, respectively.
                                                             Table 2 - Summary Statistics

                                                       Panel A: Population and Public Finance

                     Population growth          Sources of Revenue (% of Total)         Income p.c.    Main Categories of Expenditures (% of Total)
Population Bracket    mean       s.d.         FPM     Local taxes State Federal           in 2000     Administration Education    Health Housing

  6,793–10,188        0,01      0,05           0,33        0,05      0,25     0,13          1850,50       0,17         0,31        0,22      0,09
 10,189–13,584        0,01      0,05           0,33        0,05      0,22     0,13          1831,25       0,17         0,33        0,22      0,09
 13,585–16,980        0,01      0,05           0,33        0,05      0,22     0,13          1813,63       0,16         0,34        0,23      0,10
 16,981–23,772        0,01      0,05           0,31        0,06      0,22     0,14          1878,15       0,16         0,34        0,22      0,09
 23,773–30,564        0,01      0,04           0,28        0,07      0,22     0,15          2016,49       0,16         0,35        0,22      0,10
 30,565–37,356        0,01      0,05           0,26        0,08      0,23     0,14          2113,95       0,15         0,34        0,23      0,10
 37,357–44,148        0,01      0,05           0,24        0,09      0,23     0,15          2134,62       0,15         0,34        0,23      0,10
 44,149–47,537        0,01      0,03           0,24        0,09      0,22     0,15          2272,26       0,15         0,34        0,24      0,10

      Total           0,011    0,051           0,31        0,06      0,23     0,14          1901,40       0,16         0,33        0,22      0,09


                                                Panel B: Total Earnings per sector in BRL thousands

                                       Public Sector                                                    Private Sector
                        Old Hires                   New Hires                    Agriculture              Manufacturing               Services
Population Bracket    mean     s.d.            mean        s.d.              mean           s.d.         mean          s.d.        mean      s.d.

  6,793–10,188         1289     757            258         299                 645         1377           1431        3174         1081     1496
 10,189–13,584         1719     956            338         384                 905         2072           1899        3907         1626     2363
 13,585–16,980         2201    1308            423         470                 936         2102           2710        6388         2358     3040
 16,981–23,772         2923    1721            571         657                1327         2673           4088        7777         3583     4351
 23,773–30,564         3839    2451            749         968                1494         2887           5647       10135         5657     7397
 30,565–37,356         4864    2687            936         999                2266         4242           8267       13254         8899     9804
 37,357–44,148         5596    3085           1024        1039                2634         4938          11412       15707        11599    12129
 44,149–47,537         6420    3420           1152        1241                2793         5358          13471       19230        14426    16549
                     ####### #######         681,375     757,125            1625,000     3206,125       6115,625    9946,500     6153,625 7141,125
      Total           3606    2048             681         757                1625         3206           6116        9947         6154     7141
                                                                                               Panel C: Employment per sector

                                                              Public Sector                                                                                                 Private Sector
                                        Old Hires                          New Hires                                             Agriculture                                  Manufacturing                               Services
Population Bracket                    mean     s.d.                   mean        s.d.                                       mean           s.d.                             mean          s.d.                        mean      s.d.

    6,793–10,188                      245     106                         48                 53                             141                     244                       238                 444                  203      242
   10,189–13,584                      324     132                         61                 67                             191                     342                       324                 587                  308      401
   13,585–16,980                      403     159                         76                 84                             202                     334                       431                 765                  437      511
   16,981–23,772                      520     208                         99                 106                            287                     474                       635                1039                  658      701
   23,773–30,564                      657     267                         129                152                            330                     502                       856                1300                 1041     1197
   30,565–37,356                      801     297                         157                162                            434                     661                      1179                1630                 1568     1478
   37,357–44,148                      894     310                         175                176                            536                     772                      1609                1880                 2045     1742
   44,149–47,537                     1008     341                         196                200                            577                     832                      1934                2209                 2526     2253
                                    606,500 227,500                     117,625            125,000                        337,250                 520,125                   900,750            1231,750             1098,250 1065,625
          Total                       607     228                         118                125                            337                     520                       901                1232                 1098     1066

                                                                                       Panel D: Yearly Wage per worker in BRL

                                                              Public Sector                                                                                                 Private Sector
                                        Old Hires                          New Hires                                             Agriculture                                  Manufacturing                               Services
Population Bracket                    mean     s.d.                   mean        s.d.                                       mean           s.d.                             mean          s.d.                        mean      s.d.

    6,793–10,188                      5216           1869                 5407                2443                           3825                    1296                     5746                3896                 4970             1645
   10,189–13,584                      5279           1959                 5538                2626                           3815                    1380                     5537                3422                 5002             1565
   13,585–16,980                      5366           2051                 5579                2594                           3763                    1375                     5438                3212                 5081             1565
   16,981–23,772                      5548           2154                 5756                2681                           3859                    1556                     5683                3418                 5133             1548
   23,773–30,564                      5698           2360                 5785                2731                           3868                    1469                     5931                3607                 5007             1355
   30,565–37,356                      5962           2299                 6021                2717                           4214                    1828                     6119                3520                 5166             1359
   37,357–44,148                      6103           2431                 5925                2529                           4117                    1766                     6370                4246                 5137             1343
   44,149–47,537                      6257           2298                 6041                2560                           4022                    1301                     6007                2915                 5077             1143
          Total                       5679           2178                 5757                2610                           3935                    1496                     5854                3530                 5072             1440
The table gives summary statistics for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis. The sample includes 43,466 yearly observations covering 3,279 Brazilian municipalities over the period 1999-2014. Panel A reports the mean and
standard deviation of three sets of variables per population bracket: municipal population growth, sources of municipal revenue as a share of total, income per capita according to the 2000 census and types of expenditure. Sources of municipal
revenue include FPM transfers, local tax revenue which include ISS (service tax) and IPTU (property tax), state-level government transfers and federal-level government transfers (net of FPM) to municipalities. Panel B-D report summary
statistics on municipal public and private sector labor markets outcomes, by employee tenure (old or new hires) and by sub-sector (Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services), respectively. Panel B-D on reports total earnings, total employment and
wage per worker, respectively.
                                       Table 3 - Actual and Law-Implied FPM Transfers

                                        OLS, Fixed-Effect and LAD (Median) Estimates
                                          full sample                                               local estimates
                    bandwidth                  all                 <4%             <3%            <2%           <4%                   <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                       (1)                  (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)                   (6)             (7)

                                                                 PANEL A: Estimates without Fixed-Effects
Actual FPM                                 1.010***            1.003*** 1.001*** 0.995***                          1.010*** 1.009*** 1.008***
 OLS estimates
                                            (0,003)             (0,005) (0,005) (0,005)                             (0,007) (0,007) (0,009)
  within (marginal) R2                         0,93                0,92            0,92            0,91                0,86           0,86            0,83

Log Actual FPM                             1.012***            0.980*** 0.973*** 0.966***                          0.990*** 0.981*** 0.976***
 OLS estimates
                                            (0,003)             (0,007) (0,007) (0,007)                             (0,010) (0,009) (0,011)
  within (marginal) R2                         0,92                0,89            0,89            0,88                0,84           0,83            0,83

Actual FPM                                 1.010***            1.003*** 1.001*** 0.995***                          1.007*** 1.007*** 1.007***
 LAD estimates
                                            (0,003)             (0,005) (0,005) (0,005)                             (0,001) (0,001) (0,001)


                                                                         PANEL B: Fixed-Effect Estimates
Actual FPM                                 1.025***            1.015*** 1.012*** 1.002***                          1.018*** 1.016*** 1.012***
 OLS estimates
                                            (0,004)             (0,006) (0,005) (0,007)                             (0,007) (0,008) (0,010)

  within (marginal) R2                        0,993               0,992           0,993           0,993               0,992          0,993           0,993

Log Actual FPM                             1.020***            0.979*** 0.976*** 0.965***                          0.981*** 0.975*** 0.966***
 OLS estimates
                                            (0,006)             (0,008) (0,007) (0,008)                             (0,009) (0,009) (0,011)

  within (marginal) R2                         0,99               0,989           0,989            0,99               0,989          0,989            0,99

Observations                                 43466                11349            8471           5663               11349            8471            5663
State-year dummies                            Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                           Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                        No                   No               No             No                 Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual municipal FPM transfers to law-implied FPM Transfers. The table reports estimates from 5
specifications. Panel A reports estimates without fixed-effects. Row (1) reports OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent and the independent variable
are expressed in levels (no transformation). Row (2) reports OLS coefficient estimates when both actual FPM transfers (the dependent variable) and law-implied
transfers (the independent variable) are expressed in logs. Row (3) reports least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates associating actual FPM transfers with law-
implied FPM transfers in levels. PANEL B - rows (4) and (5) repeat specifications in (1) and (2) with fixed-effects. We construct municipal law-implied
transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close
and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs
using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include state-year fixed effects and
cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). The table also reports the within (marginal) R2. Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the
micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                     Table 4 - Municipal Revenue and Expenditure around the FPM Cutoffs

                                         OLS Fixed-Effect and LAD (Median) Estimates
                                       full sample                                                 local estimates
                  bandwidth                 all                  <4%             <3%             <2%           <4%                    <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                    (1)                   (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)

                                                                          PANEL A - Municipal Revenue
Level-OLS with FE                       2.599***             1.548*** 1.271*** 1.197***                           0.781*** 0.597** 0.694***
                                         (0,147)              (0,156) (0,177) (0,185)                              (0,289) (0,293) (0,239)

Log-OLS with FE                         0.499***             0.381*** 0.345*** 0.355***                           0.370*** 0.354*** 0.365***
                                         (0,015)              (0,016) (0,018) (0,022)                              (0,021) (0,023) (0,027)

LAD (median)                            2.297***             1.212*** 1.160*** 0.949***                           0.897*** 1.015*** 0.917***
                                         (0,079)              (0,127) (0,133) (0,179)                              (0,199) (0,208) (0,317)


                                                                       PANEL B - Municipal Expenditure
Level-OLS with FE                       2.327***             1.358*** 1.081*** 0.918***                           0.708*** 0.536*** 0.567***
                                         (0,129)              (0,129) (0,141) (0,161)                              (0,190) (0,206) (0,207)

Log-OLS with FE                         0.469***             0.338*** 0.304*** 0.299***                           0.319*** 0.308*** 0.308***
                                         (0,015)              (0,017) (0,018) (0,023)                              (0,022) (0,024) (0,029)

LAD (median)                            2.254***             1.089*** 0.910*** 0.907***                           0.637*** 0.727*** 0.809***
                                         (0,074)              (0,131) (0,141) (0,166)                              (0,173) (0,220) (0,269)

Observations                               43460                11347            8470            5662                11347            8470            5662
State-year dummies                          Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                         Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                      No                   No               No              No                  Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating municipal public finance variables to law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A reports estimates for municipal
revenues as the dependent variable and Panel B for municipal expenditure. Row (1) in each panel reports OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent
and the independent variable are expressed in levels (no transformation). Row (2) reports OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are expressed in logs.
Row (3) reports least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see
appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report
local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off.
Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported).
Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at
99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                     Table 5 - Other Sources of Municipal Revenue around the FPM Cutoffs

                                         OLS Fixed-Effect and LAD (Median) Estimates
                                     full sample                                                 local estimates
               bandwidth                  all                 <4%              <3%             <2%           <4%                     <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                  (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)                     (6)             (7)

                                                              PANEL A: State-level government transfers
Level-OLS with FE                     0.396***                0,059           0,005           -0,004               -0,077          -0,093           -0,005
                                       (0,075)               (0,066)         (0,074)          (0,076)              (0,079)         (0,084)          (0,102)

Log-OLS with FE                      0.198***               0.077**           0,055            0,006                0,051           0,033            0,029
                                        (0,031)              (0,033)         (0,037)          (0,047)              (0,039)         (0,044)          (0,055)

LAD (median)                          0.199***                0,020          -0,015           -0,079               -0,114          -0,105           -0,084
                                       (0,036)               (0,049)         (0,062)          (0,067)              (0,100)         (0,108)          (0,118)


                                                 PANEL B: Federal-level government transfers (net of FPM)
Level-OLS with FE                     0.215***               -0,008          -0,067           -0,013               -0,301          -0,358           -0,124
                                       (0,056)               (0,086)         (0,110)          (0,090)              (0,184)         (0,191)          (0,161)

Log-OLS with FE                      0.257***                 0,063           0,043            0,020                0,031           0,013           -0,006
                                        (0,048)              (0,074)         (0,086)          (0,089)              (0,090)         (0,104)          (0,116)

LAD (median)                          0.242***            0.0606*** 0,026                      0,013                0,008           0,012            0,017
                                       (0,015)              (0,023) (0,028)                   (0,034)              (0,035)         (0,040)          (0,054)


                                                                          PANEL C: Local tax revenues
Level-OLS with FE                     0.294***             0.145*** 0.103**                    0,064                0,008          -0,021           -0,043
                                       (0,041)              (0,047) (0,048)                   (0,064)              (0,053)         (0,050)          (0,077)

Log-OLS with FE                      0.212***                0.104*           0,087            0,042              0.134**           0,081            0,093
                                        (0,045)              (0,054)         (0,058)          (0,065)              (0,067)         (0,069)          (0,083)

LAD (median)                         0.0959***                0,014          -0,005           -0,032               -0,030          -0,025           -0,028
                                       (0,016)               (0,023)         (0,024)          (0,026)              (0,037)         (0,040)          (0,042)

Observations                            43460                11347             8470            5662                11347            8470             5662
State-year dummies                       Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                      Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                   No                   No                No              No                  Yes             Yes              Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating other sources of municipal revenue (apart from FPM transfers) to law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A reports
estimates for state-level government transfers as the dependent variable, Panel B reports estimates for federal-level government transfers (net of FPM) and Panel
C reports estimates for revenues from local taxes which includes ISS (service tax) and IPTU (property tax). Row (1) in each panel reports OLS coefficient
estimates when both the dependent and the independent variable are expressed in levels (no transformation). Row (2) reports OLS coefficient estimates when
both variables are expressed in logs. Row (3) reports least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the
FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the
seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative
bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-
effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                         Table 6 - Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Public Sector

                                              full sample                                                   local estimates
                       bandwidth                   all                   <4%             <3%              <2%           <4%                     <3%              <2%
dep.var.                                           (1)                    (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                     (6)              (7)

log (Total Earnings)                           0.394***              0.233*** 0.226*** 0.217***                             0.261*** 0.210*** 0.258***
                                                (0,031)               (0,033) (0,034) (0,043)                                (0,040) (0,045) (0,057)

log (Employment)                               0.336***              0.155*** 0.147*** 0.121***                             0.174*** 0.114*** 0.150***
                                                (0,028)               (0,030) (0,033) (0,040)                                (0,038) (0,043) (0,052)

log (Wage per Worker)                          0.047***              0.050***           0.036*            0,024             0.0532** 0.0549** 0.0544**
                                                (0,015)               (0,017)           (0,019)          (0,022)             (0,022) (0,023) (0,027)

Observations                                      43441                11344             8467             5661                11344             8467             5661
Municipality Fixed-Effect                          Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes
State-year dummies                                 Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                                Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                             No                   No                No               No                  Yes              Yes              Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating municipal public sector labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. Rows (1)-(3) reports fixed-effect OLS
coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism
formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4)
report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns
(5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted
standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*)
confidence level.
        Table 7 - Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Public Sector according to Tenure

                                             full sample                                                    local estimates
                      bandwidth                   all                   <4%              <3%              <2%           <4%                      <3%              <2%
dep.var.                                          (1)                    (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)                      (6)              (7)

                                                                          PANEL A: Old Hires from previous years
log (Total Earnings)                          0.370***              0.191*** 0.170*** 0.169***                              0.184*** 0.166*** 0.198***
                                               (0,034)               (0,033) (0,036) (0,045)                                 (0,041) (0,047) (0,058)

log (Employment)                              0.305***              0.085***           0.064*             0,033               0,0608           0,0351           0,0454
                                               (0,032)               (0,032)           (0,038)           (0,045)              (0,039)          (0,047)          (0,056)

log (Wage per Worker)                         0.050***              0.063*** 0.049**                   0.050**              0.075*** 0.074*** 0.087***
                                               (0,016)               (0,018) (0,020)                    (0,022)              (0,022) (0,024) (0,027)


                                                                              PANEL B: New Hires in current year
log (Total Earnings)                          0.502***              0.486*** 0.670*** 0.647***                              0.628*** 0.592*** 0.703***
                                               (0,084)               (0,135) (0,159) (0,192)                                 (0,165) (0,197) (0,246)

log (Employment)                              0.430***              0.401*** 0.525*** 0.427**                               0.495*** 0.431**                   0.515**
                                               (0,075)               (0,125) (0,151) (0,185)                                 (0,155) (0,190)                    (0,238)

log (Wage per Worker)                          0.0447*               0,00249           -0,0232          -0,0424               0,0184          -0,0311          -0,0533
                                                (0,025)               (0,042)           (0,052)          (0,059)              (0,058)          (0,066)          (0,075)

Observations                                     42773                 11123             8287             5522                11123             8287              5522
Municipality Fixed-Effect                         Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes               Yes
State-year dummies                                Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes               Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                               Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes              Yes               Yes
First order polynomial                            No                    No                No               No                  Yes              Yes               Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating municipal public sector labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers according to job tenure. Panel A focus on
Old Hires (current employees hired in previous years) and Panel B focus on New Hires (hired in current year). Rows (1)-(3) in each panel reports fixed-effect OLS
coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism
formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report
local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7)
include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard
errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence
level.
                            Table 8 - FPM Transfers and Private Sector Labor Market Outcomes
                                         Earnings, Employment and Average Wage


                                            full sample                                                    local estimates
                     bandwidth                   all                   <4%              <3%              <2%           <4%                      <3%              <2%
dep.var.                                         (1)                    (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)                      (6)              (7)

                                                                                Panel A: Reduced-Form Estimates
log (Total Earnings)                          0.339***              0.154*** 0.144***                   0.101*             0.190*** 0.177*** 0.184**
                                               (0,042)               (0,044) (0,049)                    (0,059)             (0,053) (0,060) (0,074)

log (Employment)                              0.286***              0.168*** 0.139***                   0.093*             0.211*** 0.163*** 0.152**
                                               (0,044)               (0,045) (0,047)                    (0,055)             (0,055) (0,060) (0,069)

log (Average Wage)                            0.057***                 0,022          0.053**           0,0274                0,019           0.057*           0.059*
                                               (0,019)                (0,022)          (0,024)          (0,028)              (0,027)          (0,032)          (0,033)


                                                                                Panel B: Fuzzy RD (IV) Estimates
log (Total Earnings)                          0.332***              0.158*** 0.148***                   0.104*             0.193*** 0.182*** 0.191***
                                               (0,041)               (0,044) (0,048)                    (0,059)             (0,053) (0,060) (0,073)

log (Employment)                              0.280***              0.172*** 0.143***                   0.097*             0.215*** 0.167*** 0.158**
                                               (0,043)               (0,045) (0,047)                    (0,054)             (0,055) (0,060) (0,068)

log (Average Wage)                            0.056***                0,0224          0.054**           0,0284                0,019           0.059*           0.061*
                                               (0,019)                (0,022)          (0,024)          (0,027)              (0,027)          (0,032)          (0,033)

Observations                                    43425                 11328             8451             5645                 11328             8451             5645
Municipality Fixed-Effect                        Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
State-year dummies                               Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                           No                    No                No               No                   Yes              Yes              Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating municipal private sector labor market outcomes to actual/law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A exhibits reduced-form
estimates with law-implied FPM transfers as the main regressor. Rows (1)-(3) reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage
per Worker. Panel B reports fuzzy RD (IV) estimates with actual FPM transfers instrumented by law-implied transfers. We construct municipal law-implied transfers
applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the
seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths
(4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not
reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at
99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                                     Table 9 - Federal Transfer Employment Multiplier
                         Cost of a job in the Public and Private Sector (4% and 3% local samples)


                                                                 no polynomial                                               1st-order polynomial
                                                 IV-Fuzzy RD                    Jobs Created per                  IV-Fuzzy RD                    Jobs Created per
                                                  coefficient                     BRL 30,000                       coefficient                     BRL 30,000
                      bandwidth                  <4%            <3%               <4%           <3%               <4%            <3%               <4%           <3%
                                                   (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)               (5)           (6)               (7)            (8)

                                                                               PANEL A: Public vs Private Sector
Public-Sector                                   0,155 0,147                      0,99    0,94                     0,174 0,114                     1,11    0,73
                                               (0,030) (0,033)                  (0,192) (0,211)                  (0,038) (0,043)                 (0,240) (0,276)

Private-Sector                                  0,172 0,143                      3,01    2,51                     0,215 0,167                     3,77    2,93
                                               (0,045) (0,047)                  (0,286) (0,824)                  (0,055) (0,060)                 (0,348) (1,044)


                                                                     PANEL B: Cost of a Job and Income Multiplier

Cost of a Job inBRL1998                                                           7495          8712                                               6151          8211

Output Multiplier                                                                 2,12           1,83                                              2,59          1,94

Panel A reports IV-Fuzzy RD coefficients of the impact of actual FPM trasfers instrumented by law-implied transfers on employment in the public and private sector.
Columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6) report local estimate in the neighborhood of 4% and 3%, respectively, without and with a rectangular kernel on normalized population.
Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) report the equivalent number of jobs created by a transfer of 30,000 Brazilian Reais in 1998 prices (equivalent to USD in 2016 prices) using
the standard elasticity formula. Panel B calculates the corresponding estimated cost of a job for the different specifications and the associated implied output multiplier.
The mapping from emplyment estimated to output multiplier is described in section 5.2. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation
mechanism formula (see appendix). All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted
standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*)
confidence level.
                     Table 10 - Reduced-form Estimates by Type of Activity
    Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Retail & Services


                                             full sample                                                   local estimates
                       bandwidth                  all                   <4%             <3%              <2%           <4%                     <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                          (1)                    (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                     (6)             (7)

                                                                                                  Agriculture
log (Total Earnings)                           0.744***                0,181            0,086            0,018               0,237            0,015           -0,309
                                                (0,185)               (0,232)          (0,239)          (0,289)             (0,307)          (0,298)          (0,380)

log (Employment)                               0.374***               0.147*            0,072            0,030               0,141            0,059           -0,094
                                                (0,069)               (0,085)          (0,088)          (0,100)             (0,105)          (0,108)          (0,131)

log (Average Wage)                               -0,003             -0.0540** -0,030                    -0,044              -0,026            0,000           -0,002
                                                 (0,019)              (0,026) (0,023)                   (0,029)             (0,034)          (0,028)          (0,033)


                                                                                               Manufacturing
log (Total Earnings)                           0.544***                0,268            0,482            0,086               0,420            0,580            0,104
                                                (0,189)               (0,283)          (0,312)          (0,397)             (0,343)          (0,389)          (0,471)

log (Employment)                               0.336***                0,149            0,182            0,091             0.272**            0,250            0,191
                                                (0,085)               (0,105)          (0,126)          (0,150)             (0,126)          (0,155)          (0,192)

log (Average Wage)                                0,041                0,009            0,018           -0,016              -0,037           -0,019           -0,009
                                                 (0,028)              (0,040)          (0,044)          (0,052)             (0,052)          (0,054)          (0,060)


                                                                                             Retail & Services
log (Total Earnings)                           0.513***             0.173*** 0.150*** 0.149**                             0.163*** 0.162*** 0.207***
                                                (0,065)              (0,047) (0,050) (0,058)                               (0,057) (0,062) (0,072)

log (Employment)                               0.320***             0.143*** 0.116** 0.124**                               0.132** 0.120** 0.176**
                                                (0,047)              (0,044) (0,046) (0,055)                                (0,054) (0,060) (0,070)

log (Average Wage)                             0.105***                0,027            0,028           -0,006               0,024            0,032            0,011
                                                (0,020)               (0,023)          (0,025)          (0,027)             (0,026)          (0,029)          (0,033)

Observations                                     43425                 11328            8451             5645                11328            8451             5645
Municipality Fixed-Effect                         Yes                   Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
State-year dummies                                Yes                   Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                               Yes                   Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                            No                    No               No               No                  Yes             Yes              Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating municipal private sector labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers according to the type of activity. Panel
A-C report estimates on Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services. Rows (1)-(3) in each panel reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings,
Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports
estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that
restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All
specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-
region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                               Table 11 - Heterogeneity Analysis across Geographic Regions
                              Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Private Sector


                                          full sample                                                  local estimates
                    bandwidth                  all                  <4%             <3%              <2%           <4%                    <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                       (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)

                                                                                   PANEL A: Total Earnings
South                                       0.297***            0.174*** 0.160*** 0.162***                            0.207*** 0.191*** 0.239***
                                             (0,050)             (0,050) (0,056) (0,061)                               (0,060) (0,067) (0,072)

North                                       0.388***              0.129*            0,123           0,013              0.166**          0.157*           0,0991
                                             (0,067)              (0,077)          (0,086)         (0,106)              (0,082)         (0,093)          (0,119)


                                                                                    PANEL B: Employment
South                                       0.278***            0.179*** 0.147*** 0.136**                             0.220*** 0.170*** 0.191***
                                             (0,048)             (0,045) (0,048) (0,053)                               (0,054) (0,057) (0,063)

North                                       0.295***              0.154*            0,129           0,032              0.198**           0,153           0,093
                                             (0,075)              (0,085)          (0,090)         (0.102)              (0,092)         (0.101)         (0.116)


                                                                                PANEL C: Wage per Worker
South                                          0,019               0,014          0.0387*           0,026                0,011           0,044 0.0563**
                                              (0,018)             (0,019)          (0,021)         (0,022)              (0,023)         (0,028) (0,027)

North                                       0.101***               0,033            0,071           0,029                0,030           0,077   0,063
                                             (0,037)              (0,044)          (0,047)         (0,055)              (0,048)         (0,054) (0.0597)

Observations                                  43425                11328            8451             5645               11328             8451            5645
Municipality Fixed-Effect                      Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                            Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                         No                   No               No               No                 Yes              Yes             Yes
The table reports regression heterogeneity estimates associating municipal private sector labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers according to
geography. Panel A-C report estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. Rows (1) and (2) in each panel reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient
estimates for municipalities in the South and North. Appendix Table 1 reports how each state has been classified as South or North. We construct municipal law-
implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both
close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using
three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year
fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                                Table 12 - Heterogeneity Analysis across Municipality Size
                              Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Private Sector


                                           full sample                                                 local estimates
                    bandwidth                   all                 <4%              <3%             <2%           <4%                     <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                        (1)                  (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)                     (6)             (7)

                                                                                   PANEL A: Total Earnings
Thresholds 1-3                              0.172***             0.172*** 0.157***                   0,105             0.191*** 0.177*** 0.177**
                                             (0,051)              (0,051) (0,057)                   (0,070)             (0,055) (0,061) (0,075)

Thresholds 4-7                                 0,094                0,094           0,099            0,083                0,161           0,174         0.336**
                                              (0,082)              (0,082)         (0,089)          (0,099)              (0,104)         (0,123)         (0,140)


                                                                                     PANEL B: Employment
Thresholds 1-3                              0.308***             0.207*** 0.167***                  0.116*             0.218*** 0.168*** 0.153**
                                             (0,046)              (0,052) (0,056)                   (0,064)             (0,056) (0,061) (0,070)

Thresholds 4-7                               0.177**                0,034           0,043            0,008                0,074           0,049            0,137
                                              (0,072)              (0,071)         (0,074)          (0,091)              (0,094)         (0,111)          (0,128)


                                                                                PANEL C: Wage per Worker
Thresholds 1-3                             0.0540***                0,004           0,044            0,021                0,014         0.0542*            0,054
                                             (0,021)               (0,026)         (0,030)          (0,033)              (0,028)         (0,033)          (0,034)

Thresholds 4-7                              0.0700**             0.0831** 0.0822*                    0,052             0.115**          0.120** 0.169***
                                             (0,031)              (0,036) (0,042)                   (0,042)             (0,051)          (0,058) (0,064)

Observations                                  43425                11328             8451            5645                11328            8451             5645
Municipality Fixed-Effect                      Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
State-year dummies                             Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                            Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                         No                   No                No              No                  Yes             Yes              Yes
The table reports regression heterogeneity estimates associating municipal private sector labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers according to municipal
population size. Panel A-C report estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. Rows (1) and (2) in each panel reports fixed-effect OLS
coefficient estimates for municipalities around thresholds 1-3 (6,793-20,376 inhabitants) and thresholds 4-7 (6,793-47,537 inhabitants). Appendix Table 2 reports local
sample sizes for each threshold bracket for a 4%-bandwidth. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see
appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local
regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7)
include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted
standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*)
confidence level.
                                                        Appendix Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics


                               FPM State             Macro          IBGE-defined                Number of                   Number of                Mean Municipal
     State Name                Coefficient           Region            regions                 Municipalities              Observations                Population

   Espírito Santo                    1,76             South            Southeast                         64                       964                         18438
   Minas Gerais                    14.185             South            Southeast                        449                      6,203                        16367
   Rio de Janeiro                   2.738             South            Southeast                         59                       794                         21100
     São Paulo                     14.262             South            Southeast                        327                      4,528                        19779
       Paraná                       7.286             South             South                           227                      3,232                        16655
 Rio Grande do Sul                  7.301             South             South                           187                      2,619                        17192
   Santa Catarina                     4,2             South             South                           144                      1,984                        15991
       Goiás                        3.732             South           Center-West                       113                      1,485                        17310
Mato Grosso do Sul                    1,5             South           Center-West                        58                       856                         18235
    Mato Grosso                     1.895             South           Center-West                        84                      1,101                        16923
      Alagoas                       2.088             North            Northeast                         83                      1,086                        19508
       Bahia                         9,27             North            Northeast                        367                      4,944                        19004
       Ceará                        4.586             North            Northeast                        153                      1,965                        21829
     Maranhão                       3.972             North            Northeast                        169                      1,700                        20921
      Paraíba                       3.194             North            Northeast                        115                      1,530                        15296
    Pernambuco                      4.795             North            Northeast                        152                      2,138                        20757
        Piauí                       2.402             North            Northeast                         90                      1,097                        16318
Rio Grande do Norte                 2.432             North            Northeast                         90                      1,176                        14784
      Sergipe                      1.334              North            Northeast                        51                        751                         17728
        Acre                        0,263             North             North                           17                        180                         18150
     Amazonas                       1.245             North             North                           56                        653                         21901
      Amapá                         0,139             North             North                             9                        94                         15450
        Pará                        3.295             North             North                           116                      1,181                        24457
     Rondônia                       0,746             North             North                            40                       534                         18660
      Roraima                       0,085             North             North                            13                       109                         13456
     Tocantins                      1.296             North             North                            46                       562                         13910
The table reports the number of municipalities and municipality-years (observations) per state in our 1999-2014 sample. Macro Regions are a classification defined by the authors.
State FPM share is the predetermined share of the FPM funds each state receives every year.
                               Appendix Table 2 - Distribution of Municipalities around Each Discontinuity

                                                          Panel A: Full Sample

Population    threshold 1      threshold 2         threshold 3        threshold 4        threshold 5          threshold 6     threshold 7
 Intervals    6793-11886      11887-15282         15283-20376        20377-27168        27169-33960          33961-40752     40753-47537

   year      below    above   below   above      below   above      below   above      below    above        below   above   below   above
  1999        489     236     162      172        129     236        149     133        89      79            51      52      34      33
  2000        619     291     204      219        147     299        191     171        111     106           65      58      49      43
  2001        626     289     218      216        160     309        205     164        119     102           70      66      51      38
  2002        639     289     230      219        165     320        183     191        127     107           74      60      61      38
  2003        670     287     248      213        169     329        191     184        140     99            75      62      59      42
  2004        634     262     234      214        162     306        204     162        141     103           64      60      61      37
  2005        636     256     231      206        157     310        210     147        147     112           66      68      64      39
  2006        690     273     238      233        162     335        227     171        150     114           81      72      66      46
  2007        690     261     231      232        171     324        234     166        153     111           90      66      65      52
  2008        629     360     198      262        159     347        212     196        120     126           75      89      38      54
  2009        668     332     220      250        173     347        223     197        118     125           86      80      59      50
  2010        677     317     229      251        175     342        226     201        117     132           84      69      62      53
  2011        597     402     178      252        145     351        208     198        103     140           73      85      49      54
  2012        585     372     173      242        139     329        212     175        105     130           74      69      57      51
  2013        617     369     196      243        146     337        231     190        100     133           77      76      57      46
  2014        564     323     201      220        150     305        220     194        105     124           79      69      56      44

  Total      10,030   4,919   3,391   3,644      2,509   5,126      3,326   2,840      1,945    1,843        1,184   1,101   888     720
                                                    Appendix Table 2 - Distribution of Municipalities around Each Discontinuity (cont.)

                                                           Panel B: Restricted Sample in the Neighborhood of the FPM Cutoffs (<4%)

Population                threshold 1                     threshold 2                     threshold 3                     threshold 4                    threshold 5                     threshold 6                     threshold 7
 Intervals                9780-10596                     13041-14127                     15283-20376                     22821-24723                    29341-31787                     35862-38850                     42382-45914

     year               below         above             below         above            below          above            below         above             below         above             below         above            below          above
     1999                  55            69               54             61               43            52                38            47               23             37               18            19                14            17
     2000                  60            82               55             75               59            76                47            56               35             46               27            27                23            17
     2001                  58            80               75             64               56            74                53            54               41             43               27            32                26            14
     2002                  53            90               78             80               61            71                39            66               40             47               35            28                26            18
     2003                  61            91               86             73               67            70                40            62               53             36               39            33                28            22
     2004                  64            75               68             72               70            68                55            61               49             33               36            33                28            16
     2005                  67            62               68             62               65            64                48            48               40             44               19            33                28            20
     2006                  61            64               73             83               61            77                49            48               43             40               30            32                31            24
     2007                  71            56               70             82               65            67                53            47               49             37               41            27                31            29
     2008                  26           144               47            115               47            96                37            73               40             63               29            43                19            36
     2009                  55            49               60             60               72            57                54            49               43             42               34            27                28            18
     2010                  56            47               61             55               62            50                45            61               37             45               37            24                22            21
     2011                  31           158               46            111               49           100                33            77               21             70               22            41                21            30
     2012                  41           129               52             92               50            89                54            58               22             62               27            36                25            26
     2013                  46           129               57             91               49            82                67            54               23             63               30            34                26            23
     2014                  49            63               53             62               57            59                60            57               41             35               37            29                25            30

     Total                854         1,388             1,003         1,238              933          1,152              772           918               600           743              488           498               401           361
Panel A gives the count of observations per year (municipalities-year) in our sample below and above each of the seven FPM population thresholds (10188, 13584, 16980, 23772, 30564, 37356 and 44148) for the full sample. Panel B restricts the
sample within a 4%-neighbourhood of the closest threshold.
                                                 Appendix Table 3 - Descriptive Evidence
                                    Restricted Sample in the Neighborhood of the FPM Cutoffs (<4%)

                          Panel A: Distribution of Municipalities; "Control" and "Treatment" Groups
                                                                       Moves to Higher Bracket
                                           No Movement                         Bracket                                                                                               Total

   No Movement                                                      705                                                            1,140                                            1,845
Moves to Lower Bracket                                              133                                                             327                                              460
             Total                                                  838                                                            1,467                                            2,305


                       Panel B: Municipality Moves to a Higher or Lower Population Bracket by Year
                                                Movements to a Lower (-) and Higher (+) Population Bracket
             Years                              -2       -1            no change            +1          +2                                                                           Total
             1999                                0                   32                             428                               87                    0                       2,044
             2000                                0                   30                             555                              100                    0                       2,573
             2001                                0                   22                             601                               74                    0                       2,633
             2002                                7                   95                             419                              197                   14                       2,703
             2003                                0                   25                             656                               79                    1                       2,768
             2004                                0                   14                             627                               87                    0                       2,644
             2005                                1                   29                             491                              147                    0                       2,649
             2006                                0                   16                             595                              105                    0                       2,858
             2007                                0                   11                             636                               78                    0                       2,846
             2008                                8                  104                             495                              196                   12                       2,865
             2009                                0                    2                             442                              204                    0                       2,928
             2010                                0                    6                             540                               77                    0                       2,935
             2011                                2                   78                             533                              193                    4                       2,835
             2012                                0                   20                             713                               30                    0                       2,713
             2013                                0                   17                             710                               47                    0                       2,818
             2014                                1                    2                             432                              222                    0                       2,654
             Total                              19                  503                            8,873                           1,923                   31                      11,349


                    Panel C: Municipality Moves to a Higher or Lower Population Bracket by Bracket
                                                Movements to a Lower (-) and Higher (+) Population Bracket
             Years                              -2       -1            no change            +1          +2                                                                           Total
     6,793–10,188                                0                    0                             732                              328                    8                       1,068
    10,189–13,584                                0                  123                            1,940                             382                   10                       2,455
    13,585–16,980                                2                  113                            1,678                             339                    2                       2,134
    16,981–23,772                               10                  100                            1,497                             297                    1                       1,905
    23,773–30,564                                0                   73                            1,175                             244                    5                       1,497
    30,565–37,356                                4                   43                             958                              178                    5                       1,188
    37,357–44,148                                1                   29                             697                              155                    0                        882
    44,149–47,537                                2                   22                             196                               0                     0                        220
             Total                              19                  503                            8,873                           1,923                   31                      11,349
  This Table mirrors Table 1 for a restricted sample within a 4%-neighbourhood of the closest threshold. Panel A reports the number of municipalities that move across FPM population brackets and the
  number of municipalities that stay in the same FPM population bracket across the sample period 1999-2014. Panel B and C reports the number of municipalities that stay in the same FPM population
  bracket and the number of municipalities that move to a higher or lower FPM population bracket per year and per bracket, respectively.
                                                      Appendix Table 4 - Summary Statistics
                                         Restricted Sample in the Neighborhood of the FPM Cutoffs (<4%)

                                                       Panel A: Population and Public Finance

                     Population growth         Sources of Revenue (% of Total)         Income p.c.   Main Categories of Expenditures (% of Total)
Population Bracket    mean     s.d.         FPM     Local taxes State    Federal         in 2000     Public Admin Education     Health Housing

 6,793–10,188        0,010    0,052          0,31        0,06      0,24     0,14           3724           0,16        0,32        0,22     0,09
 10,189–13,584       0,012    0,053          0,33        0,05      0,23     0,13           3632           0,16        0,33        0,22     0,09
 13,585–16,980       0,014    0,049          0,33        0,05      0,22     0,13           3726           0,16        0,34        0,22     0,09
 16,981–23,772       0,011    0,046          0,31        0,06      0,22     0,14           3738           0,16        0,34        0,22     0,09
 23,773–30,564       0,012    0,042          0,28        0,07      0,23     0,14           3862           0,16        0,34        0,22     0,10
 30,565–37,356       0,012    0,042          0,26        0,08      0,23     0,14           4283           0,15        0,34        0,23     0,10
 37,357–44,148       0,014    0,040          0,24        0,08      0,23     0,15           4573           0,15        0,34        0,23     0,10
 44,149–47,537       0,015    0,037          0,24        0,09      0,22     0,15           4568           0,15        0,35        0,24     0,10
      Total          0,012    0,047          0,30        0,06      0,22     0,14           3815           0,16        0,34        0,22     0,09


                                                    Panel B: Earnings per sector in BRL thousands

                                      Public Sector                                                  Private Sector
                        Old Hires                 New Hires                    Agriculture                Manufacturing          Retail & Services
Population Bracket    mean    s.d.           mean        s.d.              mean            s.d.          mean         s.d.       mean      s.d.

 6,793–10,188         1423    903            283         381               679            1675          1638         3746         1255     1550
 10,189–13,584        1710    1008           340         391               829            1896          1927         4085         1604     2259
 13,585–16,980        2159    1260           418         479               894            1945          2531         6608         2292     3149
 16,981–23,772        2859    1730           581         634               1220           2124          3563         6957         3415     4209
 23,773–30,564        3771    2401           676         755               1459           2439          5545         9747         5633     7138
 30,565–37,356        4690    2672           917        1005               2240           4360          8389         14200        8417     9697
 37,357–44,148        5559    3093          1040        1020               2755           5634          11900        16100       11400    11600
 44,149–47,537        6496    3576          1133        1132               2832           6234          13600        20000       13800    18000
      Total           3034    2408           584        7312               1350            3083           4649       10180       4463     7496
                                                                                               Panel C: Employment per sector

                                                            Public Sector                                                                                                 Private Sector
                                      Old Hires                         New Hires                                               Agriculture                                    Manufacturing                                Services
Population Bracket                  mean    s.d.                   mean        s.d.                                         mean            s.d.                              mean         s.d.                          mean     s.d.

   6,793–10,188                     277           125                   52                  59                               151                       301                        270                  507               244            297
   10,189–13,584                    321           142                   61                  67                               181                       318                        331                  618               310            409
   13,585–16,980                    398           152                   75                  79                               196                       337                        407                  754               429            540
   16,981–23,772                    509           213                   102                 106                              279                       408                        572                  962               639            704
   23,773–30,564                    650           266                   120                 130                              327                       442                        839                 1289               1050           1226
   30,565–37,356                    783           298                   155                 163                              428                       659                       1205                 1717               1496           1455
   37,357–44,148                    887           321                   179                 169                              552                       843                       1695                 1989               2029           1715
   44,149–47,537                    1023          352                   195                 193                              576                       928                       1964                 2328               2372           2238
          Total                      526          305                   102                 121                              286                       500                        705                 1271                813           1170

                                                                                       Panel D: Yearly Wage per worker in BRL

                                                            Public Sector                                                                                                 Private Sector
                                      Old Hires                         New Hires                                               Agriculture                                    Manufacturing                            Retail & Services
Population Bracket                  mean    s.d.                   mean        s.d.                                         mean            s.d.                              mean         s.d.                         mean      s.d.

   6,793–10,188                     5104         1832                  5423                2513                             3681                      1304                       5948                 5729               4984           1736
   10,189–13,584                    5291         1918                  5548                2583                             3765                      1324                       5580                 3438               4973           1576
   13,585–16,980                    5340         2061                  5489                2474                             3752                      1341                       5357                 3040               5059           1578
   16,981–23,772                    5500         2104                  5700                2543                             3752                      1684                       5681                 3190               5110           1506
   23,773–30,564                    5670         2314                  5665                2693                             3874                      1560                       5861                 3292               5002           1349
   30,565–37,356                    5905         2258                  5937                2552                             4227                      1955                       5947                 3300               5088           1298
   37,357–44,148                    6092         2393                  5927                2507                             4101                      1691                       6253                 3533               5124           1397
   44,149–47,537                    6266         2414                  5968                2583                             4037                      1343                       6138                 3337               5080           1173
          Total                     5535         2143                  5657                2561                             3870                      1544                       5736                 3529               5045           1495
This table mirrors table 1 for a restricted sample within a 4%-neighbourhood of the closest threshold. Summary statistics for the main variables employed in the empirical analysis are reported. The sample includes 11,349 yearly observations
covering 2,305 Brazilian municipalities over the period 1999-2014. Panel A reports the mean and standard deviation of three sets of variables per population bracket: municipal population growth, sources of municipal revenue as a share of total,
income per capita according to the 2000 census and types of expenditure. Sources of municipal revenue include FPM transfers, local tax revenue which include ISS (service tax) and IPTU (property tax), state-level government transfers and
federal-level government transfers (net of FPM) to municipalities. Panel B-D report summary statistics on municipal public and private sector labor markets outcomes, by employee tenure (old or new hires) and by sub-sector (Agriculture,
Manufacturing and Services), respectively. Panel B-D on reports total earnings, total employment and wage per worker, respectively.
                                        Appendix Table 5 - Actual and Law-Implied FPM Transfers

                                          Specification in Differences - OLS and LAD local estimates
                                             log-differences                                 OLS-differences                                   LAD-differences
              bandwidth               <4%         <3%        <2%                        <4%      <3%        <2%                           <4%      <3%        <2%
dep.var.                               (1)         (2)        (3)                        (4)      (5)        (6)                           (7)      (8)        (9)

Law-Implied FPM                   0.937*** 0.944*** 0.937***                        0.984*** 0.989*** 0.985***                         1.011*** 1.013*** 1.012**
                                   (0,008) (0,009) (0,012)                           (0,007) (0,008) (0,011)                            (0,001) (0,002) (0,004)

Observations                         7089            4756            2650               7089            4756            2650              7089            4756            2650
State-year dummies                   Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                  Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating differences in actual municipal FPM transfers to differences in law-implied FPM Transfers. Columns (1)-(3) report OLS coefficient
estimates when both actual FPM transfers (the dependent variable) and law-implied transfers (the independent variable) are expressed in simple differences (no transformation).
Columns (4)-(6) report least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates of simple differences. Columns (7)-(9) report OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are expressed in logs.
We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Specifications restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM
cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported).
Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**)
and 90% (*) confidence level.
                              Appendix Table 6 - Actual and Law-Implied FPM Transfers

                                                      Cutoff-Specific Local Estimates
                                           full sample                                        log-level specifications
                      bandwidth                 all                 <4%            <3%           <2%          <4%      <3%                             <2%
dep.var.                                        (1)                  (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)      (6)                             (7)

thresholds 1-3                              1.010***            0.975*** 0.968*** 0.961***                         0.989*** 0.980*** 0.975***
                                             (0,003)             (0,007) (0,007) (0,008)                            (0,009) (0,009) (0,011)

thresholds 4-7                              1.021***            0.996*** 0.993*** 0.982***                         1.021*** 1.014*** 1.007***
                                             (0,006)             (0,009) (0,008) (0,010)                            (0,014) (0,014) (0,016)


threshold 1                                 1.015***            0.971*** 0.964*** 0.965***                          0.983*** 0.974*** 0.975***
                                              (0,004)             (0,011) (0,011) (0,011)                             (0,012) (0,012) (0,013)

threshold 2                                 0.999***            0.978*** 0.969*** 0.954***                         0.993*** 0.982*** 0.967***
                                             (0,005)             (0,008) (0,008) (0,010)                            (0,010) (0,010) (0,013)

threshold 3                                 1.006***            0.980*** 0.976*** 0.964***                         0.999*** 0.992*** 0.982***
                                              (0,005)             (0,008) (0,009) (0,011)                            (0,011) (0,012) (0,015)

threshold 4                                 1.021***            0.997*** 0.992*** 0.984***                          1.020*** 1.012*** 1.005***
                                             (0,006)             (0,009) (0,009) (0,012)                             (0,014) (0,013) (0,016)

threshold 5                                 1.023***            1.013*** 1.011*** 1.000***                         1.039*** 1.033*** 1.024***
                                             (0,009)             (0,013) (0,015) (0,017)                            (0,017) (0,019) (0,022)

threshold 6                                 1.011***            0.983*** 0.983*** 0.973***                         1.014*** 1.009*** 1.000***
                                             (0,012)             (0,018) (0,012) (0,015)                            (0,022) (0,017) (0,020)

threshold 7                                 1.013***            0.983*** 0.974*** 0.945***                         1.018*** 1.004*** 0.979***
                                             (0,012)             (0,016) (0,017) (0,022)                            (0,021) (0,023) (0,029)

Observations                                   43466               11349           8471            5663               11349            8471           5663
Municipality Fixed-Effect                       No                  No              No              No                 No               No             No
State-year dummies                              Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                             Yes                 Yes            Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
First order polynomial                          No                  No              No              No                 Yes             Yes            Yes
The table reports cutoff-specific regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers to law-implied FPM Transfers. We construct municipal law-implied
transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Rows (1) and (2) report estimates specific to observations pooled around Thresholds
1-3 and 44-7, respectively. Rows (3)-(9) report coefficients associated to each of the seven threholds in our sample. Column (1) reports estimates in the full
sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict
estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All
specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). The table also reports the within (marginal) R2.
Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at
99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                        Appendix Table 7 - Municipal Revenue around the FPM Cutoffs

                                                   Cutoff-Specific Local Estimates
                                     full sample                                      log-level specifications
                   bandwidth              all             <4%           <3%           <2%        <4%      <3%                      <2%           FPM /
dep.var.                                  (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)      (6)                      (7)         Revenue

thresholds 1-3                        0.503*** 0.395***0.368***0.385*** 0.376***0.359***0.373***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,016) (0,019) (0,022) (0,024) (0,021) (0,024) (0,027)

thresholds 4-7                        0.476*** 0.331***0.265***0.240*** 0.266***0.234***0.195***                                                   0,27
                                       (0,030) (0,031) (0,034) (0,044) (0,048) (0,052) (0,060)


threshold 1                           0.516*** 0.380***0.342***0.376*** 0.367***0.337***0.363***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,022) (0,027) (0,030) (0,042) (0,028) (0,031) (0,043)

threshold 2                           0.472*** 0.388***0.373***0.375*** 0.366***0.365***0.352***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,026) (0,027) (0,030) (0,040) (0,029) (0,032) (0,042)

threshold 3                           0.513*** 0.435***0.412***0.419*** 0.401***0.399***0.384***                                                   0,32
                                       (0,031) (0,047) (0,058) (0,070) (0,051) (0,062) (0,073)

threshold 4                           0.491*** 0.369***0.287***0.308*** 0.313***0.266***0.254***                                                   0,29
                                       (0,034) (0,041) (0,048) (0,059) (0,052) (0,056) (0,067)

threshold 5                           0.436*** 0.276***0.246***0.219*** 0.202***0.216*** 0.142*                                                    0,26
                                       (0,047) (0,062) (0,061) (0,075) (0,074) (0,078) (0,086)

threshold 6                           0.473*** 0.309***0.231*** 0,0254 0.209** 0.190* -0,0841                                                      0,24
                                       (0,053) (0,070) (0,079) (0,100) (0,098) (0,105) (0,119)

threshold 7                           0.477*** 0.358***0.285*** 0.283** 0.241** 0.237* 0,147                                                       0,23
                                       (0,083) (0,091) (0,109) (0,134) (0,118) (0,127) (0,152)

Observations             43466                           11349          8471          5663           11349           8471          5663
Municipality Fixed-Effect Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
State-year dummies        Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Cutoff-year dummies       Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
First order polynomial    No                              No             No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes
The table reports cutoff-specific regression estimates associating Municipal Revenue to law-implied FPM Transfers. We construct municipal law-implied
transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Rows (1) and (2) report estimates specific to observations pooled around
Thresholds 1-3 and 44-7, respectively. Rows (3)-(9) report coefficients associated to each of the seven threholds in our sample. Column (1) reports
estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD)
estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include
a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). The table also reports the
within (marginal) R2. Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                     Appendix Table 8 - Municipal Expenditure around the FPM Cutoffs

                                                   Cutoff-Specific Local Estimates
                                     full sample                                      log-level specifications
                   bandwidth              all             <4%           <3%           <2%        <4%      <3%                      <2%           FPM /
dep.var.                                  (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)      (6)                      (7)          Expend.


thresholds 1-3                        0.471*** 0.346***0.322***0.324*** 0.324***0.313***0.314***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,015) (0,019) (0,021) (0,025) (0,022) (0,024) (0,029)

thresholds 4-7                        0.459*** 0.312***0.238***0.204*** 0.238***0.202*** 0.169**                                                   0,27
                                       (0,030) (0,033) (0,035) (0,045) (0,048) (0,055) (0,068)


threshold 1                           0.487*** 0.340***0.313***0.346*** 0.323***0.304***0.329***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,021) (0,031) (0,036) (0,043) (0,032) (0,037) (0,044)

threshold 2                           0.435*** 0.351***0.349***0.310*** 0.323***0.334***0.281***                                                   0,33
                                       (0,026) (0,028) (0,030) (0,040) (0,030) (0,033) (0,042)

threshold 3                           0.479*** 0.353***0.303***0.302*** 0.310***0.279***0.256***                                                   0,32
                                       (0,030) (0,036) (0,040) (0,047) (0,040) (0,044) (0,053)

threshold 4                           0.474*** 0.353***0.272***0.299*** 0.282***0.232***0.229***                                                   0,29
                                       (0,035) (0,045) (0,053) (0,063) (0,054) (0,061) (0,076)

threshold 5                           0.417*** 0.240***0.202*** 0.169** 0.146** 0.147* 0,0731                                                      0,27
                                       (0,047) (0,062) (0,062) (0,081) (0,072) (0,079) (0,096)

threshold 6                           0.477*** 0.291*** 0.196** -0,0327                              0.165* 0,12     -0,174                        0,25
                                       (0,053) (0,076) (0,085) (0,120)                               (0,097) (0,109) (0,145)

threshold 7                           0.411*** 0.345*** 0.230** 0,164                                0.201* 0,142 -0,0092                          0,24
                                       (0,088) (0,097) (0,115) (0,126)                               (0,119) (0,132) (0,154)

Observations             43466                           11349          8471          5663           11349           8471          5663
Municipality Fixed-Effect Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
State-year dummies        Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Cutoff-year dummies       Yes                             Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
First order polynomial    No                              No             No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes
The table reports cutoff-specific regression estimates associating Municipal Expenditure to law-implied FPM Transfers. We construct municipal law-
implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Rows (1) and (2) report estimates specific to observations pooled around
Thresholds 1-3 and 44-7, respectively. Rows (3)-(9) report coefficients associated to each of the seven threholds in our sample. Column (1) reports
estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD)
estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include
a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). The table also reports the
within (marginal) R2. Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                 Appendix Table 9 - Current vs Capital Expenditure around the FPM Cutoffs

                                            full sample                                                local estimates
                       bandwidth                 all                 <4%             <3%             <2%           <4%                   <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                         (1)                  (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                   (6)             (7)

log (Current Expenditure)                    0.573***             0.374*** 0.351*** 0.381***                          0.354*** 0.365*** 0.389***
(net of wage bill)
                                              (0,022)              (0,035) (0,041) (0,048)                             (0,045) (0,051) (0,067)


log (Wage Bill)                              0.388***             0.245*** 0.205*** 0.166***                          0.219*** 0.182*** 0.149***
                                              (0,017)              (0,023) (0,022) (0,025)                             (0,029) (0,027) (0,032)


log (Capital Expenditure)                    0.458***             0.562*** 0.512*** 0.530***                          0.557*** 0.553*** 0.563***
                                              (0,053)              (0,071) (0,081) (0,096)                             (0,086) (0,101) (0,121)

Observations                                    43436               11342            8465            5659               11342            8465            5659
Municipality Fixed-Effect                        Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                               Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                              Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                           No                  No               No              No                 Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating types of Municipal Expenditure to law-implied FPM Transfers. Rows (1)-(3) reports fixed-effect OLS
coefficient estimates on Current Expenditure (net of wages), Wage Bill and Capital Expenditure. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM
allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM
cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths
(4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects
(constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly
different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
           Appendix Table 10 - Main Categories of Municipal Expenditure around the FPM Cutoffs

                                         full sample                                         local estimates
                      bandwidth               all               <4%           <3%            <2%        <4%                   <3%           <2%            % of total
dep.var.                                      (1)                (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)                   (6)           (7)          Expenditure

log (Public Admin)                        0.538*** 0.424***0.389***0.336*** 0.397***0.328***0.303***                                                           16,2%
                                           (0,035)  (0,045) (0,052) (0,063)  (0,057) (0,066) (0,085)

log (Education)                           0.428*** 0.271***0.240***0.206*** 0.245***0.231***0.208***                                                           33,2%
                                           (0,020)  (0,023) (0,024) (0,029)  (0,031) (0,031) (0,036)

log (Health)                              0.394*** 0.272***0.229***0.184*** 0.220***0.227***0.175***                                                           22,4%
                                           (0,029)  (0,040) (0,044) (0,050)  (0,049) (0,055) (0,063)

log (Housing & Urbanism)0.541*** 0.303***0.330***0.508*** 0.412***0.628***0.712***                                                                              9,3%
                         (0,071)  (0,100) (0,121) (0,150)  (0,129) (0,149) (0.186

log (Other)                               0.580*** 0.465***0.403***0.439*** 0.437***0.440***0.475***                                                           19,2%
                                           (0,040)  (0,045) (0,051) (0,061)  (0,058) (0,064) (0,077)

Observations                                 43269            11289           8425           5636             11289          8425           5636
Municipality Fixed-Effect                     Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
State-year dummies                            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
First order polynomial                        No               No              No             No               Yes           Yes            Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating categories of Municipal Expenditure to law-implied FPM Transfers. Rows (1)-(5) reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient
estimates of municipal public spending on Public Administration, Education, Health, Housing & Urbanism and Others. We construct municipal law-implied transfers
applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the
seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths
(4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not
reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at
99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                Appendix Table 11 - Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Public Sector

                                     Specification in Differences - OLS and LAD local estimates
                                           log-differences                               OLS-differences                                  LAD-differences
             bandwidth                <4%       <3%      <2%                          <4%    <3%       <2%                             <4%    <3%      <2%
dep.var.                               (1)       (2)       (3)                         (4)    (5)       (6)                             (7)    (8)      (9)

Total Earnings                    0.111***0.0972** 0.112**                            0,043 0,047 0,062                             0.088** 0.111** 0,080
                                   (0,032) (0,038) (0,045)                           (0,052) (0,060) (0,072)                         (0,038) (0,046) (0,054)

Employment                       0.0886***0.0736** 0,062                              0,005 0,004 -0,001                           0.013*** 0.011** 0,012
                                   (0,027) (0,032) (0,039)                           (0,008) (0,009) (0,011)                        (0,005) (0,005) (0,008)

Average Wage                        (0,022) (0,012) (0,005)                       0.0652** 0.0584* 0.0730*                           0.061* 0.077** 0.110*
                                    (0,016) (0,018) (0,022)                        (0,031) (0,035) (0,043)                           (0,032) (0,037) (0,063)

Observations        6908                            4620           2554               6908           4620          2554               6908           4620           2554
Municipality FE      No                              No             No                 No             No            No                 No             No             No
Cutoff-year dummies Yes                             Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating differences in Public Sector Labor Market outcomes to differences in law-implied FPM Transfers. Rows (1)-(3) report
fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. Columns (1)-(3) report OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are
expressed in simple differences (no transformation). Columns (4)-(6) report OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent the independent variable are expressed in
logs. Columns (7)-(9) report least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates of simple differences. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation
mechanism formula (see appendix). Specifications restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off.
All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-
region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
     Appendix Table 12 - Earnings, Employment and Wage in the Public Sector according to Tenure

                                    Specification in Differences - OLS and LAD local estimates
                                          log-differences                              OLS-differences                                 LAD-differences
             bandwidth               <4%       <3%      <2%                         <4%    <3%       <2%                            <4%    <3%      <2%
dep.var.                              (1)       (2)       (3)                        (4)    (5)       (6)                            (7)    (8)      (9)

                                                                   PANEL A: Old Hires from previous years
Total Earnings                    0.0630* 0,050 0.103**                            0.072* 0,086 0,055                            0.070** 0.066** 0.077*
                                   (0,038) (0,041) (0,048)                         (0,043) (0,053) (0,064)                        (0,028) (0,033) (0,046)

Employment                          0,008 -0,011 -0,011                             0,004 0,005 -0,005                           0.008** 0,006 0,000
                                   (0,031) (0,034) (0,041)                         (0,006) (0,007) (0,009)                        (0,004) (0,005) (0,008)

Average Wage                      0.0260* 0,021 0.0380*                           0.062** 0.057* 0.115**                           0,056 0,069 0.109*
                                   (0,015) (0,018) (0,023)                         (0,031) (0,035) (0,046)                        (0,038) (0,045) (0,063)


                                                                       PANEL B: New Hires in current year

Total Earnings                   0.578*** 0.494** 0,367                            -0,024 -0,038 0,010                             0,025 0,016 0,004
                                  (0,194) (0,227) (0,268)                          (0,041) (0,054) (0,064)                        (0,030) (0,041) (0,055)

Employment                       0.496*** 0.468** 0.452*                            0,001 0,000 0,008                              0,004 0,002 0,002
                                  (0,187) (0,224) (0,274)                          (0,007) (0,009) (0,011)                        (0,005) (0,007) (0,010)

Average Wage                       -0,004 -0,077 -0,132                             0,130 -0,055 -0,040                            0,140 0,075 0,075
                                   (0,059) (0,071) (0,080)                         (0,150) (0,187) (0,202)                        (0,137) (0,155) (0,259)

Observations        6908                           4620          2554               6908          4620           2554              6908           4620          2554
Municipality FE      No                             No            No                 No            No             No                No             No            No
Cutoff-year dummies Yes                            Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating differences in Public Sector Labor Market outcomes according to tenure to differences in law-implied FPM Transfers.
Rows (1)-(3) in Panel A report fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker for `Old Hires'. Panel B reports
corresponding estimates for `New Hires'. Columns (1)-(3) report OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are expressed in simple differences (no transformation).
Columns (4)-(6) report OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent the independent variable are expressed in logs. Columns (7)-(9) report least-absolute-
deviation (median) estimates of simple differences. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix).
Specifications restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. All specifications include state-year
fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses
below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
               Appendix Table 13 - Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Private Sector

                                     Specification in Differences - OLS and LAD local estimates
                                           log-differences                               OLS-differences                                  LAD-differences
             bandwidth                <4%       <3%      <2%                          <4%    <3%       <2%                             <4%    <3%      <2%
dep.var.                               (1)       (2)       (3)                         (4)    (5)       (6)                             (7)    (8)      (9)

Total Earnings                    0.129*** 0.112** 0.154**                        0.500*** 0.419** 0.577***                        0.168***0.148*** 0.229**
                                   (0,035) (0,046) (0,060)                         (0,128) (0,169) (0,200)                          (0,044) (0,056) (0,100)

Employment                        0.110***0.097***0.125***                        0.068***0.061***0.087***                         0.026*** 0.021* 0.031**
                                   (0,030) (0,035) (0,043)                         (0,016) (0,021) (0,025)                          (0,008) (0,011) (0,014)

Average Wage                         0,021 0,015 0,035                                0,049 0,021 0,051                               0,022 0,026 0,035
                                    (0,018) (0,022) (0,024)                          (0,034) (0,040) (0,043)                         (0,017) (0,019) (0,025)

Observations        6908                            4620           2554               6908           4620          2554               6908           4620           2554
Municipality FE      No                              No             No                 No             No            No                 No             No             No
Cutoff-year dummies Yes                             Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating differences in private sector labor market outcomes to differences in law-implied FPM transfers. Rows (1)-(3) report
fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. Columns (1)-(3) report OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are
expressed in simple differences (no transformation). Columns (4)-(6) report OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent the independent variable are expressed in
logs. Columns (7)-(9) report least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates of simple differences. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation
mechanism formula (see appendix). Specifications restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off.
All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-
region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
            Appendix Table 14 - Baselines Estimates excluding observations around Threshold 1
                       FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                         full sample                                                  local estimates
                     bandwidth                all                  <4%             <3%              <2%           <4%                    <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                      (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)

                                                                   PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (FPM Transfers)                        1.006***            0.989*** 0.988*** 0.971***                            0.993*** 0.990*** 0.975***
                                            (0,006)             (0,007) (0,008) (0,010)                               (0,009) (0,010) (0,013)

log (Expenditure)                          0.447***            0.339*** 0.294*** 0.281***                            0.309*** 0.292*** 0.281***
                                            (0,018)             (0,020) (0,021) (0,026)                               (0,026) (0,028) (0,035)


                                                                                   PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Total Earnings)                       0.403***            0.265*** 0.259*** 0.284***                            0.318*** 0.244*** 0.384***
                                            (0,041)             (0,045) (0,047) (0,058)                               (0,057) (0,064) (0,080)

log (Employment)                           0.343***            0.181*** 0.152*** 0.130***                            0.217*** 0.0938* 0.179***
                                            (0,035)             (0,039) (0,040) (0,048)                               (0,049) (0,054) (0,068)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0444**            0.0458** 0.0489**                   0,047              0.0524* 0.0875*** 0.117***
                                            (0,021)             (0,020) (0,023)                   (0,029)              (0,027) (0,029) (0,033)


                                                                                  PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Total Earnings)                       0.293***             0.105**           0.112*           0,020              0.133**         0.143**            0,112
                                            (0,050)              (0,050)          (0,058)         (0,072)              (0,066)         (0,072)          (0,101)

log (Employment)                           0.245***             0.114**          0.109**           0,054              0.153**          0.131*            0,130
                                            (0,053)              (0,050)          (0,053)         (0,066)              (0,065)         (0,069)          (0,091)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0572**               0,022            0,036          -0,009                0,017           0,044            0,021
                                            (0,024)              (0,025)          (0,027)         (0,038)              (0,033)         (0,039)          (0,048)

Observations                                 28517                 9107            6783            4522                 9107             6783            4522
Municipality Fixed-Effect                     Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                            Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                           Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes              Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                        No                    No              No              No                  Yes              Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. The sample is
restricted by dropping observations around thresholds 1. Panel A reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on actual FPM transfers and Expenditure. Panel B
and C report estimates on Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the
FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM
cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-
2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not
reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from
zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                Appendix Table 15 - Baselines Estimates excluding observations in census years
                         FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                         full sample                                                 local estimates
                     bandwidth                all                  <4%             <3%             <2%           <4%                    <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                      (1)                   (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)

                                                                  PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (FPM Transfers)                       1.044***             1.002*** 0.998*** 0.989***                           0.996*** 0.993*** 0.987***
                                           (0,006)              (0,008) (0,008) (0,009)                              (0,010) (0,010) (0,012)

log (Expenditure)                         0.478***             0.349*** 0.316*** 0.309***                           0.311*** 0.303*** 0.291***
                                           (0,015)              (0,019) (0,022) (0,026)                              (0,025) (0,030) (0,035)


                                                                                   PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Total Earnings)                      0.406***             0.233*** 0.242*** 0.236***                           0.260*** 0.210*** 0.273***
                                           (0,032)              (0,037) (0,039) (0,045)                              (0,046) (0,053) (0,062)

log (Employment)                          0.339***             0.156*** 0.174*** 0.174***                           0.178*** 0.131*** 0.204***
                                           (0,029)              (0,035) (0,037) (0,042)                              (0,042) (0,047) (0,056)

log (Wage per Worker)                    0.0566***             0.0464**           0,029            0,010            0.0474**            0,038           0,026
                                           (0,016)              (0,019)          (0,021)          (0,025)            (0,024)           (0,027)         (0,031)


                                                                                  PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Total Earnings)                      0.351***             0.140*** 0.128**                    0,081            0.180*** 0.153**                   0.157*
                                           (0,044)              (0,052) (0,057)                   (0,069)            (0,064) (0,070)                   (0,084)

log (Employment)                          0.291***              0.137**          0.101*            0,064            0.183***            0,107           0,106
                                           (0,045)               (0,054)         (0,056)          (0,064)            (0,065)           (0,070)         (0,077)

log (Wage per Worker)                    0.0618***                0,035 0.0687**                   0,044               0,030 0.0776** 0.0801**
                                           (0,019)               (0,024) (0,027)                  (0,032)             (0,030) (0,036) (0,040)

Observations                                 35133                9027             6705            4441                 9027            6705            4441
Municipality Fixed-Effect                     Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                            Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                           Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                        No                   No               No              No                  Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. The sample is
restricted by dropping observations on population census years (2001, 2007 and 2011). Panel A reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on actual FPM
transfers and Expenditure. Panel B and C report estimates on Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-
implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both
close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using
three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year
fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients.
Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
        Appendix Table 16 - Estimates excluding observations with positive changes in population brackets
                           FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                          full sample                                                          local estimates
                     bandwidth                 all                    <4%                <3%                <2%             <4%                      <3%                <2%
dep.var.                                       (1)                     (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)                      (6)                (7)

                                                                           PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (FPM Transfers)                        1.024***               0.978***           0.976***           0.955***               0.981***           0.975***          0.958***
                                           (0.00651)              (0.00971)          (0.0101)           (0.0135)               (0.0121)           (0.0132)          (0.0163)

log (Expenditure)                           0.490***               0.380***          0.347***           0.316***               0.363***           0.346***          0.318***
                                            (0.0159)               (0.0200)          (0.0234)           (0.0342)               (0.0265)           (0.0318)          (0.0445)


                                                                                           PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Total Earnings)                        0.428***               0.288***          0.293***           0.280***               0.326***           0.303***          0.303***
                                            (0.0342)               (0.0428)          (0.0452)           (0.0610)               (0.0527)           (0.0583)          (0.0796)

log (Employment)                            0.367***               0.195***          0.184***           0.147***               0.213***           0.166***          0.176***
                                            (0.0314)               (0.0393)          (0.0433)           (0.0539)               (0.0492)           (0.0550)          (0.0668)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0505***               0.0572**          0.0588**             0,041                0.0722** 0.0842***                     0,067
                                            (0.0170)               (0.0234)          (0.0269)            (0.0354)              (0.0291) (0.0320)                     (0.0411)


                                                                                          PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Total Earnings)                        0.357***               0.164***           0.142**             0,099                0.197***            0.150*             0.198*
                                            (0.0453)               (0.0544)           (0.0610)           (0.0857)              (0.0701)           (0.0768)            (0.103)

log (Employment)                            0.300***               0.182***           0.135**             0,086                0.244***           0.158**             0.173*
                                            (0.0473)               (0.0545)           (0.0604)           (0.0763)              (0.0723)           (0.0800)           (0.0945)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0602***                0,019             0.0631*             0,050                  0,001             0,050             0.0754*
                                            (0.0208)               (0.0289)           (0.0334)           (0.0394)               (0.0357)          (0.0443)           (0.0457)

Observations                                  40912                   9395               6725               4256                   9395              6725               4256
Municipality Fixed-Effect                      Yes                     Yes                Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes
State-year dummies                             Yes                     Yes                Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                            Yes                     Yes                Yes               Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes
First order polynomial                         No                      No                 No                No                     Yes                Yes                Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. The sample is restricted by dropping
observations of municipalities with positive changes in population brackets from one year to the next. Panel A reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on actual FPM transfers
and Expenditure. Panel B and C report estimates on Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers
applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs.
Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off.
Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted
standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence
level.
                        Appendix Table 17 - Baselines Estimates with mayor-specific fixed-effects
                             FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                          full sample                                                    local estimates
                     bandwidth                 all                  <4%              <3%              <2%           <4%                    <3%                <2%
dep.var.                                       (1)                   (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)                    (6)                (7)

                                                                      PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (FPM Transfers)                        0.915***             0.955*** 0.967*** 0.957***                             0.954*** 0.960***                  0.954***
                                            (0,008)              (0,011) (0,013) (0,018)                                (0,013) (0,015)                    (0,023)

log (Expenditure)                          0.304***             0.271*** 0.260*** 0.271***                             0.259*** 0.261***                  0.256***
                                            (0,015)              (0,026) (0,032) (0,044)                                (0,032) (0,037)                    (0,048)


                                                                                       PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Total Earnings)                       0.176***                 0,177 0.185*** 0.232***                             0.149**          0.154**            0.213*
                                            (0,031)                (0,060) (0,062) (0,082)                               (0,063)          (0,072)           (0,110)

log (Employment)                           0.130***              0.115** 0.143*** 0.154***                                0,086            0,085              0,107
                                            (0,028)               (0,045) (0,053) (0,066)                                (0,059)          (0,066)            (0,089)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0302**                 0,025          -0,001            0,007                0,017            0,015              0,023
                                            (0,013)                (0,022)         (0,029)          (0,033)              (0,027)          (0,033)            (0,051)


                                                                                      PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Total Earnings)                       0.117***               0.108*            0,123           0.190*                0,116            0,158            0.250*
                                            (0,037)               (0,062)          (0,080)          (0,099)              (0,076)          (0,098)           (0,134)

log (Employment)                           0.0842**                 0,090           0,084            0,133                0,095            0,095              0,185
                                            (0,036)                (0,056)         (0,071)          (0,099)              (0,070)          (0,090)            (0,129)

log (Wage per Worker)                      0.0358**                 0,023           0,041            0,057                0,026            0,065              0,063
                                            (0,017)                (0,031)         (0,037)          (0,052)              (0,035)          (0,042)            (0,062)

Observations                                  43466                11349            8471             5663                11349             8471               5663
Municipality Fixed-Effect                      Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
State-year dummies                             Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                            Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
First order polynomial                         No                   No               No               No                  Yes              Yes                Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A reports fixed-
effect OLS coefficient estimates on actual FPM transfers and Expenditure. Panel B and C report estimates on Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings, Employment and
Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the
full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the
neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include
mayor-specific, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Mayor-specific fixed effects are equivalent to municipality fixed-effects interacted with
mayor term dummies. Mayor terms in our sample consist of the following 4-year periods: 1997-2000, 2001-2004, 2005-2008, 2009-2012 and 2013-2016.
Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99%
(***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
          Appendix Table 18 - Global RD Full Sample Estimates with higher-order polynomials
                     FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                                                        Global RD estimates - polynomials of nth-order
                     bandwidth                                -             1st        2nd         3rd         4th                                       5th
dep.var.                                                     (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)                                       (7)

                                                                        PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (FPM Transfers)                                     1.020*** 1.048*** 1.100*** 1.151*** 1.182*** 1.204***
                                                         (0,006)  (0,007)  (0,009)  (0,011)  (0,012)  (0,012)

log (Expenditure)                                       0.469*** 0.418*** 0.456*** 0.498*** 0.537*** 0.561***
                                                         (0,015)  (0,018)  (0,022)  (0,026)  (0,028)  (0,030)


                                                                                         PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Total Earnings)                                    0.394*** 0.311*** 0.360*** 0.385*** 0.425*** 0.465***
                                                         (0,031)  (0,038)  (0,046)  (0,054)  (0,060)  (0,064)

log (Employment)                                        0.336*** 0.244*** 0.292*** 0.337*** 0.380*** 0.429***
                                                         (0,028)  (0,035)  (0,042)  (0,050)  (0,055)  (0,059)

log (Wage per Worker)                                  0.0470*** 0.0511*** 0.0485**                                0,029             0,030              0,026
                                                         (0,015)   (0,016)  (0,021)                               (0,025)           (0,027)            (0,029)


                                                                                        PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Total Earnings)                                    0.339*** 0.244*** 0.291*** 0.301*** 0.329*** 0.331***
                                                         (0,042)  (0,047)  (0,056)  (0,065)  (0,071)  (0,076)

log (Employment)                                        0.286*** 0.204*** 0.243*** 0.227*** 0.227*** 0.223***
                                                         (0,044)  (0,048)  (0,056)  (0,062)  (0,069)  (0,074)

log (Wage per Worker)                                  0.0567*** 0.0464** 0.0547** 0.0816*** 0.107*** 0.107***
                                                         (0,019)  (0,022)  (0,027)   (0,031)  (0,035)  (0,037)

Observations                                              43466              43466             43466              43466             43466              43466
Municipality Fixed-Effect                                  Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
State-year dummies                                         Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                                        Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
First order polynomial                                     No                 No                No                 Yes               Yes                Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A reports
fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on actual FPM transfers and Expenditure. Panel B and C report estimates on Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings,
Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). All columns
report estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(6) report global (RD) regression estimates
that include higher-order (1st-5th) polynomial on normalized population. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects
(constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly
different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                   Appendix Table 19 - Regional Spillover Effects into neighbouring municipalities
                            FPM Transfers, Expenditure and Labor Market Outcomes


                                                  full sample                                                 local estimates
                              bandwidth                all                  <4%             <3%             <2%           <4%                    <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                               (1)                   (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)

                                                                           PANEL A: FPM Transfers and Expenditure
log (Regional FPM Transfers)                       0.0449**                0,029           0,059            0,058               0,081            0,096           0,133
                                                    (0,018)               (0,032)         (0,057)          (0,073)             (0,050)          (0,065)         (0,098)

log (Regional Expenditure)                             0,019               0,018           0,058            0,038               0,074            0,096           0,123
                                                      (0,019)             (0,037)         (0,066)          (0,083)             (0,057)          (0,075)         (0,113)


                                                                                           PANEL B: Public Sector
log (Regional Total Earnings)                          0,002              -0,012           0,019           -0,023               0,026            0,057           0,042
                                                      (0,023)             (0,040)         (0,063)          (0,089)             (0,059)          (0,075)         (0,123)

log (Regional Employment)                              0,014              -0,016          -0,005           -0,036               0,000            0,012          -0,004
                                                      (0,017)             (0,022)         (0,033)          (0,044)             (0,030)          (0,039)         (0,060)

log (Regional Wage per Worker) -0,001                                     -0,014           0,009           -0,014               0,007            0,022           0,012
                               (0,016)                                    (0,025)         (0,037)          (0,051)             (0,036)          (0,045)         (0,072)


                                                                                          PANEL C: Private Sector
log (Regional Total Earnings)                         -0,003               0,004           0,019            0,008               0,020            0,047           0,076
                                                      (0,026)             (0,039)         (0,060)          (0,077)             (0,053)          (0,068)         (0,101)

log (Regional Employment)                             -0,014              -0,019          -0,013           -0,034              -0,011            0,012           0,007
                                                      (0,023)             (0,028)         (0,036)          (0,043)             (0,033)          (0,040)         (0,055)

log (Regional Wage per Worker) 0,019                                       0,019           0,034            0,025               0,045            0,042           0,057
                               (0,014)                                    (0,022)         (0,035)          (0,043)             (0,030)          (0,040)         (0,059)

Observations                                          43466                11349            8471            4522                11349            8471            4522
Municipality Fixed-Effect                              Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                                     Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                                    Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                                 No                   No               No              No                  Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating regional (at the meso-region level) actual FPM transfers, expenditure and labor market outcomes to local (municipal)
law-implied FPM Transfers. A meso-region is a subdivision of states defined by the IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) which congregates a few
municipalities in a given geographical area with economic and social similarities. They do not constitute any sort of poliitcal or economic entities. Panel A reports fixed-
effect OLS coefficient estimates on regional actual FPM transfers and Expenditure. Panel B and C report estimates on regional Public (Private) Sector Total Earnings,
Employment and Wage per Worker. All regional variables exclude the local municipalitity. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation
mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4)
report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns
(5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted
standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*)
confidence level.
                                  Appendix Table 20 - Delayed Effects (Time-to-build)
                          Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Private Sector at t+1


                                           full sample                                                   local estimates
                     bandwidth                  all                  <4%              <3%              <2%           <4%                      <3%              <2%
dep.var.                                        (1)                   (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)                      (6)              (7)

log (Total Earningst+1 )                    0.261***                 0,063            0,079            0,053                0,058            0,060            0,081
                                             (0,040)                (0,042)          (0,048)          (0,058)              (0,051)          (0,056)          (0,065)

log (Employmentt+1 )                        0.221***                 0,042           0,0446            0,028                0,054           0,0534           0,0573
                                             (0,041)                (0,044)          (0,048)          (0,055)              (0,054)          (0,057)          (0,063)

log (Wage per Workert+1 ) 0.0386**                                  0.033*           0.052*            0,044                0,025            0,033            0,042
                           (0,018)                                  (0,019)          (0,021)          (0,029)              (0,025)          (0,028)          (0,033)

Observations                                   43425                11328             8451             5645                 11328             8451             5645
Municipality Fixed-Effect                       Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
State-year dummies                              Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                             Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                   Yes              Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                          No                   No                No               No                   Yes              Yes              Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating law-implied FPM Transfers in year t to municipal private sector labor market outcomes in year t+1. Rows (1)-(3)
reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM
allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM
cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%)
for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported).
Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99%
(***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
         Appendix Table 21 - Estimates excluding observations with positive changes in population brackets
                             Employment in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services


                                           full sample                                                           local estimates
                     bandwidth                  all                     <4%                <3%                <2%             <4%                       <3%                <2%
dep.var.                                        (1)                      (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)                       (6)                (7)

Agriculture                                  0.408***                0.223**              0,103              0,073                  0,202              0,116             -0,130
                                              (0,076)                 (0,113)            (0,129)            (0,159)                (0,143)            (0,162)            (0,200)

Manufacturing                                0.310***                  0,139              0,086              0,259                  0,259              0,149              0,215
                                              (0,093)                 (0,175)            (0,241)            (0,176)                (0,176)            (0,215)            (0,291)

Services                                     0.353***               0.194***            0.137**            0.165**                0.167**             0.137*            0.238**
                                              (0,051)                (0,054)             (0,058)            (0,080)                (0,068)            (0,077)            (0,096)

Observations                                   40912                   9395               6725               4256                    9395               6725               4256
Municipality Fixed-Effect                       Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes                     Yes                Yes                Yes
State-year dummies                              Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes                     Yes                Yes                Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                             Yes                    Yes                Yes                Yes                     Yes                Yes                Yes
First order polynomial                          No                      No                 No                 No                     Yes                Yes                Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating private sector labor market outcomes by sector to law-implied FPM Transfers. The sample is restricted by dropping observations of
municipalities with positive changes in population brackets from one year to the next. Rows (1)-(3) reports fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on employment in Agriculture,
Manufacturing and Services. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full
sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the
FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications include municipality, state-year and cutoff-
year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly
different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                            Appendix Table 22 - Estimates with mayor-specific fixed-effects
                              Employment in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services


                                          full sample                                                local estimates
                     bandwidth                 all                 <4%             <3%             <2%           <4%                   <3%             <2%
dep.var.                                       (1)                  (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                   (6)             (7)

Agriculture                                   0,092               0,014           -0,055          -0,057              -0,038          -0,066           0,059
                                             (0,070)             (0,130)          (0,160)         (0,212)             (0,156)         (0,181)         (0,239)

Manufacturing                                 0,080               0,081            0,207           0,343               0,116           0,205           0,331
                                             (0,085)             (0,139)          (0,169)         (0,247)             (0,157)         (0,209)         (0,311)

Services                                   0.106***             0.153**          0.155* 0.210**                       0.152*          0.181*          0.248*
                                            (0,037)              (0,063)         (0,080) (0,102)                      (0,078)         (0,101)         (0,133)

Observations                                 40912                 9395            6725            4256                9395            6725            4256
Municipality Fixed-Effect                     Yes                   Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
State-year dummies                            Yes                   Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                           Yes                   Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes
First order polynomial                        No                    No              No              No                  Yes             Yes             Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating private sector labor market outcomes by sector to law-implied FPM Transfers. Rows (1)-(3) reports fixed-effect
OLS coefficient estimates on employment in Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation
mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the FPM cutoffs. Columns
(2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each
cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel.All specifications include mayor-specific, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported).
Mayor-specific fixed effects are equivalent to municipality fixed-effects interacted with mayor term dummies. Mayor terms in our sample consist of the following
4-year periods: 1997-2000, 2001-2004, 2005-2008, 2009-2012 and 2013-2016. Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are
reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                     Appendix Table 23 - Earnings, Employment and Average Wage in the Private Sector
                                          Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services

                                           Specification in Differences - OLS and LAD local estimates
                                               log-differences                                    OLS-differences                                  LAD-differences
                 bandwidth                <4%       <3%        <2%                           <4%      <3%       <2%                            <4%     <3%       <2%
dep.var.                                   (1)       (2)        (3)                           (4)      (5)        (6)                           (7)     (8)        (9)

                                                                                              Panel A: Agriculture
log (Total Earnings)                     0,168          -0,128          -0,257              0,097           0,098          0,069               0,001          0,001          -0,004
                                        (0,226)         (0,238)         (0,247)            (0,059)         (0,070)        (0,056)             (0,004)        (0,006)         (0,007)

log (Employment)                         0,091           0,009           0,023             0.014*           0,011          0,016              -0,002         -0,003           0,003
                                        (0,063)         (0,073)         (0,097)            (0,007)         (0,009)        (0,012)             (0,001)        (0,001)         (0,002)

log (Wage per Worker)                    0,013          -0,003          -0,032             -0,011          -0,025         -0,071               0,018          0,011          -0,002
                                        (0,029)         (0,028)         (0,034)            (0,048)         (0,068)        (0,072)             (0,016)        (0,021)         (0,024)


                                                                                           Panel B: Manufacturing
log (Total Earnings)                     0,267           0,541           0,260              0,178           0,151 0.380***                   0.032** 0.037*                  0.056*
                                        (0,309)         (0,388)         (0,507)            (0,110)         (0,124) (0,145)                    (0,014) (0,021)                (0,033)

log (Employment)                        0.144*          0.188* 0.274**                      0,017           0,012 0.039**                     0.005*          0,006           0,007
                                        (0,078)         (0,097) (0,132)                    (0,013)         (0,015) (0,018)                    (0,003)        (0,005)         (0,005)

log (Wage per Worker)                    0,038           0,002           0,040             -0,004          -0,098          0,061             0.060** 0.101*** 0,078
                                        (0,041)         (0,048)         (0,056)            (0,127)         (0,170)        (0,157)             (0,030) (0,035) (0,052)


                                                                                                 Panel C: Services
log (Total Earnings)                  0.152*** 0.166*** 0.186***                         0.225*** 0.170*                   0,128            0.057*** 0.062** 0.060*
                                       (0,039) (0,049) (0,062)                            (0,075) (0,089)                 (0,125)            (0,021) (0,026) (0,033)

log (Employment)                      0.105*** 0.118*** 0.145***                         0.032*** 0.030*** 0.0278*                           0.010** 0.011** 0.016**
                                       (0,031) (0,036) (0,045)                            (0,010) (0,012) (0,016)                             (0,004) (0,005) (0,006)

log (Wage per Worker) 0.046** 0.041*                                     0,021           0.118*** 0.101**                  0,043            0.0490** 0,033                    0,055
                       (0,018) (0,022)                                  (0,026)           (0,040) (0,047)                 (0,052)            (0,020) (0,025)                 (0,039)

Observations                              6908           4620            2554               6908            4620            2554               6908            4620           2554
State-year dummies                        Yes            Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
Cutoff-year dummies                       Yes            Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes            Yes
The table reports regression estimates associating differences in Private Sector Labor Market outcomes to differences in law-implied FPM Transfers. Panel A-C report estimates on
Agriculture, Manufacturing and Services. Rows (1)-(3) report fixed-effect OLS coefficient estimates on Total Earnings, Employment and Wage per Worker. Columns (1)-(3) report
OLS coefficient estimates when both variables are expressed in simple differences (no transformation). Columns (4)-(6) report OLS coefficient estimates when both the dependent the
independent variable are expressed in logs. Columns (7)-(9) report least-absolute-deviation (median) estimates of simple differences. We construct municipal law-implied transfers
applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Specifications restrict estimation in the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%)
for each cut-off. All specifications include state-year fixed effects and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the
micro-region are reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
                        Appendix Table 24 - Heterogeneity Analysis across Geography and Size
                             FPM Transfers and Expenditure around the FPM Cutoffs

                                         full sample                                                  local estimates
                    bandwidth                 all                  <4%             <3%              <2%           <4%                    <3%              <2%
                                              (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                    (6)              (7)

                                                                                     PANEL A: Geography

                                                                               Dep.var: Log(FPM Transfers)
South                                     1.058***             1.002*** 0.997*** 0.981***                            1.003*** 0.995*** 0.981***
                                           (0,007)              (0,009) (0,009) (0,011)                               (0,010) (0,010) (0,013)

North                                     0.975***             0.949*** 0.948*** 0.942***                            0.950*** 0.946*** 0.942***
                                           (0,008)              (0,012) (0,011) (0,012)                               (0,014) (0,013) (0,013)


                                                                                 Dep.var: Log(Expenditure)
South                                     0.452***             0.341*** 0.310*** 0.306***                            0.323*** 0.314*** 0.314***
                                           (0,022)              (0,024) (0,026) (0,031)                               (0,029) (0,031) (0,036)

North                                     0.488***             0.334*** 0.295*** 0.288***                            0.314*** 0.299*** 0.298***
                                           (0,020)              (0,023) (0,024) (0,030)                               (0,027) (0,029) (0,035)


                                                                                           PANEL B: Size

                                                                               Dep.var: Log(FPM Transfers)
Thresholds 1-3                            1.058***             1.002*** 0.997*** 0.981***                            1.003*** 0.995*** 0.981***
                                          (0.00708)            (0.00857) (0.00885) (0.0108)                          (0.00986) (0.0104) (0.0125)

Thresholds 4-7                            0.975***             0.949*** 0.948*** 0.942***                            0.950*** 0.946*** 0.942***
                                          (0.00783)            (0.0124) (0.0114) (0.0116)                            (0.0135) (0.0129) (0.0133)


                                                                                 Dep.var: Log(Expenditure)
Thresholds 1-3                            0.452***            0.341*** 0.310*** 0.306***                             0.323*** 0.314*** 0.314***
                                          (0.0222)            (0.0242) (0.0259) (0.0308)                             (0.0286) (0.0305) (0.0360)

Thresholds 4-7                            0.488***            0.334*** 0.295*** 0.288***                             0.314*** 0.299*** 0.298***
                                          (0.0195)            (0.0229) (0.0242) (0.0302)                             (0.0266) (0.0286) (0.0353)

Observations                                43466                11349             8471             5663                11349            8471             5663
Municipality Fixed-Effect                    Yes                  Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes              Yes
First order polynomial                       No                   No                No               No                  Yes             Yes              Yes
The table reports regression heterogeneity estimates associating actual FPM Transfers and municipal expenditure (dependent variables) to law-implied FPM Transfers
according to geography and municipal population size. Panel A allows coefficients to differ for municipalities in the South/North. Panel B repeats the analysis for
municipalities around thresholds 1-3 (6,793-20,376 inhabitants) and thresholds 4-7 (6,793-47,537 inhabitants). Appendix Table 1 reports the complete North/South
classification. We construct municipal law-implied transfers applying the FPM allocation mechanism formula (see appendix). Column (1) reports estimates in the full
sample that includes municipalities both close and far from the seven FPM cutoffs. Columns (2)-(4) report local regression (RD) estimates that restrict estimation in
the neighborhood of the FPM cutoffs using three relative bandwidths (4%-2%) for each cut-off. Columns (5)-(7) include a rectangular kernel. All specifications
include municipality, state-year and cutoff-year fixed-effects (constants not reported). Heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors clustered at the micro-region are
reported in parentheses below the coefficients. Significantly different from zero at 99% (***), 95% (**) and 90% (*) confidence level.
