                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE EVOLUTION OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SWAP LINES SINCE 1962

                                         Michael D. Bordo
                                         Owen F. Humpage
                                         Anna J. Schwartz

                                        Working Paper 20755
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20755


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




Anna J. Schwartz, who collaborated on this work, passed away in June 2012. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Cleveland, of the Federal Reserve System, or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20755.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael D. Bordo, Owen F. Humpage, and Anna J. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of the Federal Reserve Swap Lines since 1962
Michael D. Bordo, Owen F. Humpage, and Anna J. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 20755
December 2014
JEL No. F3,N2

                                         ABSTRACT

In this paper, we describe the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s swap lines from their inception
in1962 as a mechanism to forestall claims on U.S gold reserves under Bretton Woods to a means
ofextending emergency dollar liquidity during the Great Recession. We describe a number of
consequencesassociated with swap operations. We argue, for example, that swaps calm crisis
situationsby bothsupplementing foreign countries’ dollar reserves and by signaling central-bank
cooperation. We showhow swaps exposed the Federal Reserve to conditionality and raised fears
that they bypassed the Congressionalappropriations process.


Michael D. Bordo                                Anna J. Schwartz
Department of Economics                         N%(5
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Owen F. Humpage
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
P.O. Box 6387
Cleveland, OH 44101-1387
owen.f.humpage@clev.frb.org
         In December 2007, at the Great Recession’s onset, the Federal Reserve established swap

lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank as a way of channeling

emergency dollar liquidity through these central banks to foreign depository institutions that

lacked access to the Federal Reserve’s borrowing facilities. As the global financial crisis

unfolded, the lines grew to encompass fourteen central banks, including some key emerging

market central banks, and the dollar ceilings on some of the lines vanished.

         Central bank swap lines were not new to the Federal Reserve’s playbook, but their use

had now changed in a fundamental way. What started out as a device to provide central banks

with cover for unwanted dollar positions had returned as a way to finance global lender-of-last-

resort operations in U.S. dollars.

         The funding problems were not limited to the U.S. dollar positions. The European

Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and Swiss National Bank also established emergency swap

lines during the crisis to provide liquidity in their currencies beyond their borders—often to

emerging market countries. Likewise, since 2000, East Asia has seen an extensive network of

swaps develop, offering support should a financial crisis emerge and fostering closer economic

integration in the area (Moessner and Allen 2010, 32). The People’s Bank of China also

extended new swap lines during the financial crisis, in part as a backstop against financial crises,

but also to promote the use of the renminbi and other non-dollar currencies in regional trade and

investment (Moessner and Allen 2010, 33).

         Swap lines have now returned to the modern central bank’s tool kit, but what may seem

novel to some has a long history.1 Using previously unavailable data and, heretofore, unexplored

Federal Reserve documents, this paper discusses the Federal Reserve’s experience with central-



1
    See Hooyman (1993) for an early survey of central bank uses of swaps.
                                                                                                    2


bank swap lines since 1961.2 Section 1 explains how swaps provided the Federal Reserve with a

mechanism to forestall gold losses during Bretton Woods. During this period swaps also

augmented deficit countries’ foreign-exchange reserves and allowed the Fed to intervene in the

Eurodollar market. Section 2 explains why the Federal Reserve’s use of swaps as a mechanism

to finance its foreign-exchange interventions largely failed. Section 3 discusses why the

Mexican rescue operations in 1994 ended the FOMC’s use of swap lines. Section 4 discusses

their recent reincarnation as a means of financing global lender-of-last-resort operations in

dollars. Section 5 recalls the main benefits and problems that the Federal Reserve encountered in

using swaps.

                     1. The Advent of the Federal Reserve’s Swap Lines

       In October 1960, the price of gold in the London market rose well above the U.S. gold-

export point of $35.20 per ounce, greatly increasing incentives for central banks to exchange

unwanted dollar reserves for gold with the U.S. Treasury.3 Underlying the price spike was a fear

that the United States might devalue the dollar. The United States had run balance-of-payments

deficits since 1950 which provided post-war Europe and Japan with needed international

reserves. As a consequence, outstanding dollar liabilities to foreigners had been rapidly piling up

(figure 1). In August 1960, total outstanding dollar liabilities began to exceed the U.S. gold

stock, and by December 1965, outstanding dollar liabilities to official institutions, which could

exchange them directly with the U.S. Treasury, exceeded the U.S. gold stock. The imbalance

indicated that the United States could not fulfill its Bretton Woods commitment to freely

exchange dollars for gold at the existing official price of $35 per ounce (Triffin 1960).

2
  The U.S. Treasury has established swap lines with foreign monetary authorities on an ad hoc
basis since 1936. Typically the Treasury sets up these lines with developing countries to provide
short-term bridge loans in anticipation of financing from other sources.
3
  Coombs (1976) provides an estimate of the U.S. gold export point.
                                                                                                    3


       In March 1962, the Federal Reserve (Fed) established Reciprocal Currency

Arrangements—a network of swap lines—specifically to forestall any official run on the U.S.

gold stock. A year earlier, the Exchange Stabilization Fund (ESF) of the U.S. Treasury had

begun intervening in forward foreign-exchange markets to shore up confidence in the dollar.

The operations were both successful and profitable, but a lack of resources severely limited the

ESF’s ability to expand its operations. The Treasury, therefore, sought the Fed’s participation.

The ESF’s budget was limited and subject to Congressional appropriation, but the Fed had a very

elastic capacity to acquire foreign exchange. The Fed’s swap lines became the country’s first

line of dollar defense.




               Source: Board of Governors (1976, Tables 14.1 and 15.1)

       The intervention operations that followed were stopgap in nature and part of a broader set

of expedient U.S. policies. In the early 1960s, U.S. authorities saw the persistent U.S. balance-

of-payments deficits as stemming primarily from policies to assist post-war economic
                                                                                                     4


development and to provide military security. In their view, the U.S. balance-of-payments

deficits were temporary and not indicative of a fundamental disequilibrium, which might require

a real dollar devaluation (Bordo and Humpage 2014).

       The Fed established its first swap line with the Bank of France and quickly drew on the

line to test its operation. By the end of 1962, the Fed had set up lines with the central banks of

nine key countries: Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands,

and Switzerland. Altogether the lines provided up to $900 million equivalent in foreign

exchange (figure 2). The network continued to grow. By the closing of the U.S. gold window in

August 1971, the arrangements totaled $11.7 billion worth of foreign exchange and encompassed

14 central banks, having picked up the central banks of Denmark, Japan, Mexico, Norway, and

Sweden over the intervening years. The Fed also established two swap lines with the Bank for

International Settlements (BIS), one exclusively in Swiss francs and one in any other key

European currency. The FOMC rejected requests for swap lines from Ireland, primarily because

that country was too small in terms of its international trade and financial dealings and from

Venezuela primarily because that country was not compliant with Article VIII of the IMF

Articles of Agreement on currency convertibility (Board Staff 1967; Reynold 1969).
                                                                                                     5




               Source: Federal Reserve System

       The extensiveness of the swap lines reflected their underlying objective: to forestall U.S.

gold losses. Many central banks maintained dollar reserves, which under the rules of the game

for Bretton Woods, were convertible on demand for the U. S. gold. From the inception of the

swap lines until the closing of the gold window in 1971, the Fed drew $11.6 billion worth of

foreign exchange through the swap lines primarily to provide cover to foreign central banks for

temporary, unwanted dollar exposures (table 1). By far the Fed’s largest cover operations took

place with the Swiss National Bank (SNB). The Swiss franc was a key safe-haven currency,

and, consequently, the SNB, which attempted to maintain strict limits on the proportion of its

reserves held in dollars, frequently received unwanted dollar inflows.4 From 1962 through 1971,

the Fed drew nearly $4.7 billion worth of Swiss francs from its swap lines with the SNB and



4
  The dollar was the key vehicle currency. When speculators shifted funds, say, out of British
pounds and into Swiss francs, they would sell pounds for dollars and dollars for francs, leaving
the SNB with dollars.
                                                                                                   6


from the Swiss franc line with the BIS (Task Force Paper #9 1990, 11).5 In a cover operation,

the Fed sold the foreign exchange that it acquired through the swap to the counterparty central

bank for dollars. The two sequential transactions—the spot swap of dollars for foreign currency

plus the subsequent dollar purchase—left the foreign central bank holding exactly the same

amount of dollars as before the operation. Now, however, the forward leg of the swap—

undertaken at a known and guaranteed exchange rate—covered the foreign central bank’s dollar

position. By eliminating the bank’s exchange-risk exposure, the swap blunted the foreign central

bank’s need to exchange the unwanted dollars for gold (Makin 1971). In providing cover, the

swaps then protected U.S. gold reserves.6

       These operations were only intended to provide cover for temporary—that is,

reversible—acquisitions of excessive dollar reserves. The underlying structure of the swap lines

emphasized this short-term nature. Drawings initially had a term of three months, but could be

renewed once, if both parties agreed. Banks were not to seek a second renewal, nor were they to

continuously repay and re-draw on the lines. Under all circumstances, swap drawings were to

terminate within a year. The U.S. monetary authorities understood that persistent dollar

acquisitions reflected a fundamental disequilibrium that required gold payments or, in the limit, a

real dollar depreciation. Over time, however, the term of swap drawings lengthened.




5
  The Swiss franc line with the BIS existed to overcome Swiss laws that limited the SNB’s
lending to foreign central banks. This included swap amounts.
6
  Early central-bank swaps were usually done on a “flat” basis. The spot and forward exchange
rates were equal to the rate then quoted in the spot market. The interest rates paid to the creditor
country and on any balance held by the debtor country were equal and typically based on U.S.
Treasury bill yields.
                                                                                                   7


_________________________________________________________________


 TABLE 1: DRAWINGS ON THE FEDERAL RESERVES SWAP LINES:
 1962 - 1971

                    Initiated by the                Initiated by
                     United States                Other Countries
                      $ - millions        %          $-millions           %
         Austria           50             0               50               0
        Belgium          1662            14            723.5               5
         Canada            20             0            517.6               3
       Denmark              0             0              150               1
        England           835             7             8650              57
          France           72             1             1155               8
       Germany           1368            12                0               0
            Italy        1400            12             1450               9
           Japan            0             0               80               1
         Mexico             0             0                0               0
     Netherlands         1475            13            246.6               2
        Norway              0             0                0               0
         Sweden             0             0                0               0
     Switzerland         3773            33                0               0
       BIS (SF)           898             8                0               0
     BIS (Other)            0             0             2266              15
        TOTAL           11553           100.0          15289             100

Source: Federal Reserve System
_________________________________________________________________



       Facing relatively short maturity dates on its swap drawings, the Fed quickly looked for

opportunities to acquire the necessary foreign exchange to repay the swaps, but this often proved

difficult. The problem arose because the FOMC precluded the Fed’s foreign-exchange desk

from purchasing foreign currencies that were trading above their parity values. This, however,

was often the case for the currencies of those central banks acquiring unwanted dollar balances.

Obtaining a currency above its parity value might push it higher and expose the Fed to a
                                                                                                  8


valuation loss should the outstanding swap be at a lower exchange value. Persistent losses from

its foreign-currency operations might expose the Fed to Congressional accusations of

mismanagement.7 (Almost all of the Fed’s profits accrue to the U.S. Treasury.) When the

needed foreign currency was trading above its parity value, the Fed would attempt to acquire it

off-market from a foreign central bank—typically the counterparty to the swap. Foreign central

banks—especially the swap counterparty—were reluctant to do so, because it resulted in their

holding even more unwanted, uncovered dollars. In this case the Fed often attempted to renew

its swap drawing.

       Ultimately, if the Fed could not pay down a swap drawing, the U.S. Treasury, which had

a clearer legal mandate for foreign-exchange operations than the Fed, stepped in by offering

foreign-currency-denominated certificates and, later, Roosa bonds to foreign central banks and

then selling the proceeds to the Fed.8 The Fed used the foreign funds to pay down its swap.

These operations, however, only shifted the foreign-currency debt and exposure to the U.S.

Treasury’s books, albeit with a longer maturity. This backstopping agreement with the Treasury

resulted in frequent consultations between the Fed and Treasury officials about the operations.

As the swap evolved from a short-term financial mechanism to a broader, longer-term operation,

the Treasury had more at stake. This threatened the Fed’s independence.

       Operations to provide cover to foreign central banks persisted until the closing of the gold

window in August 1971. Despite encountering frequent problems in unwinding its positions, the

Fed’s swap drawings often succeeded in preventing countries from converting temporary inflows

7
  The Fed’s authority for foreign-exchange operations was unclear in the 1960s and 1970s. The
Monetary Control Act of 1980 gave the Fed authority to invest its foreign-exchange holdings in
foreign-government securities, which implied Congressional consent for the Fed’s various
foreign-currency operations. On the Fed’s legal authority see Todd (1992).
8
  Roosa bonds were non-marketable foreign-currency-denominated bonds issued by the U.S.
Treasury.
                                                                                                     9


of unwanted dollar reserves into Treasury gold. According to Solomon (13 August 1971, 3 – 4),

between 1962 and 1969, Fed swap drawings totaled $7 billion equivalent. In general, subsequent

financial outflows from foreign countries enabled the Fed to purchase foreign exchange and

repay approximately three-fourths of its swap drawings. Repayments out of gold amounted to

only $186 million. The issuance of U.S. Treasury foreign-currency securities and U.S. drawings

on the IMF financed the remainder. Although comparable data do not exist, between the end of

1969 and 12 August 1971, the Fed drew $4.5 billion in foreign currencies through the swap lines.

Bretton Woods had entered its crisis phase. Suggestive of the deteriorating position of the dollar,

the Treasury had to finance most of the repayments through the sale of reserve assets.

       Besides providing financing for cover operations, the Fed’s non-Swiss-franc swap line

with the BIS allowed the Fed to intervene in the Eurodollar market. Starting in 1966, the Fed

occasionally acted to minimize disturbances associated with seasonal stresses, particularly if they

threatened exchange-market stability, or occurred during international crises. Typically, the Fed

drew on the BIS swap lines and had the BIS deposit the dollars that it received with European

banks when increases in Eurodollar interest rates threatened to put downward pressures on the

British pound at an unpropitious time. The Fed feared that if Britain devalued the pound,

speculative pressure would turn against the dollar. Previously, the Fed had sometimes asked

foreign central banks to deposit dollar reserves in the market. Although this activity is not well

documented, it appears to have continued into 1973.

       The Fed’s swap lines were reciprocal, meaning that foreign central banks could initiate

drawings on the lines when they needed temporary increases in their dollar liquidity. In this

way, swaps augmented countries’ official reserves without adding to the U.S. balance-of-

payments deficits. Between 1962 and 1971, nine foreign central banks initiated drawings
                                                                                                   10


totaling $15.3 billion (table 1). The United Kingdom, whose currency was often under pressure

to devalue, accounted for more than one-half of these drawings. By temporarily augmenting

countries’ reserves, swaps were supposed to prevent transitory reserve losses from encouraging

speculation that might snowball. Still, the FOMC did worry that the swap lines might substitute

for reserves, that is, encourage central banks to hold fewer dollar reserves than otherwise might

be the case (Board Staff 1967, 4, 7).

        Besides temporarily augmenting reserves, swaps also signaled cooperation among central

banks as to the goal of defending the Bretton Woods parity grid. Often during the Bretton

Woods era, the announcement of an increase in the available credit under a swap line proved as

effective in stemming speculative sales of a deficit-country’s currency as the actual use of the

line. Such announcements often coincided with crises. The mere existence of the lines raised

the potential cost of continued speculation against a deficit country’s currency. In many years

during the Bretton Woods era, a substantial amount of the available swap lines went unused,

attesting to their signaling quality (figure 2).

        On 15 August 1971, the Nixon administration refused to henceforth convert the dollar

balances of foreign central banks into U.S. gold. This action created problems for the Fed which

had recently acquired outstanding swap obligations of $3.0 billion in U.K. pounds, German

marks, Swiss francs, and Belgium francs (Task Force Paper #10, 1990, 21).9 Most foreign

central banks did not want the Fed to buy their currencies, which were then appreciating in the

foreign-exchange market, to repay the debts. They preferred instead to roll over any existing

swap obligations until new parity values were established and financial flows reversed course

(FOMC Memorandum, 16 November 1971, 15; Bulletin September 1971, 787). The dollar’s

9
  The U.S. Treasury had outstanding obligations of nearly $1.8 billion (Task Force Paper #10,
1990, 21).
                                                                                                  11


subsequent devaluations in December 1971, under the Smithsonian agreement, and in February

1972 failed to restore confidence in the parity system and created substantial uncertainties about

outstanding swap obligations.

       The swap lines included revaluation clauses that protected the country that initiated a

drawing in case the creditor country revalued its currency. In such cases, the creditor country

was to provide the debtor country with sufficient funds at the pre-revaluation exchange rate to

extinguish the drawing. The upward drift of many currencies and the Smithsonian agreement

created uncertainty as to whether, and to what extent, the dollar had been devalued or the foreign

currencies had been revalued. In 1972, the position emerged that a broad-based appreciation of

foreign currencies against the dollar implied a dollar devaluation (FOMC Memorandum 19 - 21

March 1973, 63). Hence the revaluation clauses did not apply and the Fed faced substantial

losses on its outstanding swap obligations.

       The Fed quickly paid down its outstanding German mark and British pound swaps

through on- and off-market currency purchases but encountered serious difficulties extinguishing

its Belgian and Swiss franc obligations. Both central banks wanted the Fed to refrain from

buying their currencies, which were relatively strong at the time. The Fed was able to acquire

some Belgian and Swiss francs in 1972 and 1973, but stopped at the request of the U.S. Treasury

in late 1973. The Treasury did not want the Fed to make further payments on its Belgian and

Swiss franc swap debts until these countries agreed to a risk-sharing agreement for the United

States’ outstanding, pre-1971 obligations. In the end, it took the Fed and the U.S. Treasury

seven and one-half years to pay off their pre-August 1971 swap debts. The Board of Governors

later estimated the losses on the Fed and Treasury swaps at $989 million and $1.5 billion,

respectively (Task Force Paper #10 1990, 25).
                                                                                                 12


                                 2. Swaps and the Early Float

       By March 1973, most of the key currencies were reluctantly floating against the dollar.

At the time, monetary authorities viewed floating exchange rates as inherently prone to disorder.

They seemed to believe that information inefficiencies created excessive exchange-rate volatility

and often drove exchange rates away from their equilibrium values for prolonged periods. In this

atmosphere, the G10 finance ministers agreed, official foreign-exchange-market interventions,

particularly on the part of the United States, could provide market guidance and calm disorderly

conditions.

       The United States remained ambivalent about intervention, but agreed in principle to

such operations.10 Holding the United States back was a lack of clear arrangements for risk

sharing under the existing swap facilities (FOMC Memorandum 19 – 29 March 1973, 63 – 65).

At the time, the United States held virtually no foreign-exchange reserves and would need to

borrow funds for intervention through the swap lines. On 8 July 1973, as an inducement to U.S.

intervention, Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Switzerland agreed to risk sharing

arrangements with the United States (Task Force Paper #9 1990, 6).11 In the future, when the

Fed drew on a swap line for intervention purposes, it would share any valuation profit or loss

equally with the creditor central bank. The risk-sharing arrangement did not apply to foreign-

central-bank drawings (Task Force paper #9 1990, 6). If a foreign central bank drew on the line,

it bore the foreign-exchange risk alone. As a consequence, no G10 foreign central bank drew on

the U.S. swap lines between 1973 and 1980.


10
   During Bretton Woods, the United States generally viewed currency intervention as the
responsibility of foreign central banks. Although the U.S. monetary authorities occasionally
intervened, their only obligation was to buy and sell gold.
11
   Risk sharing agreements ended in December 1980. Henceforth countries drawing on the swap
assumed all of the risk.
                                                                                                   13


         With the risk sharing settled, the Fed negotiated increases in the G10 swap lines on 10

July 1973 from $11.6 billion to nearly $17.8 billion and renewed its foreign-exchange

intervention. Now swaps became the instrument to finance foreign-exchange interventions by

substituting for U.S. foreign-exchange reserves. The Fed negotiated additional increases in the

swap lines with the G10 countries to $19.8 billion in 1974 and to $29.4 billion in 1978 as the

dollar came under intense pressures.12

         Between 8 July 1973 and 17 April 1981, the Fed frequently bought and sold foreign

exchange. Almost all of the U.S. interventions over this period were undertaken against the

German mark, the linchpin of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, and nearly 85 percent of

U.S. swap drawings involved German marks. The total amount that the Fed drew on the lines

was always substantially less than the amount available; the lines continued to signal cooperation

among central banks and the Fed’s capacity to resist speculative pressures. During this period,

however, the Fed usually only intervened to offset downward pressure on the dollar in a leaning-

against-the-wind fashion (Bordo, Humpage, Schwartz 2012).

         Financing its intervention through the swap lines created serious operational problems.

Swaps remained a short-term financing mechanism for intervention. Consequently, shortly after

the Fed drew on a line to finance an intervention, it had to acquire the funds to repay the

drawing. Moreover, it had to time the transactions to minimize unwanted impacts on dollar

exchange rates (Adams and Henderson 1983).

         Undertaking intervention in this manner, however, conflicted with the then prevailing

theoretical transmission mechanism for intervention—the portfolio-balance channel. The

portfolio-balance channel suggested that sterilized intervention offered central banks an



12
     These numbers exclude lines with the Bank of Mexico.
                                                                                                    14


additional policy tool with which to permanently affect exchange rates while leaving their

monetary policies free to pursue domestic objectives. The act of sterilizing the intervention

altered the outstanding stocks of publically held government debt and, if these securities were

imperfect substitutes in private portfolio, could alter the risk premiums on this debt. The risk-

premium changes were manifested as changes in spot exchange rates. If the Fed, however,

quickly followed a sterilized intervention to support the dollar with a sterilized purchase of

foreign exchange to repay the swap, it must negate any portfolio-balance mechanism.13

       As the volume of intervention increased in the late 1970s, the Fed’s strategy of relying on

swap drawings to finance intervention, instead of holding foreign-currency reserves, began to

change. At the end of 1978, following massive—largely unsuccessful—interventions to support

the dollar, the Fed had a record $5.5 billion in outstanding swap obligations, and the Treasury

had $890 million in swap obligations and nearly $2.2 billion in outstanding Carter bonds.14 Most

of this was in German marks. The Fed was incurring substantial losses on these drawings.

       In early 1979, the FOMC considered increasing the Fed’s portfolio of foreign exchange

reserves largely to avoid the growing conditions that countries—notably Germany—were

attempting to attach to U.S. swap drawings (Task Force paper #8, 1990, 11). The Bundesbank

complained that the dollar’s depreciation reflected an inappropriately easy U.S. monetary policy

and worried that marks created through the swap drawings contributed to inflation in Germany.

In addition, the Bundesbank wanted changes in its swap agreement, primarily the risk sharing


13
   Although the Board of Governors discussed intervention in terms of a portfolio-balance
mechanism, traders at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s foreign-exchange desk only
referred to intervention’s “psychological” effect on the market. The modern expectations
channels were not prominent until the early 1980s. Edison (1993), Baillie et al. (2000) and
Sarno and Taylor (2001) discuss the transmission channels for sterilized intervention.
14
   The Treasury issued foreign-currency-denominated Carter bonds to borrow funds for
intervention. Carter bonds were marketable, whereas Roosa bonds were non-marketable.
                                                                                                      15


arrangement, which forced Germany to assume one-half of the loss (Holmes and Pardee, 1978,

4). At a minimum, the Bundesbank wanted the United States to quickly finance its repayments

through IMF drawings or the sale of SDRs.

       In this manner, swaps allowed foreign central banks considerable influence over U.S.

exchange-market operations. Largely as a consequence of Germany’s threatened conditionality,

after 1979, the Fed began buying foreign exchange, whenever possible, to build larger reserves

of German marks and Japanese yen. Initially, the Fed used the funds so acquired to pay down its

swap debts, but the Fed stopped financing its foreign-exchange interventions via swap drawings

in 1980. The swap lines remained in place but neither the Fed nor any other G10 central

banks—with one, brief exception—drew on them.15 By the mid-1990s, various FOMC members

looked to terminate the swap lines, in part because they were outmoded, but mainly because they

were a threat to the Fed’s independence and, therefore, the credibility of monetary policy.

                                   3. The Mexican Swap Line

       FOMC participants always worried that if Congress viewed the Fed’s use of the swap

lines as an attempt to contravene its appropriation process for foreign-policy-type initiatives, it

might restrict the Fed’s ability to act independently. This problem, although a perennial worry,

never seriously confronted the FOMC until the Mexican peso crisis of 1994 - 1995.

       The Fed established a $130 million swap line with Mexico in 1967, its only line with an

emerging market economy, because of Mexico’s close economic and financial ties with the

United States. The FOMC increased the line over the years to $700 million by 1979. In the

1970s, Mexico often drew down the full amount of the line to supplement its reserves for

intervention purposes but regularly repaid its obligation quickly.

15
  The Bank of Sweden was the last foreign central bank to draw on the line in February 1981.
The Bank repaid the drawing in April 1981.
                                                                                                16


       During the 1980s, the Fed augmented Mexico’s swap line on two occasions explicitly to

help that country deal with its international debts. The FOMC offered Mexico a special $325

million line in August 1982 and a $125 million line in September 1989. In 1988 and 1993,

Mexico and the United States considered additional short-term borrowing facilities, including

extensions of Fed swaps, but mutually terminated the initiatives (Maroni 1994). Mexico drew on

these lines frequently throughout the 1980s, but had stopped drawing on the lines and paid down

outstanding balances by 1991. The swap line was then valued at $700 million.

       In early 1994, after the conclusion of the North American Free Trade Agreement

(NAFTA) and in anticipation of the Bank of Mexico’s independence, the Mexican government

requested an increase in its existing swap lines with the Fed and the U.S. Treasury. The proposal

rekindled perennial debates within the FOMC about the nature and uses of swaps and their

potential implications for the Fed’s independence at the 22 March 1994 FOMC meeting (FOMC

Transcripts 22 March 1994, 2 - 15). Chairman Greenspan, however, noted that participation in

such policies with the Treasury gave the Fed influence over them. If the Fed did not participate

in the enlarged swap line with Mexico, it would lose its influence over a policy that would

nevertheless go forward in some form.

       On 24 March 1994, fearing market turmoil following the assassination of a Mexican

presidential candidate, the United States provided Mexico with a temporary increase in the

Mexican swap line to $6 billion. The Fed and the U.S. Treasury equally split their contributions.

On 26 April 1994, the United States made the Mexican swap lines permanent and extended a $2

billion swap line to Canada as part of the North American Framework Agreement (a financial

counterpart to NAFTA). All lines were reciprocal, but any Mexican drawings required FOMC

approval and any Mexican drawing above $1 billion required additional collateral.
                                                                                                  17


       Mexico did not immediately draw on the line but continued instead to defend the peso,

which was under pressure to devalue, from the Bank of Mexico’s reserves. On 20 December

1994, with its reserves depleted, Mexico devalued the peso and two days later allowed it to float.

The action precipitated a financial crisis. In response, both the Fed and the Treasury provided

Mexico with a second temporary increase in their swap lines, bringing the combined facility to

$9 billion. The Fed’s permanent swap remained at $3 billion.

       The Clinton administration asked the U.S. Congress to provide $40 billion in loan

guarantees to Mexico. When the Congress refused this request, the Treasury fell back on a

previous contingency plan for providing Mexico with aid in case a Congressional refusal to pass

NAFTA precipitated financial flight from Mexico. Under that arrangement, the Fed would

provide Mexico with its regular $3 billion swap line and a temporary $3 billion swap line.

Mexico could draw on these lines for a 12 month period. The Treasury promised to take the Fed

out of any loan exceeding twelve months, implying that the Treasury ultimately assumed the full

credit risk. At the latest, final payments were due on 31 January 1997.

       In addition, however, the Treasury anticipated a $20 billion package of loans and loan

guarantees. To finance these, the Treasury asked the FOMC for a $20 billion swap line with the

Fed.16 At the time, the Treasury held $19.5 billion worth of German marks and Japanese yen,

which it intended to swap with the Fed to finance the bailout. Fed staff warned the FOMC that

Treasury drawings on this line could take up to ten years to repay (FOMC Transcripts, 31

January & 1 February 1995, 59 – 75, 117 – 144).




16
   These Fed-Treasury swaps are typically described as the Fed’s warehousing facility, through
which the Fed temporarily warehouses foreign exchange for dollars (Bordo, Humpage, Schwartz,
forthcoming 2015, chapter 6)
                                                                                                      18


       At least four FOMC participants objected to increasing the swap lines with Mexico and

especially to offering a $20 billion swap line to the U.S. Treasury. If the situation did not

represent a clear systemic risk to the U.S. financial system, they contended, the Treasury should

finance the operation through the appropriations process. They primarily worried that Congress,

which clearly did not favor a Mexican bailout, would view the Fed’s participation, particularly

the $20 billion swap line with the Treasury, as a clear subversion of its will. Moreover, that the

Fed took action seemingly under the direction of the Treasury did not speak well of its

independence.

       At the 28 March 1995 FOMC meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond President J.

Alfred Broadus, complained about the fiscal nature of the swap with the Treasury. When the

Treasury used the dollars that it obtained through its swap with the Fed, the latter sterilized the

operation by selling Treasury securities from its own portfolio. The operation increased the debt

held by the private sector, just as if the Treasury funded the operation by issuing debt to the

private sector. The only difference, Broadus noted, was that the Fed’s action kept the operation

off budget. This participation in a Treasury fiscal operation threatened the Fed’s independence

and, one step removed, its monetary-policy credibility (Broaddus and Goodfriend 1996,

Goodfriend 1994, 2013). Chairman Greenspan acknowledged Broaddus’s concern, but justified

the action as necessary because of the Fed’s responsibility “to ensure the safety and soundness of

the financial system” (FOMC Transcripts 28 March 1995, 5). The potential for spillovers to U.S

financial markets became the justification for the action, thereby setting a precedent for future

actions to stem financial crises.

       In the end, Mexico drew only $1.5 billion on the Fed’s swap line and repaid its obligation

by January 1996. The Treasury never drew on its swap line with the Fed. The dissatisfaction
                                                                                                  19


with the Mexican experience, however, encouraged those FOMC participants who saw swaps as

anachronistic and dangerous to Fed independence to suggest their termination. On 17 November

1998, because of their long disuse, the FOMC eliminated all of its standing swap facilities with

the mutual agreement of the counterparty central banks in anticipation of the adoption of the

euro. The FOMC maintained its NAFA swap lines with Canada and Mexico but expressed a

hope that these would soon terminate (FOMC Transcripts 17 November 1998, 34 – 36).

       In the discussion that led up to the elimination of the swap lines, most FOMC participants

agreed that swap lines were no longer needed for their traditional use, exchange-market

intervention. Nevertheless, many favored a mechanism capable of providing emergency dollar

liquidity in the event of a payments-system meltdown (Fisher, Kohn, Truman 1996, FOMC

Transcripts 2 -3 July 1996, 96 – 112). The Board staff and the Federal Reserve Bank of New

York recommended, with uncanny prescience, that the swap lines be modified or replaced with

an alternative arrangement to “provide a mechanism whereby the Fed could provide dollar

liquidity … to foreign monetary authorities, who may in turn need to provide dollar liquidity to

their banks in the event that dollar funding of their banks’ is suddenly (and unexpectedly)

withdrawn” (Fisher, Kohn, Truman 1996, 8).

                                     4. Lender of Last Resort

       As the global financial crises spread in 2007, the Fed did just that. The FOMC

reestablished its swap lines and provided dollar liquidity on an unprecedented scale. The Fed’s

decision to finance global lender-of-last-resort operations reflected its fear that disorder in

foreign money markets could spill over into the United States, thereby further complicating
                                                                                                  20


monetary policy, and the Fed’s perceived responsibility as issuer of the world’s key international

currency.17

       Over the past fifteen years, financial-market innovation and sustained globalization have

spurred foreign banks’ acquisitions of dollar-denominated assets. Banks fund these dollar

positions in short-term, wholesale markets either by borrowing dollars or borrowing local

currencies and converting them into dollars via foreign-exchange swaps (McQuire and von Peter

2009). The resulting maturity mismatches leave banks vulnerable to roll-over disruptions, as

occurred by late 2007.

       The global financial crisis that year heighted credit risks, causing dollar funding to dry up

by year’s end. Banks not only found it increasingly difficult to rollover their exposures, but

many acquired additional dollar assets as they backstopped structured investment vehicles

(Fleming and Klagge 2010). Maturity mismatches lengthened, and a severe dollar shortage

emerged. U.S. branches of foreign banks that held reserves could borrow directly from the Fed,

but most foreign banks could not.

       On 12 December 2007, the Board of Governors established the Term Auction Facility for

U.S. depository institutions, and the FOMC set up special liquidity swap lines with the European

Central Bank (ECB) and the SNB. These swap lines essentially extended the Term Auction

Facility’s reach beyond U.S. borders by financing the term dollar funding facilities of foreign

central banks (figure 4).




17
   Following the 11 September 2001 terrorists’ attacks, the Federal Reserve set up similar swap
lines with the European Central Bank ($50 billion) and the Bank of England ($30 billion), and
expanded its existing swap with the Bank of Canada ($10 billion). The lines expired after 30
days (Bulletin December 2001, 761).
                                                                                                    21




               Source: Federal Reserve System.

       As with previous central-banks swaps, parties conducted the spot and forward legs of any

transaction at the same exchange rate. The ECB and the SNB drew on these swap lines initially

at one or two-month terms as they extended dollar liquidity to eligible commercial banks in their

jurisdictions. The loans that the ECB and the SNB made to commercial banks were

collateralized, and the interest rates on dollar funds initially were equal to the lowest acceptable

auction rate under the Fed’s Term Auction Facility. Unlike under past swaps, the Fed held the

British pounds and Swiss francs in non-interest bearing accounts in the respective foreign central

banks, and the foreign central banks paid the Fed the same interest that they earned on their loans

to commercial banks.

       Under this arrangement, the foreign central banks acted as the lender of last resort; the

Fed acted as the financier. Foreign central banks assumed all of the credit risk associated with

providing dollar liquidity to foreign financial institution, since they could best assess the quality
                                                                                                  22


of the financial institutions’ balance sheets. The Fed did, however, face some moral hazard

risks. To minimize these, the interest cost of the dollar liquidity would eventually become

prohibitive as funding markets improved and risk premiums declined (see below). In addition,

the swap lines remained limited, and their extensions remained uncertain.

       The swap lines with the ECB and the SNB quickly increased from $20 million and $4

million, respectively, to $55 million and $12 million, respectively, just prior to the Lehman

Brothers collapse on 15 September 2008. During this period the Fed sterilized the impact of its

swap (and other) operations on its balance sheet, but after the Lehman Brothers collapse the

Fed’s balance sheet rapidly expanded.

       The dollar funding problems greatly intensified following the Lehman Brothers failure,

and the FOMC expanded the special liquidity swap facilities in conjunction with foreign central

banks’ dollar liquidity operations. By the end of 2008, the Fed offered swaps to nine central

banks, and the total facility had grown from $24 million to $620 million. By late October 2008,

the Fed eliminated the overall limit on the facilities for the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan,

the ECB and the SNB, so these banks could offer “full allotments” of dollar liquidity—that is, as

much as local commercial banks desired—at a fixed interest rate equal to 100 basis points over

the OIS rate. As the turmoil abated in 2009 and market rates no longer exceeded the OIS rate by

more than 100 basis points, central banks dollar lending facilities were no longer advantageous

to financial institutions and swap drawing fell off in turn.

       In October 2008, the FOMC also extended swap lines to five emerging market central

banks—the Bank of Brazil, the Bank of Korea, the Bank of Mexico, the Bank of New Zealand,

and the Monetary Authority of Singapore. The Fed considered these emerging market

economies large enough to have significant spillover effects to the rest of the world should they
                                                                                                  23


face a serious financial crisis. Aizenman and Pasricha (2010) suggest that the Fed primarily

extended swap lines to those emerging market economies in which U.S. banks had a high

exposure. Other emerging market countries apparently asked for similar swap lines, but

broadening such access could saddle the Fed with credit risk vis-à-vis the foreign central bank

and could increase moral hazard concerns.18

         Some controversy arose over the extension of the swap lines to countries that held a

substantial amount of reserves, like Japan and Korea. At the very onset, William Poole, the

President of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, voted against establishing swap lines with

the ECB and the SNB. He viewed the lines as unnecessary given the size of the dollar-

denominated reserves that these institutions held (FOMC Transcripts 6 December 2007, 16, 18,

45; FOMC Transcripts 11 December 2007, 12, 14). In the end, however, most of the countries

that received swap lines (in dollars or in other currencies) did not seem to hold sufficient reserves

to meet the liquidity demand of the financial crisis (Moessner and Allen 2010; Obstfeld, et al.

2009).

         Augmenting foreign-exchange reserves with temporary dollar liquidity, however, was not

the sole purpose in extending the swap lines. As previously noted, swap lines have always had a

significant impact by signaling central banks cooperation toward a goal. The financial crisis was

no exception. In addition, using dollar reserves would require foreign central banks to sell U.S.

Treasury securities and other dollar-denominated assets when markets were distressed. Most

important, however, using reserves would not increase liquidity in the market, which became

important after the Lehman Brothers collapse. Selling reserve assets would remove dollar




18
     On foreign-central-bank access, see Prasad (2014, 207 – 209).
                                                                                                  24


liquidity from the market and lending it would only re-inject that liquidity. Only the Fed could

increase dollar liquidity. After 15 September 2008, the Fed sought to do so.

       Unlike earlier swaps, the post-2007 lines were not reciprocal; the United States could not

draw on them. In April 2009, the Fed established parallel swap lines with the Bank of Canada,

the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the SNB that allowed the Fed to draw

foreign currencies against dollars should U.S. banks experience liquidity problems in foreign

currencies. The Fed never drew on these lines.

       At the programs peak in December 2008, outstanding swap drawings totaled more than

$580 billion and accounted for over 25 percent of the Fed’s total assets (figure 4) (Fleming and

Klagge 2010, 5). The ECB, whose outstanding drawings reached $300 billion in late 2008, was

the biggest single user of the facility, followed by the Bank of Japan and the Bank of England.

Although swap borrowing fell off in 2009, funding markets continued to differentiate between

strong and weak financial institutions (Goldberg, et al. 2010, 19-20). After a couple of

extensions, the initial swap lines expired on 1 February 2010. Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, and

Singapore never drew on their swap lines. By most accounts, the swap operations successfully

provided dollar liquidity and calmed markets (Goldberg, et al. 2010).

       The February 2009 hiatus was short-lived. On 9 May 2010, as the European debt crisis

roiled financial markets, the Fed re-established swap lines with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of

England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and the SNB at a rate of 100 basis points over the OIS.

With the exception of the Bank of Canada, which maintained a $30 million limit, all of the other

swap lines were again open-ended. On 30 November 2011, to make the facilities more attractive

to commercial banks, participating central banks lowered the interest rate on dollar funding to 50

basis points over the OIS rate. In addition, the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank
                                                                                                   25


of Japan, the ECB, and the SNB extended temporary swaps to each other so that emergency

liquidity was available in all of the currencies of the participating central banks. Thereafter these

swap lines were periodically extended. At its 29-30 October 2013 meeting, however, the FOMC

made the liquidity swap lines with the five key central banks into a standing facility, that is,

available indefinitely.

                                           5. Assessment

       The Fed has used swaps for many different purposes since their inception in 1962. They

initially forestalled U.S. gold losses, offering a useful stopgap, but not a fundamental solution to

the situation. They next proved an ineffective way of financing U.S. foreign-exchange

interventions, negating any portfolio-balance effect and exposing the Fed to conditionality. They

have since evolved as a mechanism to supplement the dollar reserves of foreign governments

during crises periods. They have the advantage that, unlike foreign exchange reserves, in a

liquidity crisis swap drawings can increase the aggregate amount of dollar liquidity in markets.

They can, if the FOMC chooses, expand the Fed’s balance sheet—an important lender-of-last-

resort function. Their contribution in these situations, however, has gone well beyond the

quantity of funds that they have offered. Often the lines are not completely drawn down.

Sometimes they are not used. A key benefit of swaps is their capacity to signal central-banks

cooperation, which seems a crucial element of restoring market confidence. This aspect of

swaps goes a long way to explain their recent reintroduction.

       The Fed has used swaps for many different purposes since their inception in 1962, but

their applications have always been controversial. Of the various controversies one has

persistently reappeared: From their beginning, many FOMC participants have argued that swaps

bypass the Congressional appropriations process and, therefore, represent an abuse of the Fed’s
                                                                                                 26


off-budget status. FOMC participants expressed this concern in 1962, when the Fed’s legal

authority for foreign-exchange operations was unclear, but it came to the fore most clearly with

the Mexican crisis, when the Fed helped to finance a bailout after Congress refused. Swap

extensions to foreign monetary authorities have often been coordinated with the U.S. Treasury

and have supplemented the latter’s resources. The Treasury is subject to the appropriations

process. Congress, however, has never seriously challenged or constrained the Fed’s swap

activity on this score. They seem to accept the Fed’s justification: modern uses of swaps have

addressed crises that posed a systemic risk to the U.S. financial sector and, therefore, are a

legitimate use of Fed policy. Still, swaps have historically often brought the Fed into the sphere

of the Treasury, an association that has sometime proved uncomfortable for monetary policy.
                                                                                             27


                                          References


Adams D. and Henderson, D. 1983. Definition and Measurment of Exchange Market
      Intervention. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Staff Studies No. 126.
Aizenman, J., Jinjarak, Y. and Park, D. 2011. International Reserves and Swap Lines: Substitutes
      or Compliments? International Review of Economics and Finance 20(): 5 – 18.
Aizenman, J. and Pasricha, G. K. 2010. Selective Swap Arrangements and the Global Financial
      Crisis: Analysis and Interpretation. International Review of Economics and Finance 19:
      353 – 365.
Baillie, R., Humpage, O. and Osterberg W. 2000. Intervention from an Information Perspective.
        Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 10(3-4): 407 – 421.
Board Staff. 1967. Reciprocal Swap Agreement with Venezuela. Unpublished memorandum to
       the FOMC. (February 28).
Bordo, M. D., and Humpage, O. F. 2014. Federal Reserve Policy and Bretton Woods. Federal
       Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 14-07.
Bordo, M. D., Humpage O. F. and Schwartz A. J. 2012. The Federal Reserve as an Informed
       Foreign Exchange Trader: 1973 – 1995. International Journal and Central Banking, 8(1):
       1 – 29.
Bordo, M. D., Humpage O. F. and Schwartz A. J. 2015 (forthcoming). Strained Relations, US
       Foreign –Exchange Operations and Monetary Policy in the Twentieth Century. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Broaddus, J. A. and Goodfriend, M. 1996. Foreign Exchange Operations and the Federal
      Reserve. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 82(1): 1 – 20.
[Bulletin] Treasury and Federal Reserve Foreign Exchange Operations. Federal Reserve
        Bulletin, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: Washington, D. C. various
        issues.
Coombs, C. A. 1976. The Arena of International Finance, John Wiley & Sons: New York.
Edison, H. 1993. The Effectiveness of Central Bank Intervention: A Survey of the Literature
       after 1982. Princeton University, Special Papers in International Economics No. 18.
Fisher, P., D. Kohn, E. Truman, 1996, Issues Related to Review of System’s Swap
        Arrangements. unpublished memorandum to the FOMC (March 14).
Fleming, M. J. and Klagge, N. J. 2010. The Federal Reserve’s Foreign Exchange Swap Lines,
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 16(4)
      April.
[FOMC Memorandum] Federal Open Market Committee, various issues. Memorandum of
     Discussion of the Federal Open Market Committee. Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm.
                                                                                              28


[FOMC Transcripts] Federal Open Market Committee, various issues. Transcripts of the
    Federal Open Market Committee. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
    http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc_historical.htm.
Goldberg, L. S., Kennedy, C., and Miu, J. 2010. Central Bank Dollar Swap Lines and Overseas
      Dollar Funding Costs. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, No. 429
      (February).
Goodfriend, M. 1994. Why We Need an ‘Accord’ for Federal Reserve Credit Policy: A Note.
      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 26(3): 572 – 580.
Goodfriend, M. 2013. Policy Debates at the Federal Open Market Committee: 1993 – 2002. in
      Bordo M. D. and Roberds W. eds. The Origins, History, and Future of the Federal
      Reserve System, A Return to Jekyll Island. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Holmes, A.R. and Pardee, S.E. 1978. Dr. Gleske’s Proposals to Amend Swap Agreement,
      unpublished memorandum to the FOMC (September 26).
Hooyman, C.J. 1993. The Use of Foreign Exchange Swaps by Central Banks: A Survey. IMF
     Working Papers WP/93/64.
MacLaury, B.K. 1969. Discussion of Questions Raised by Governor Maisel Concerning System
     Foreign Currency Operations. unpublished memorandum to the FOMC (January 30).
Maroni, Y. 1994. History of the Reciprocal Currency (“Swap”) Agreement between the Bank of
      Mexico and the Federal Reserve System. unpublished memorandum, 11 March.
Makin, J.H. 1971. Swaps and Roosa Bonds as an Index of the Costs of Cooperation in the “Crisis
       Zone.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 85(2): 349 – 356.
McGuire, P. and von Peter, G. 2009. The US Dollar Shortage in Global Banking. Bank for
      International Settlements Quarterly Review. (March): 47 – 63.
Moessner, R. and Allen, W. A. 2010. Central Bank Co-operation and International Liquidity in
      The Financial Crisis of 2008-9. Bank for International Settlements Working Papers No.
      310. May.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C. and Taylor, A. M. 2009. Financial Instability, Reserves, and
       Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008. American Economic Review: Papers &
       Proceedings 99(2): 480 – 486.
Prasad, E.S. 2014. The Dollar Trap, How the U.S. Dollar Tightened Its Grip on Global Finance.
       Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press
Reynolds, J.E. 1969. Ireland as a Candidate for a Reciprocal Currency Arrangement with the
      Federal Reserve. unpublished memorandum to the FOMC. (December 16).
Sarno, L. and Taylor, M. P. 2001. The Official Intervention in the Foreign-Exchange Market: Is
       It Effective and, If So, How Does It Work? Journal of Economic Literature, 39(3): 839-
       868.
Solomon, R. 1971. Use of Swap Network. unpublished memorandum to the FOMC (13 August).
Task Force on System Foreign Currency Operations. Profits and Losses in U.S. Foreign-
       Currency Operations, Paper #10. 8 January 1990.
                                                                                               29


Task Force on System Foreign Currency Operations. 1990. Reciprocal Currency Arrangements
       (The “Swap” Network) Paper #9. 24 January. unpublished.
Task Force on System Foreign Currency Operations. U.S. Official Holdings of Foreign
       Currencies, Paper #8. Foreign Exchange Department Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
       16 January 1990.
Todd, W. F. 1992. Disorderly Markets: The Law, History, and Economics of the Exchange
      Stabilization Fund and U.S. Foreign-Exchange Market Intervention. In: Kaufman, G. G.
      ed., Research in Financial Services: Private and Public Policy, Vol. 4. Greenwich,
      Conn.: JAI Press. 111-79
Triffin, R. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis, The Future of Convertibility. New Haven, Conn:
        Yale University Press.
