NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES THE ENVIRONMENT STILL MATTER? DAILY TEMPERATURE AND
INCOME IN THE UNITED STATES
Tatyana Deryugina
Solomon M. Hsiang
Working Paper 20750
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20750
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

We thank Max Auffhammer, Marshall Burke, Tamma Carleton, Melissa Dell, Michael Greenstone,
Amir Jina, Edward Miguel, Matthew Neidell, Julian Reif, Wolfram Schlenker, Richard Schmalensee,
James Stock, Anna Tompsett, Reed Walker, and seminar participants at MIT and UIUC for discussions
and comments. We thank DJ Rasmussen and Michael Delgado for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Tatyana Deryugina and Solomon M. Hsiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Does the Environment Still Matter? Daily Temperature and Income in the United States
Tatyana Deryugina and Solomon M. Hsiang
NBER Working Paper No. 20750
December 2014
JEL No. N52,O1,O4,Q51,Q54,R11
ABSTRACT
It is widely hypothesized that incomes in wealthy countries are insulated from environmental conditions
because individuals have the resources needed to adapt to their environment. We test this idea in the
wealthiest economy in human history. Using within-county variation in weather, we estimate the effect
of daily temperature on annual income in United States counties over a 40-year period. We find that
this single environmental parameter continues to play a large role in overall economic performance:
productivity of individual days declines roughly 1.7% for each 1°C (1.8°F) increase in daily average
temperature above 15°C (59°F). A weekday above 30°C (86°F) costs an average county $20 per person.
Hot weekends have little effect. These estimates are net of many forms of adaptation, such as factor
reallocation, defensive investments, transfers, and price changes. Because the effect of temperature
has not changed since 1969, we infer that recent uptake or innovation in adaptation measures have
been limited. The non-linearity of the effect on different components of income suggest that temperature
matters because it reduces the productivity of the economy's basic elements, such as workers and crops.
If counties could choose daily temperatures to maximize output, rather than accepting their geographicallydetermined endowment, we estimate that annual income growth would rise by 1.7 percentage points.
Applying our estimates to a distribution of "business as usual" climate change projections indicates
that warmer daily temperatures will lower annual growth by 0.06-0.16 percentage points in the United
States unless populations engage in new forms of adaptation.
Tatyana Deryugina
Department of Finance
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
deryugin@illinois.edu
Solomon M. Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Since the invention of agriculture, one narrative of economic progress has been a gradual decoupling of humanity’s economic well-being from an unpredictable environment. As economies have
progressed from hunting and gathering groups to the sophisticated systems we participate in today,
the welfare of individuals within these economies seems to depend less and less on the specific environmental conditions in which the economy is embedded. This profound transition has been driven
by technological innovations that allow individuals to transform naturally occurring capital—such
as minerals, plants, or sunlight—into a human-engineered capital stock that is more robust to
environmental conditions (Hartwick (1977), Solow (2012)).
Here we examine how far this process has taken us. We test whether local environmental
conditions continue to influence economic well-being in the wealthiest economy to ever exist. We
exploit natural random variation in a single environmental parameter, daily temperature, to identify
its effect on per capita income in modern US counties. Controlling for annual fluctuations, county
fixed effects, and the distribution of daily rainfall within each county-year, we use a difference-indifferences approach to recover the non-linear effect of daily temperature on income. We obtain
estimates that are both economically significant and statistically precise: the average productivity
of individual days declines roughly linearly by 1.7% for each 1◦ C (1.8◦ F) increase in daily average
temperature beyond 15◦ C (59◦ F). This response is driven by warm weekdays and is not attenuated
in the most recent and wealthiest years of our sample—it is easily obtained when we restrict our
analysis to the 21st century.
Determining if wealthy economies are vulnerable to the impact of high temperatures is a particularly critical question in the economics of global climate change. Should wealthy economies
be affected by temperature, then a much larger fraction of the global economy may be disturbed
by climate change than previously thought. For example, in an early assessment Schelling (1992)
stated,
“I conclude that in the United States, and probably Japan, Western Europe, and other
developed countries, the impact [of climate change] on economic output will be negligible
and unlikely to be noticed.”
Discussions and analysis by Poterba (1993), Stern (2006), Nordhaus (2008), and Tol (2009), among
others, make similar assumptions or arrive at similar conclusions. This notion has been reinforced
by reduced-form, linear regressions in Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), who document that annual
economic growth rates in poor countries are negatively correlated with annual variations in each
country’s temperature but no statistically significant correlation appears to exist for richer countries.
It is generally thought that output in wealthy economies is less affected by climatic conditions
because these populations are better equipped to adapt to their environment (Kahn (2005)). For
example, farmers may alter what crops they plant to maximize profits conditional on their climate
(Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994)), they may innovate to develop new varieties robust to
2

adverse climates (Olmstead and Rhode (2011)), or they may simply migrate away from deteriorating
climates (Hornbeck (2012)). In other contexts, individuals may make defensive investments that
minimize the impact of the climate, such as purchasing air conditioners (Barreca et al. (2013)).
Finally, transfers or trade may be utilized to minimize the overall effect of climatic conditions on
individual welfare (Deryugina (2014), Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2012)).
Yet a growing body of evidence suggests that even in wealthy countries some economic vulnerabilities remain, implying that adapting to all climatic conditions along all margins is too costly.
For example, US crop yields continue to be highly sensitive to extreme heat, even after decades of
investment in genetic development and infrastructure (Roberts and Schlenker (2011), Burke and
Emerick (2013)), and measurable heat tolerance is only achieved at the cost of average yield reductions (Schlenker, Roberts, and Lobell (2013)). In non-agricultural contexts, the modern response
of temperature-exposed labor supply (Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)) is relatively unchanged from
responses documented seventy years earlier (Mackworth (1947)); high temperatures continue to
elicit costly personal conflicts even in wealthy populations (Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013));
and adaptation to extreme climatic events like hurricanes remains only partial (Hsiang and Narita
(2012)).
Here we examine whether, net of all potential adaptations, there remains an effect of temperature on income in the modern US (1969-2011). If relevant adaptive behaviors and investments are
both pervasive and effective, then we expect local economic activity in US counties to be unaffected
by temperature. However, if ambient temperature still matters, perhaps because the full range of
adaptations needed to decouple the US economy from the climate is too costly or because certain
impacts are unavoidable, then we expect variations in county-level income to reflect changes in
local temperatures.
To identify the effect of temperature on income, we exploit annual within-county variations in
the distribution of daily temperatures. We apply a difference-in-differences approach that allows us
to estimate the marginal effect of a single day’s temperature on end-of-year income, conditional on
temperatures experienced during the other 364 days of the year (Deschênes and Greenstone (2011)).
This method does not rely on “shocks” to annual average temperatures but instead measures
how income responds to relatively small distortions in the distribution of daily temperatures, i.e.
unpredictable changes in local climate. Key to this approach is the fact that the sum of positive
and negative disturbances to daily income manifests itself as a change in total income at the end
of the year. If hot days generate systematically lower daily incomes, then counties that experience
hotter-than-average weather during a given year will on average exhibit lower end-of-year incomes.
Specifically, an additional hot day will lower annual income by that day’s income times the fractional
loss due to the temperature on that day. We identify this marginal effect of temperature on daily
income using the residual annual variations in both the count of days at each temperature and
income per capita that remain after county fixed effects, year fixed effects, and auto-regressive
terms have absorbed average cross-sectional, trending, and serial correlations in both variables.
We find that total personal income per capita is highest when 24-hour average temperatures

3

are between 9-15◦ C (48.2-59◦ F) and declines substantially on hotter days. This average effect is
driven by lost income during warm and hot weekdays and is largely unchanged between 1969 and
2011. There is limited evidence of temporal or spatial displacement of income. Farm income loss
would be larger absent crop insurance payouts, but other government transfers do not appear to
meaningfully offset income losses. Because our income measures capture price changes, we conclude
that changes in prices do not appear to ameliorate the effects of temperature.
Farm and non-farm incomes respond somewhat differently to temperatures, with the overall
effect on total income appearing to be a weighted average of the two. The non-linear structure
of these responses suggest that temperature matters because it reduces the productivity of basic
components of economic activity: workers and crops. Overall, each additional warm day (24-27◦ C
or 75.2-80.6◦ F) reduces an average county’s total income per capita by roughly $14.78, with nonfarm income representing roughly $3.03 of this loss. Each additional hot day (>30◦ C or >86◦ F)
reduces total income per capita by $20.56, equal to 28% of average daily income.1 Integrating these
effects over individuals suggests that daily temperature has an economically meaningful effect on
economic production in the modern US.
Like many factors that affect production, there appears to be a well-defined optimal temperature
for productive activities at the county level. However, the distribution of daily temperatures is a
geographically-determined endowment that cannot generally be altered. To develop a sense for the
overall economic importance of this fixed environmental factor, we engage in a thought experiment
where we imagine that daily temperature is a choice variable that agents can freely optimize over
to maximize profits. Specifically, agents in each county set each day’s temperature to 12-15◦ C
(53.6-59◦ F), the income-maximizing temperature. We then estimate how different income in the
US would be in this scenario relative to historical experience, effectively computing the economic
penalty borne by the US because counties cannot freely choose their daily temperature. Allowing
this imaginary US economy to evolve from initial conditions defined by actual income in 1969, we
find that the inability to control county temperatures lowers the annual growth rate of average
income by 1.69 percentage points. Although this is only a partial equilibrium estimate, it suggests
that we should carefully consider the economic importance of basic environmental conditions even
in rich countries.
While we encourage caution when interpreting the above thought experiment, we think it may
help inform an important debate in economics. It is easily observed in cross-section that higher
temperatures around the world, both within and between countries, are associated with lower
incomes on average. Some authors have argued that this association is causal, with geographic
conditions playing a major role in patterns of economic development (e.g. Gallup, Sachs, and
Mellinger (1999); Nordhaus (2006)). Other authors disagree, positing instead that temperature
and other geographic measures have little effect on economies and the observed cross-sectional
correlation is due to important omitted variables, such as social and political institutions, that
are correlated with geographic conditions (e.g. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002); Easterly
1

0.08% of average annual income.

4

and Levine (2003)). We cannot settle this question in the global sense, but we believe that the
above thought experiment provides the first estimate, albeit for a single country, of the economic
burden imposed by geographically-determined temperature. Because our identification strategy
only exploits variation in the distribution of daily temperatures within a county over time, it
cannot be confounded by cross-sectional patterns of social or political institutions.
We conclude by simulating income growth in the US economy under a “business as usual”
global climate change scenario (RCP 8.5). We simulate national economic performance using the
44 climate projections developed by Houser et al. (forthcoming), which, taken together, correspond
to the probability distribution of the unknown global climate sensitivity (Weitzman (2009)). Under
the median projection, we estimate that the US annual income growth rate will change by −0.12
percentage points relative to a pre-1990 climate (median estimate) due to higher daily temperatures,
with the 10-90 centile range of effects spanning −0.15 to −0.09 percentage points per year.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we develop a framework for
the various ways in which temperature can affect economic production, allowing for the possibility
that agents adapt through reallocation of resources, defensive investments, price adjustments, and
transfers. In Section 3, we present our data. In Section 4, we describe our estimation strategy,
including a derivation for how we recover daily responses to daily temperature when we do not have
daily economic observations. In Section 5, we present our econometric estimates for the effect of
daily temperature on income, along with several extensions. In Section 6, we implement simulations
where counties can choose their temperatures and where climate change continues under “business
as usual” assumptions. We discuss these findings and conclude in Section 7.

2

Framework

Consider an economy with capital and labor resources that can be allocated across two sectors,
farming (f ) and non-farming (n) production. In sector j, the total quantity of capital (Kj ) or
labor (Lj ) can be adjusted in response to daily temperature (Td ). The productivity of that factor
may change with temperature as well. We treat capital productivity (AK
j ) separately from labor
productivity (AL
j ) because they may respond to temperature differently for technological reasons.
In this economy, the quantity of farming output produced in a single day can be stylized as
α
L
1−α
qf (Td ) = (AK
,
f (Td )Kf (Td )) (Af (Td )Lf (Td ))

(1)

where both the quantity and productivity of labor and capital might respond to that day’s temperature. Similarly, we describe non-farming output for a single day as
ω
L
1−ω
.
qn (Td ) = (AK
n (Td )Kn (Td )) (An (Td )Ln (Td ))

(2)

If daily temperature affects output in these sectors, then agents might respond to temperature
changes by reallocating capital and labor in a way that maximizes profit. However, even if agents

5

reallocate resources in a sophisticated way, temperature may still constrain the production possibility frontier of the economy by altering the productivity and quantity of primitive units (capital and
labor) available for production. In this analysis, we are interested in the shape of the production
possibility frontier with respect to daily temperature, after agents in an advanced economy have
optimized their resource allocation in (1) and (2).
On a given day, the value produced in the economy conditional on temperature is simply the
combined output of the farming and non-farming sectors, each multiplied by the price pj , which
might also change with temperature.
If we could observe aggregate economic output on a daily basis, then it would be straightforward
to recover the response of daily production to daily temperature. Unfortunately, because of the cost
involved with collecting this data, we generally only have data on aggregate production averaged
over intervals substantially longer than a day.
We are nonetheless able to recover the effect of daily temperature by making the simple assumption that the output process each day is the same. That is, we conceptualize the economy as one
where each day agents observe the weather, adjust factor allocations in response, and then produce
output, which is sold. Over the course of a year, this sequence occurs 365 times, and annual output
is the sum of these 365 daily outputs. Indexing days by d, we can write annual earnings as the sum
of earnings from each day in the year
annual earnings =

365
X



pf (Td ) · qf∗ (Td ) + pn (Td ) · qn∗ (Td ) ,

(3)

d=1

where we write q ∗ to indicate that agents are optimizing production conditional on temperature.
Written this way, it is clear that annual output depends on the full distribution of temperatures
across days in the year and the extent to which temperatures on those days alter into the quantity,
productivity, and allocation of primitive factors in the economy, as well as output prices.
In addition to reallocating capital and labor based on how temperature affects the productivity
of these factors, it is also possible that agents can directly alter how sensitive factor productivities
are to temperature by making costly defensive investments. For example, irrigation might be built
to minimize the sensitivity of crops to high temperatures or air conditioners could be installed to
maintain the productivity of workers. In both cases, greater defensive effort is rewarded with a
reduction in the temperature-sensitivity of a factor. Following Hsiang and Narita (2012), we denote
defensive adaptation effort e ∈ [0, 1] and assume
∂Aj
= hj (Td )(1 − ej )
∂T

(4)

where hj (T ) describes the sensitivity of a factor under baseline conditions that would be observed
if agents exerted no adaptive effort. If agents adapt vigorously such that ej → 1, then a primitive
factor becomes fully insulated from the environment and ∂Aj /∂Td → 0. However, even in a wealthy
economy this may not always happen because these defensive investments come at a cost c(e) that

6

is increasing in adaptation effort e. For example, running an air conditioner to protect workers
requires incurring electricity costs. Thus, in equilibrium, agents will select an optimal defensive
effort e∗ that balances the benefits of reduced temperature sensitivity of factors with the costs of
the effort. If adaptation effort costs are sufficiently convex, then e∗j will be bounded below one
(Hsiang and Narita (2012)).
Finally, agents may cope with temperature-induced changes in production by sending or receiving transfers. For example, insurance might be used to offset medical costs associated with
high temperature days (Deschênes, Greenstone, and Guryan (2009)). We denote net transfers in
equilibrium by τ ∗ .
Each day, conditional on that day’s temperature, agents adapt by allocating capital and labor
across sectors, exerting costly defensive effort, and sending or receiving transfers. Net income may
or may not change in response to the combined effect of these actions. Augmenting Equation 3
with costs from defensive investments (benefits are implicitly captured by qj∗ ) and net transfers, we
see that in an advanced economy annual income is

annual income =

365
X







∗
∗
∗
∗
pf (Td ) · qf (Td ) + pn (Td ) · qn (Td ) − c(e (Td ) + τ (Td )  ,
| {z }
| {z }
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
d=1
daily farm income

daily nonfarm income

defensive costs

(5)

transfers

where any changes caused by daily temperature result either directly or indirectly from the structure
of hj (Td ) in Equation 4, the fundamental sensitivity of the primitive factors in the economy. It is
often argued that in wealthy and technologically sophisticated economies, the offsetting effects of
price changes, vigorous defensive investments, and effective risk transfer mechanisms cause the net
effect of temperature on income to be zero, i.e. that the derivative of Equation 5 with respect to
temperature is zero. We test this hypothesis directly in the modern United States, arguably the
most advanced economy ever to exist.

3

Data

We match weather, income, and transfer data at the county level for the lower 48 states during
the period 1969-2011. All income and transfer measures are inflation adjusted to 2011 dollars and
converted to per capita terms. Summary statistics for key variables are presented in Table 1.
Weather data

To measure daily maximum and minimum temperatures as well as precipitation,

we use daily surface data from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC).2 We match weather
stations to counties using each station’s reported latitude and longitude. We omit observations
where the maximum or minimum temperature exceeds 60 degrees Celsius or is lower than -80
degrees Celsius, as these are likely errors. If there are multiple stations within a county, we average
their measures for each day. Our preferred measure of daily temperature is a simple average between
2

Publicly available from ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ghcn/daily/by_year/.

7

the maximum and minimum temperatures, which is the standard measure for average temperature
during a 24-hour period.3 As discussed in Auffhammer et al. (2013), weather station data is often
incomplete, sometimes due to mechanical failures, political events, or financial constraints. We
drop county-by-year observations that do not have a complete set of daily weather observations.
This results in a reduced sample size, with coverage that is displayed in Appendix Figure A1.
Thus, our results represent the average effect of temperature on income, conditional on whatever
circumstances allow counties to provide a complete record of daily weather within a single year.
Income data

To measure income, we use Regional Economic Information System (REIS) data,

published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The BEA, in turn, uses a variety of sources
to construct these measures.4 The most inclusive income measure at the county level is total
personal income. It encompasses all sources, including all types of labor income; proprietors’
income; dividends, interest, and rent payments; and government transfer payments. A subset of
personal income, earnings, includes only wages and salaries, other labor income, and proprietors’
income. In turn, wages and salaries include tips, commissions, bonuses, and any “pay-in-kind”
provided by an employer. They are measured before any deductions are taken and are derived from
reports filed by employers to comply with unemployment insurance (UI) laws.5 Total personal
income is reported on a place-of-residence basis, while wage and salary payments and other income
components are reported by place of work. The residence adjustment is made using US Census
estimates of worker commuting behavior. As a result, the components of personal income can
sometimes exceed total personal income.
Measures of farm income in REIS are derived from United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) estimates, which are based on sample surveys, Agricultural Census data, and administrative data.6 A distinction is made between gross farm income, which includes inventory sales, and
net farm income, which does not. However, additions to inventories are included in the net farm
income measure. Importantly, the net farm income measure we use also includes transfers such as
subsidies, crop insurance, and disaster payments. Our measure of gross farm income is cash receipts
from marketing crops.
Transfers data

We obtain data on total transfers from government to individuals from the

REIS. These include unemployment insurance, which in turn consists primarily of standard state3

The diurnal cycle in temperature approximately follows a sinusoid, so this standard measure is a good approximation for the true mean.
4
For further details, see http://www.bea.gov/regional/pdf/lapi2010.pdf.
5
There are only five industries that are not fully subject to these laws: agriculture, railroads, the military, private
education, and religious organizations. Other data are used to infer wages and salaries in the uncovered portions of
these industries. Typically, an employer will report wage and salary payments by county and by industry, resulting in
very accurate county-level estimates. In a few cases, an employer will file a UI report for the whole state, rather than
by county. In that case, the state total will be allocated to counties based on the industry’s share in each county.
6
For some states, estimates at the state level are allocated to counties using weights derived from the Census
of Agriculture. For some commodities, Agricultural Census data are interpolated to create intercensal estimates.
Because these procedures may mask some impacts of weather shocks, our estimates for the effects of temperatures
on farm income should be viewed as a lower bound.

8

administered unemployment insurance schemes, but also includes unemployment compensation
for federal employees, railroad workers, and veterans. Government transfers also include income
maintenance (which includes Supplemental Security Income (SSI), family assistance, and food
stamps), retirement and disability insurance benefits, public medical benefits other than Medicare,
Medicare, veterans’ benefits, and federal education and training assistance. In addition, the United
States has an extensive crop insurance program that has been greatly expanded over the past 30
years. Insurance plans are sold by private companies, but are heavily regulated and reinsured by
the US government. We obtain annual county-level data on crop insurance indemnities for the
years 1990–2011. These are publicly available from the Risk Management Agency (RMA) of the
USDA. Finally, Congress has also passed numerous ad hoc disaster bills to give aid to farmers who
suffered crop losses, regardless of whether they had insurance. County-level crop-related disaster
payments for the years 1990–2010 are from USDA Farm Services Agency (FSA) administrative
data, obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.

4

Empirical approach

Estimating daily impacts from annual data
Because random variations in weather are clearly exogenous, the central empirical challenge we
face is identifying the effect of daily variations in temperature on average daily income when we do
not observe daily income directly. Instead, we observe annual measures of income and assume, as
suggested by Equation 5, that annual income is a linear combination of many daily incomes that
are similarly affected by temperature. This allows us to estimate the daily impact of temperature
using annual income data.
To develop intuition for our approach, first consider a simplified example. Imagine there are
only two days in a year when production occurs and each has a random temperature that is either
“hot” or “cold.” Income on a hot day is $1 and income on a cold day is $2, but these values
are not observed. Instead, we only observe total income at the end of the year (after both days)
and we observe whether those days are hot or cold. After collecting data for several years, we
see that if both days are hot then total income is $2, if one is hot and the other cold then total
income is $3, and if both are cold then total income is $4. Assuming the daily income-generating
processes across years are similar, conditional on temperature, we could write these three facts as
three equations containing two unknowns: the daily income on hot days and daily income on cold
days.7 Solving the system recovers daily incomes on hot and cold days, even though they were not
observed directly.
Now consider the more realistic case where daily income is a continuous and potentially nonlinear
function g(.) of daily temperature Td . Annual income Y is then the sum of 365 daily production
7

If yh is income on a hot day and yc is income on a cold day, then the three equations are 2 = 2yh + 0yc , 3 =
yh + yc , 4 = 0yh + 2yc . Only two of these equations are needed to solve the system.

9

values
Y =

365
X

g(Td )

(6)

d=1

where g(Td ) is the function of interest equal to the bracketed term in Equation 5—the sum of
earnings, defensive costs and transfers. Similar to the simpler example above, if we observe Y and
the full vector of daily temperatures Td for many years, then there will be a unique estimate for
g(Td ) that best describes how production over a sequence of days generates the Y values we observe
at the end of each year.
To recover g(.), we approximate it as a stepwise function by computing the average g(.) over
a sequence of temperature bins, indexed by m. Denote the mth temperature bin Ωm with lower
bound Ωm and upper bound Ωm . The average value of g(.) over bin Ωm is
g(Ωm )

1
= m
Ω − Ωm

Z

Ωm

g(Td )dTd .
Ωm

Our stepwise approximation of g(Td ) can be written analytically as
g(Td ) ≈

X

g(Ωm ) · 1[Td ∈ Ωm ],

(7)

m

where the indicator variable is one if Td is in the mth interval and zero otherwise. Substituting
Equation 7 into Equation 6 and switching the order of the summations we have:
Y =

≈

365
X

g(Td )

d=1
365 X
X

g(Ωm ) · 1[Td ∈ Ωm ]

d=1 m

=

X
m

=

X

g(Ωm )

365
X

1[Td ∈ Ωm ]

|d=1

{z

T̃ m

}

g(Ωm ) · T̃ m ,

(8)

m

where T̃ m is equal to the number of days during the year with temperatures that fall in bin Ωm .
Thus, annual income Y can be approximated by a linear combination of the T̃ m variables, which
we can construct easily. A regression of Y on the vector of T̃ m values must return coefficients equal
to g(Ωm ), which by Equation 7 approximate the shape of the daily output function g(Td ).8
8

To our knowledge, this functional form was first introduced to the econometrics literature by Deschênes and
Greenstone (2011), in the context of health, although a derivation motivating this specification was not originally
presented. This approach is closely related to piecewise-linear degree-days models (Schlenker and Roberts (2009))
commonly used in the agronomic literature to recover daily growth functions under similar assumptions—a derivation
motivating that approach is presented in the Appendix of Hsiang (2010).

10

Regression specification
To estimate the economic response to daily temperatures, we estimate a version of Equation 8
that is augmented to account for autocorrelation, precipitation, lagged effects of weather, unobserved heterogeneity across counties, and nonlinear time trends. Specifically, using our panel of US
counties, we estimate
Yit = ρYi,t−1 +

Xh

i
i Xh
n
m
+ µi + θt + it ,
+
ζ n P̃itn + η n P̃i,t−1
β m T̃itm + γ m T̃i,t−1

(9)

n

m

where counties are indexed by i and years are indexed by t. Yit are economic outcome variables
such as log income per capita, the primary outcome of interest. µi is a set of county fixed effects
that account for unobserved constant differences between counties, such as geography. θt is a set
of year fixed effects that flexibly account for common trends, such as technological innovations or
trends in climate, and year-specific shocks, such as abrupt changes in energy prices.
T̃itm is the number of days in county i and year t that have 24-hour average temperatures in the
mth temperature bin, as indicated by the underbrace in Equation 8. Each interior temperature
bin is 3◦ C wide. We define T̃itm=1 = the number of days when Td < −15◦ C, T̃itm=2 = the number
of days when Td ∈ [−15, −12)◦ C, T̃itm=3 = the number of days when Td ∈ [−12, −9)◦ C, and so on.
The top (m = 17) bin counts days with Td ≥ 30◦ C=86◦ F. The m = 11 bin for Td ∈ [12, 15)◦ C
= [53.6, 59)◦ F is the omitted category. The coefficients β m are the parameters of interest, as they
describe the marginal effect on Y of an additional day in the mth temperature bin, relative to a day
with temperatures in the omitted category. In relation to Equation 8, the coefficient β m estimates
the component of the piecewise-constant approximation g(Ωm ). P̃ n is defined similarly for daily
precipitation across 12 bins. Each bin spans 40mm of daily precipitation, with the bottom bin
corresponding to no precipitation and the top bin corresponding to precipitation > 400mm in a
day. Because temperatures and precipitation are, on average, serially correlated within a county,
we include lagged values for all T̃ m and P̃ n variables to capture any possible direct effects that
weather in the prior year might have on current output. For example, low rainfall in a prior year
might reduce the quantity of groundwater available for irrigating crops in the current year.
The variable it is a disturbance term that we assume may be arbitrarily correlated between
counties within a state-by-year as well as within a given county over time. To account for this,
we estimate standard errors that are clustered in two dimensions (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller
(2011)): within state-by-years and within counties. This approach accounts for both spatial correlation across contemporary counties within each state and autocorrelation within each county9 .
Finally, Yi,t−1 is a lagged dependent variable with serial correlation coefficient ρ. Including this
term in the specification is important because there is substantial serial correlation in outcomes at
the county level that is not accounted for by common trends. For example, the history of capital
investments within a county affect production in subsequent years. It is known that one drawback
9
See Fisher et al. (2012) for a discussion and analysis of this technique to account for spatial autocorrelation. See
Hsiang (2010) for a discussion of simultaneously accounting for spatial and temporal autocorrelation.

11

of dynamic panel models, such as Equation 9, is that they are inconsistent when lagged dependent
variables and fixed effects are estimated simultaneously by OLS (Nickell (1981)). However, this
drawback is primarily a concern when panel lengths are short (e.g. ≤10 periods). We are not in this
hazardous context, as our panel has 43 periods. We estimate that the magnitude of our potential
bias is less than 5% of the magnitude of our point estimate, leaving us relatively unconcerned about
this potential bias as it is far smaller than our uncertainty due to sampling error.10 We opt to utilize
OLS because it conveys many advantages, allowing us to account for spatial autocorrelation, avoid
using weak instruments, and estimate spatial lag models. For completeness, we show estimates our
model without any lagged dependent variable and continue to obtain our main result.
Identification

The average effect of daily temperature in the mth bin (β m ) is identified by

Equation 9 if the exact number of days in that bin, relative to other years in the same county,
are orthogonal to other potential confounders, conditional on all control variables. For example,
the estimated effect of a 16◦ C day is identified by comparing a county to itself across years when
the number of 16◦ C degree days was slightly different. Weather has systematic patterns in each
location that are absorbed by county fixed effects. Random variations in those patterns give rise to
small distortions in the distribution of daily temperature across years that we exploit for inference.
As depicted in Figure 1, our estimates of each β m are identified off of these random disturbances at
each point in the temperature distribution within a location.11 We follow Deschênes and Greenstone
(2007) and Schlenker and Roberts (2009) in assuming that these detrended year-to-year random
variations within each county are uncorrelated with year-to-year variations in other important
factors that affect income.

5

Results

We first establish that daily temperature affects income in US counties and then demonstrate
the robustness of this result. We next look for evidence of adaptation over time, examine the
effect of weekday vs. weekend temperature, and estimate the structure of spatial lags. Finally,
we compute the total effect on income accounting for dynamic impacts and separately examine
different components of income to understand what mechanisms might be driving this result.

Main result
Panel A of Figure 2 presents our main result: log personal income per capita increases slightly
as temperatures rise from cool to moderate, then declines approximately linearly at temperatures
Nickell (1981) derives that the bias scales like −(1+ρ)
, where T is the number of periods. Based on our estimate
(T −1)
that ρ̂ = 0.825 for log personal income per capita, this number is approximately 0.045.
11
The effects of weather conditions over intervals longer than a day will be reflected in our estimates, but we do
not identify them separately. For example, the effect of a heat wave with five 28◦ C days will be captured by the
coefficient on the 27-30◦ C temperature bin, but we do not estimate a separate additional effect (eg. a “heat-wave
effect”) for this specific sequence of daily temperatures.
10

12

above 15◦ C (59◦ F). Relative to a day with an average temperature of 15◦ C (59◦ F), a day at 29◦ C
(84.2◦ F) lowers annual income by roughly 0.065% (−0.00065 log points). This effect is highly
statistically significant.12
1
365
29◦ C

If output were uniform across 365 days in a year, then each day would contribute
of annual income. Thus a decline of 0.065% of annual income from a single day at

= 0.27%
(84.2◦ F)

indicates that day is roughly 23.6% less productive than an average day. Linearizing the effect of
temperature relative to the approximate zero effect at 15◦ C (59◦ F), this is a marginal change in
daily productivity of

−23.6%
14◦ C

= −1.68%/◦ C = −0.93%/◦ F.

Interestingly, this county-level effect is quantitatively similar to the −1.0%/◦ C and −2.5%/◦ C
decline in annual average country-level GDP reported in Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and Hsiang
(2010), respectively. However, these earlier estimates were in response to average annual temperatures, not daily temperatures, and they were obtained by examining only low or middle income
countries, not the United States. Despite the fact that the modern United States is the largest,
richest, and most advanced economy to date, daily temperatures continue to have a quantitatively
large impact on county-level income.
We next check the robustness of this result by examining lags, earnings, alternative specifications, and measurements in levels.
Temporal displacement Panel B of Figure 2 displays the estimated effect of daily temperatures on annual income per capita the following year. We estimate these effects jointly with the
contemporaneous effect shown in panel A, as specified in Equation 9. Except for the single coefficient in the hottest temperature bin (> 30◦ C), we do not observe any statistically significant
effect of daily temperatures on income the following year. It is possible that the significant coefficient in the top temperature bin is spurious; because we are testing sixteen coefficients, it would
not be unlikely for one to be spuriously significant. However, it is also possible that this effect is
meaningful and indicates that some of the income lost from the hottest days is displaced into the
following year. The estimated magnitude of this positive lagged effect is half the magnitude of the
negative contemporaneous effects, indicating that roughly half of the income loss from the hottest
days might be made up in the following year.13 There is no statistically significant evidence for
temporal displacement of income for days below 30◦ C.
Earnings

Earnings make up the majority of personal income. In panels C-D of Figure 2 we

display the effect of daily temperature in current and prior years, respectively, on earnings per
capita. Qualitatively, the structure of the earnings response is very similar to the income response,
although the magnitudes of the point estimates are larger. Relative to a day at 15◦ C (59◦ F), a day
at 29◦ C (84.2◦ F) lowers annual earnings by roughly 0.11%. Again assuming uniform output across
12
We do not find any significant response of personal income or other income components to rainfall. Estimates
are available upon request.
13
In later simulations, we include this positive lag to ensure we do not overestimate the effect of high temperature
days.

13

365 days, this estimate suggests that the hotter day results in roughly 40.0% lower daily earnings.
This represents a linear decline of daily earnings at a rate of roughly 2.9%/◦ C above 15◦ C. Similar
to total income, we see no systematic response of earnings to daily temperatures in the prior year,
except possibly to very hot days with average temperatures exceeding 30◦ C.
Model specification

In columns 1-3 of Table 2, we alter the structure of our econometric model

to examine whether our main result is robust to modeling choices. In column 1 we present coefficients from our benchmark model, which includes county fixed effects, year fixed effects, precipitation, lagged weather variables, and a lagged dependent variable. In column 2, we remove the
lagged dependent variable and find that the structure of the response remains unchanged, although
some coefficients become somewhat smaller in magnitude (by roughly 30%) and others become
somewhat larger in magnitude (by roughly 50%). In column 3, we keep the lagged dependent
variable and introduce state-by-year fixed effects in place of common year fixed effects. Work by
Fisher et al. (2012) suggests that this approach removes too much of the identifying variation in
this context, causing attenuation bias to overwhelm results.14 Indeed, we find that the magnitude
of our results is substantially attenuated (roughly 60%), but the reduction in output in both of the
two hottest temperature bins remains statistically significant and the qualitative structure of the
response remains the same.
Measurement in levels In column 1 of Table 3, we re-estimate our model in income levels
rather than in logs.15 We find that the overall structure of the income response to temperature
is unchanged and that altering a day’s temperature from 15◦ C (59◦ F) to 29◦ C (84.2◦ F) reduces
annual county income per capita by $16.71 on average. This is very similar in value to the $17.4
dollar average loss one obtains by multiplying the 0.065% average loss (from column 1 of Table
2) by the $26,806 average per-capita income of counties. In column 4 of Table 3, we compute
population-weighted estimates that describe the effect on an average person rather than an average
county. These effects are smaller and are not statistically significant in the top temperature bins,
although warm days (24-27◦ C or 75.2-80.6◦ F) are estimated to cost the average individual $4.80.
This change in the response function reflects a re-weighting of the relative contributions of farm
14
Temperature is strongly correlated across moderate distances, so when a specific county has warm temperatures
it is likely that neighboring counties also have warm temperatures (this spatial correlation motivates our use of
standard errors that are clustered by state-year). The inclusion of state-year fixed effects thus absorbs all countylevel temperature variation that is spatially correlated within each state-year, variation that is “real” in the sense that
it is very unlikely to be driven by measurement errors at individual stations. However, inclusion of state-year fixed
effects does not generally reduce the quantity of measurement error at the county level because these errors are likely
independent across weather stations and counties. Thus, inclusion of state-year fixed effects substantially reduces
the real partial variance in temperature (σT2 ) that is described by our independent variables without reducing the

variance in measurement error (σe2 ). Since attention bias causes coefficient estimates to scale by
σT2

2
σT
2 +σ 2 ,
σT
e

parameter

estimates are driven towards zero as the model becomes increasingly saturated because
→ 0 while σe2 remains
relatively unchanged. See Fisher et al. (2012) for a complete treatment of this issue. Those authors conclude that
models similar to ours are over-saturated when state-by-year effects are included.
15
We Winsorize incomes at the 1st and 99th percentile to prevent outliers from exerting strong influence on our
estimates.

14

and non-farm income to the estimated effect, discussed in greater detail below.
Having established that the adverse effect of warm and hot temperatures on income is robust to
modeling choices, we next consider whether there has been any adaptation during our time period,
how the effect of temperatures differs on weekends versus weekdays, whether there are any spatial
spillovers, and how income dynamics affect the total impact of temperature.

Extensions of the main result
Adaptation and stability over time

We are interested in whether daily temperature affects

economic outcomes in the modern United States. However, it is possible that our result is driven
by earlier observations in our sample, which stretches back to 1969, and that the behavior of
the most recent years is not well-described by the pooled estimate. For example, residential air
conditioning spread steadily through the United States between 1960-2000, a fact that is likely
responsible for reducing heat-related mortality during the last century (Barreca et al. (2013)). It is
possible that this or other adaptations have altered the sensitivity of income to daily temperatures
in a substantive way. To examine this issue, we estimate the response of income to temperature for
each decade separately, shown in Figure 3. These estimates are noisier because each relies on a much
smaller sample, but they do not differ substantively from our pooled estimate. This suggests that
adaptations during the last half-century have not fundamentally altered the relationship between
temperature and income in the United States and that our main result remains valid during the
first decade of the twenty-first century.
Weekdays vs. weekends Most economic activity in the United States occurs on weekdays
rather than weekends. Some sectors, such as entertainment or retail, may generate greater value
on weekends, but many of the sectors where high temperatures are likely to have adverse impacts
focus production on weekdays. Thus, it is a useful exercise to examine whether hot weekdays
or hot weekends drive our result. To do this, we estimate a variant on Equation 9 where we
jointly estimate the marginal effects on annual income per capita of an additional weekday and
an additional weekend day in each temperature bin. We plot the response of income to weekday
temperatures and weekend temperatures in Figure 4 (coefficients are reported in columns 4a-b of
Table 2).
We observe that the negative effect that high temperature days have on annual income is driven
by hot weekdays and not hot weekends. Warm weekend days with temperatures up to 27◦ C (80.6◦ F)
have very small effects with narrow confidence intervals, allowing us to reject the hypothesis that
they have large effects on income. Hot weekend days with temperatures above 27◦ C (80.6◦ F) have a
positive and significant effect on income, increasing annual income by roughly 0.05% on the hottest
days. It is possible that hot weekends benefit annual income because hot temperatures compliment
some of the industries where production is focused on weekends. For example, consumers may
shop in air-conditioned malls or eat in outdoor restaurants more on hot summer days than at other

15

times of the year. Consistent with this notion, very cold weekends with temperatures below −3◦ C
(26.6◦ F) lower annual income.
In contrast, hot weekdays reduce annual income by 0.087% per day above 27◦ C (80.6◦ F), an
effect substantially larger in magnitude than the 0.065% effect from the estimate that pooled
weekends and weekdays. Under the conservative assumption that all economic value is produced
on weekdays, this indicates that these hot weekdays are roughly 22.7% less productive than average
weekdays at the optimal temperature. If we assume that economic value is produced uniformly
across days in the week, including weekends, then these hot weekdays are roughly 31.8% less
productive than average weekdays at the optimum temperature. For days above 30◦ C (86◦ F),
analogous productivity losses are 32.7% and 45.8%, respectively.
Spatial lags

Similar to how we use a temporal lag structure to look for temporal displacement,

we look for spatial displacement using a spatial lag structure. We assume that a county’s income
is affected by both the number of days that it is exposed to a specific temperature and the average
exposure of neighbors whose centroids fall within concentric annuli (around the county’s centroid)
with 100km widths out to a maximum distance of 500km (Cressie and Wikle (2011)). If high
temperature days cause output to be displaced to neighboring counties, then the coefficients on
neighboring temperatures will be positive. Figure 5 displays the spatial lag structure for 24-27◦ C
days, 27-30◦ C days, and > 30◦ C days (jointly estimated), indicating how county income is correlated
with its own temperature and its neighbors’ temperature at various distances. We find that high
temperatures continue to have a negative effect on own income even when accounting for neighbors’
temperature and that there are no significant positive benefits of being near hot counties. If
anything, there is some evidence that high temperatures in neighboring counties have negative
effects on a county’s own income. This suggests that either there are negative spillovers across
counties that experience high temperature days or that neighbors’ temperatures are a proxy measure
for some other temporary environmental condition that negatively affects income but is not captured
by our benchmark model, such as the length of hot spells.
Accounting for dynamic effects on income

Annual income in US counties is serially corre-

lated, so a temperature-driven income change in year t will have an indirect effect on income in
year t + 1. In Equation 9, we estimate that ρ̂ = 0.825, implying that Yi,t+1 = 0.825Yit + Xit β + it .
Thus, a temperature-driven income loss of $1 in year t will result in an income loss of $0.825 in
year t + 1, $0.68 in year t + 2 and so on, relative to a counterfactual income trajectory where no
loss was suffered in year t. The discounted sum of these income losses between the time of the
temperature event and ∞ represents the net present value (NPV) of lost income attributable to
the temperature event. By computing the NPV of the difference in county i’s income (∆Yism ) at
each moment s that was attributable to the temperature event T̃itm = 1 at time t, we can estimate

16

the full net present value of a day with T̃itm = 1. Using a discount factor δ, this is
N P V (total lost income) =

∞
X

δ (s−t) ∆Yism ≈

s=t

∞
X

δ (s−t) ρ̂(s−t) β̂ m =

s=t

1
β̂ m .
1 − ρ̂δ

Thus, the NPV of the altered income trajectory is a linear scaling of coefficients by

1
1−ρ̂δ .

(10)

Using

a discount factor δ = 0.95 (implying an annual discount rate of 5%) and ρ̂ = 0.825, we estimate
this scaling factor to be 4.62. In NPV terms, this implies that a warm day at 22.2◦ C (72◦ F) costs
4.62× − 0.000294 = −0.00136 log points of annual per capita income (relative to a 13◦ C (55.4◦ F)
day) because, in addition to altering contemporaneous income, it alters a county’s future income
trajectory. A hot day exceeding 30◦ C (86◦ F) is estimated to cost 4.62× − 0.000757 = −0.0035 log
points of annual per capita income in NPV terms.16 Recalling that a randomly selected day is
responsible for

1
365

= 0.00274 log points of annual income, the NPV of the total cost of a warm or

hot day is roughly 0.5 and 1.3 days’ worth of average income, respectively.
We next consider the different components of income to try and understand the mechanisms
that might contribute to this result.

Components of income
Much research on the economic impact of temperature in the US has focused on farming, since
the negative impact of adverse weather on crop yields is acute (Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw
(1994), Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher (2005), Deschênes and Greenstone (2007), Schlenker and
Roberts (2009), Welch et al. (2010), Fisher et al. (2012), Burke and Emerick (2013)). However,
recent work has indicated that non-farm income sources outside of the US may also be affected by
high temperatures (Jones and Olken (2010), Hsiang (2010), Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012)). These
authors suggest that this non-farm effect may be driven by the well-documented productivity
decreases of workers who are exposed to thermal stress (Mackworth (1946), Froom et al. (1993),
Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei (2006)).
In the US, high daily temperatures are associated with reductions in yields of major crops
(Schlenker and Roberts (2009)) as well as reductions in labor supplied among workers exposed
to outdoor temperatures, which includes manufacturing (Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)). These
studies demonstrate that the productivity of crops (AK
f in Equation 1) and the quantity of labor
supplied (Ln in Equation 2) depend on daily temperature and suggest mechanisms that might
explain our main finding that high temperatures reduce income in US counties. However, without
observing price changes, these studies alone are not conclusive. If prices change with temperature, as is possible in Equation 3, then changes in production might not translate into changes in
earnings. To consider whether these mechanisms might be contributing to the effect we document
For a discount rate of 3%, a warm day at 22.2◦ C (72◦ F) costs 0.00147 log points of current income in NPV,
while a hot day above 30◦ C (86◦ F) costs 0.00379 log points. At a 7% discount rate, analogous values are 0.00126 and
0.00325 log points.
16

17

above, we directly examine how the agricultural and non-agricultural components of income respond to temperature. We then compare both the structure and magnitude of these responses to
earlier results by Schlenker and Roberts (2009) and Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014). To facilitate
comparison, we reproduce the main results of both studies in Figures 6A and 7A, respectively.
It is worth noting here that Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) obtain data on the quantity of labor
supplied (Ln in Equation 2) but cannot observe labor effort, i.e. the productivity of labor supplied
(AL
n in Equation 2). Lab studies indicate that the labor productivity response to temperature
is qualitatively similar in structure to the response reported in Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)
(Mackworth (1946), Froom et al. (1993), Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei (2006)). Thus, the total labor
effects on income might be larger than the estimates in Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) suggest, but
the overall structure of the response should be similar.
Agricultural income To examine how crop losses contribute to our main result, we repeat our
analysis, replacing the dependent variable with log revenue from crop sales per capita. In panel B
of Figure 6, we plot the effect of hot days on annual income from crops and observe steep declines
when daily average temperatures rise above 27◦ C (tabulated in Appendix Table A1). This structure
is very similar to the yield response obtained by Schlenker and Roberts (2009) (Figure 6A). The
slightly higher breakpoint of 29-32◦ C in that study and its steeper decline is likely because Schlenker
and Roberts (2009) use hourly temperature, whereas our analysis uses daily averages. Because days
with 24-hour average temperatures of 27◦ C are likely to have some hours above 29◦ C, we would
expect to observe declines on days with average temperatures of 27◦ C in our analysis, even if crop
yields do not deteriorate until the hourly temperature reaches 29◦ C. Thus, we interpret our results
in Figure 6B as consistent with the crop yield response in Figure 6A reported by Schlenker and
Roberts (2009). Our results suggest that higher crop prices do not dramatically offset yield losses
caused by high temperature days; thus, reductions in yields translate into reductions in income.
Quantitatively, the decline in crop income explains a significant share of our main result for
total income: a 30◦ C day reduces annual crop income by 0.523% but lowers total income by only
0.076%. This large decline in crop income is broadly consistent with the magnitude of changes
reported by Schlenker and Roberts (2009), although a direct comparison is difficult because of the
difference in measurement described above. The outcome in Schlenker and Roberts (2009) is the
yield effect of 24 hours at each exact temperature. Because 24 hours at 35◦ C reduces annual yields
by roughly 0.03 log points (an approximate average across the three crops in Schlenker and Roberts
(2009)), one hour at 35◦ C should reduce annual yields by roughly

0.03
24

= 0.00125 log points. A

day with average temperature of 29◦ C might have roughly one hour at this higher temperature
during the day’s peak temperature, and we estimate that such a day would cause crop income to
decline by 0.00187 log points. Thus, while we cannot make a perfect comparison between these two
sets of results, this back-of-the-envelope calculation does seem consistent with the hypothesis that
high-temperature yield declines cause a decline in income that is not offset by rising prices.
In panel C of Figure 6, we examine how net farm income per capita (in levels) responds to

18

daily temperature and find that it declines by $21.07 for each day above 30◦ C .17 The structure
of the response of total farm income differs somewhat from that of crop income: we observe lower
farm incomes starting at temperatures around 20◦ C . We lack the data to determine precisely
the mechanism that could mediate effects at these lower temperatures. However, the observed
structure is broadly consistent with the labor productivity response discussed below. Alternatively,
farmers may be increasing expenditure on inputs to combat the negative impacts of temperatures
on yields. Finally, it is also possible that other productive factors respond negatively to these lower
temperatures.18
Non-agricultural income

We examine whether non-agricultural income might be playing a

role by repeating our analysis on log non-farm income per capita, shown in Figure 7B (tabulated
in Appendix Table A1). We see that non-farm income is relatively flat (albeit noisy) at low
temperatures and then begins to decline systematically at temperatures above 15◦ C, the same
breakpoint observed for total income (Figure 2). However, the magnitude of the effect on nonfarm income is smaller, with temperatures at 25◦ C lowering annual non-farm incomes by only
0.021% relative to 15◦ C whereas the analogous loss of annual total income is 0.059%. Both of these
features of the response, the smaller magnitude and the lower breakpoint temperature, are broadly
consistent with the response of labor supply documented by Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) (Figure
7A) and labor productivity responses from lab experiments (Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei (2006)). As
with the crop yield response, the breakpoint documented by Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) (∼25◦ C)
is a higher temperature than what we observe in non-farm income (15◦ C). This difference is likely
due in part to Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) using daily maximum temperature rather than daily
average temperature as we do–although the 10◦ C difference might be too large relative to normal
diurnal temperature variations to be fully explained by this fact alone.19 It is possible that changes
in the quality of labor, i.e. the intensive margin, are responsible for this lower turning point:
lab studies summarized in Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei (2006) indicate that productivity begins to
decline at slightly lower temperatures (∼21-22◦ C). We observe that the point estimate for nonfarm income increases in the hottest temperature bin. However, this point estimate is noisy and is
neither statistically different from zero nor from the negative estimates at the adjacent temperature
bin.
Quantitatively, our estimated effect of temperature on non-farm income is roughly four times
what one might expect based only on previous labor supply results, which is consistent with the
notion that unmeasured labor productivity effects are comparable or larger in magnitude to documented labor supply effects. For a day with an average temperature of 25◦ C, annual non-farm
income is estimated to fall by 0.000213 log points, which corresponds to a loss of 7.8% of an average
17

Net farm income is not amendable to a log model because many observations in the sample are negative.
We observe cash receipts from livestock sales and find that they are not significantly affected by temperature.
Key, Sneeringer, and Marquardt (2014) find that, while dairy production is negatively correlated with local average
temperatures, there is no relationship between temperature deviations and dairy production.
19
The average difference between the daily average and maximum temperatures in our sample is about 6.5◦ C. A
difference of 10◦ C is slightly above the 90th percentile in that distribution.
18

19

day’s non-farm output ( 0.000213
1/365 = 0.078) relative to the optimum temperature. Maximum temperatures on such a day might reach low 30’s or even 35◦ C. Based on results reported by Graff Zivin
and Neidell (2014), daily maximum temperatures in this range might result in a roughly 30-minute
drop in labor supply, or 6.5% of the average 7.67 hour workday among workers who spending a significant amount of time working outdoors. Because these thermally-vulnerable workers — termed
“high risk” in Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) — constitute 28% of the national workforce (Houser
et al. (forthcoming)), a randomly selected worker would on average supply 1.8% less work on this
hot day, which is roughly one fourth of the 7.8% loss of non-farm income that we document.
Transfers

Finally, we examine the effect of daily temperature on several types of transfers that

we are able to observe, as these may change with temperature and potentially offset lost earnings
(recall Equation 5). For example, risk-sharing within the US causes federal government transfers
to increase following natural disasters (Healy and Malhotra (2009), Deryugina (2014)). In Panel A
of Figure 8, we show the effect of daily temperatures on total annual transfers from the government
(excluding crop-related payments). We estimate that daily temperatures have zero effect on total
transfers. Our confidence intervals on these estimates are narrow, allowing us to reject fractional
changes in transfers that are similar in magnitude to the estimated effect on income. One component
of these government transfers that might conceivably respond to daily temperatures is total spending
on public medical benefits. Daily temperatures are known to affect health outcomes (Deschênes,
Greenstone, and Guryan (2009); Deschênes and Greenstone (2011); Barreca et al. (2013)), possibly
increasing demand for medical care and thus for these transfers. We estimate the effect of daily
temperatures on medical benefit transfers in Panel B of Figure 8 and find no statistically significant
effect or pattern, although these estimates are notably noisier than the measure of total transfers.
In Panels C and D of Figure 8, we display the effect of daily temperature on ad hoc crop
disaster payments and crop insurance indemnities, respectively. These data are only available for
1990-2010, and we estimate these effects in levels because many of the observations are zeroes. We
observe no systematic pattern for disaster payments, although there is suggestive evidence of small
reductions in payments for cold days and a small increase in payments in the hottest days (> 30◦ C).
Crop insurance payouts appear to offset farm income losses somewhat (recall Figure 6C), increasing
steeply for days that exceed 27◦ C (80.6◦ F). For each day above 30◦ C (86◦ F), counties receive an
average of $5 per capita in crop insurance payouts. Because crop insurance payments are already
included in farm income, these estimates suggest that farm income losses would be roughly 25%
higher if crop insurance were not available.

6

Counterfactual simulations

To develop a sense for the overall influence of daily temperature on economic outcomes, we conduct
two thought experiments where we apply our estimates from Equation 9 to counterfactual temperature distributions (shown in Appendix Figure A2). In the first, we imagine that daily temperature

20

is a choice parameter that counties can optimize every morning before production occurs. By comparing outcomes from this simulation with actual economic performance, we roughly characterize
the economic cost that counties bear because their temperature is determined by geography rather
than endogenously. In the second counterfactual, we compare economic performance when counties
are subject to their historical distribution of daily temperatures (1969-1990) in comparison to the
distribution of daily temperatures they are forecast to experience at the end of the twenty-first century under “business as usual” climate change (2080-2099). This comparison provides an estimate
for the economic cost of temperature changes caused by climate change under the assumption that
future patterns of adaptation are similar to those we observe historically.
Both simulations apply our partial equilibrium estimates for the income response to marginal
changes in the distribution of daily temperatures to counterfactual settings in which changes to the
temperature distribution are not marginal. Thus, our simulation results should be interpreted with
caution, as there may exist general equilibrium responses that would emerge—and which our model
does not capture—should the United States actually be subject to one of these counterfactuals.
Despite this shortcoming, we think these simulations are a useful exercise for developing a sense of
scale for the economic impact of daily temperature historically and in the future.

Temperature as a component of geography
We imagine a world in which every day, counties can choose their temperature before economic
activity commences. If, just like many other inputs to production, counties optimize their daily
temperature to maximize income,20 they will set their temperature to 12-15◦ C (53.6-59◦ F) each
day.21 We interpret this scenario as relaxing one of the constraints that is imposed on counties
by their geography. We think of the economic cost of this geographic constraint as the difference
between outcomes in this scenario and an otherwise identical scenario where counties experience
the actual sequence of daily temperatures.
We first estimate our benchmark model (Equation 9) with the full sample and all variables.
We use Winsorized personal income per capita as the outcome variable, weighting by population
to enable us to accurately aggregate the estimates into a national income measure. Then, holding
all coefficient estimates fixed and taking output in 1969 as given, we predict what economic output
would have been during 1970-2011 had each county been able to fix their daily temperature at 1215◦ C (53.6-59◦ F).22 To ensure this counterfactual is comparable to the realized output trajectory,
we also use the same procedure to predict output using actual weather observations (“historic”
20

If counties could actually choose their daily temperature, they would likely optimize it over a combination of
income effects as well as its amenity value. For simplicity, we consider only income effects here.
21
In this thought experiment, we avoid using the corner solution at < 5◦ F (< −15◦ C ) as the optimum. The
estimate at this edge is highly uncertain and there is substantial likelihood that the true effect at these temperatures
is below the interior optimum.
22
This procedure is slightly more complicated than using the predict command in Stata because of dynamic effects.
Output in each year depends on output in the prior year, which is affected by counterfactual temperatures. Thus,
we predict each year in the sample sequentially, allowing us to condition on prior year counterfactual temperatures
in each estimate.

21

simulation). To characterize the uncertainty of these simulations, we bootstrap 1,000 estimates of
Equation 9 and simulate both temperature scenarios for each estimate. We then multiply countylevel predictions by the county’s population and aggregate them to a single annual measure of total
income.
Figure 9 displays the model estimates and 95% confidence intervals for simulated trajectories of
aggregate United States income in both scenarios, as well as the full distribution of implied annual
growth rates for each realization. We note that the historic simulation closely mimics the observed
national income trajectory, so much so that they are not visually distinguishable for most of the
sample. We estimate that total personal income in the United States would have grown dramatically
faster had counties’ temperatures not been constrained by geography. Our model estimate is that
United States income would grow on average 4.05% per year (95% confidence interval: 3.12-4.65%)
if counties could have optimized their temperature to maximize income, compared to income growth
of 2.36% per year (95% confidence interval: 2.20-2.39%) in the historic simulation. Actual growth
during this period was also 2.35% per year. It takes one decade for the confidence intervals of the
two simulations to separate completely. After 42 years, at the end of our sample period, total income
is nearly 100% larger in the temperature-optimized simulation relative to the realistic simulation.
Overall, these results provide prima facie evidence that counties’ inability to control their daily
temperature costs the United States roughly 1.69 percentage points of growth per year.
We find the results presented in Figure 9 to be stark, particularly because our estimates suggest
an extremely hot day has a relatively modest cost of about $20 per capita per day. Thus, reconciling these seemingly different magnitudes merits discussion. There are two reasons why income
trajectories diverge so rapidly from historical experience when we simulate counties optimizing
their temperature. The first is that temperatures are suboptimal on most days for most counties;
average temperatures fall in the 12-15◦ C range 9% of the time. Thus, even if the marginal per
capita loss from an additional warm or cool day is only a few dollars, hundreds of such days across
thousands of counties per year add up to substantial losses nationally. This is analogous to the
proverbial “death by a thousand cuts”—small economic costs imposed by geography accumulate
to large quantities because economies are continuously exposed to these losses. Hsiang and Jina
(2014) describe a similar phenomenon when examining the effect of repeated tropical cyclones on
economic growth. The second reason why small daily effects of temperature accumulate to large
aggregate growth effects is because the income path of counties has a dynamic component that
depends on income in prior years, so economic losses imposed in an early period grow over time.
It is impossible to test whether these results would hold in reality, and it is likely that general
equilibrium adjustments would alter these impacts. We do not interpret these values too literally
and stress that they are most useful as a thought experiment that provides an order-of-magnitude
estimate. Overall, we think the general structure of these results force us to carefully consider the
potentially large importance of this single environmental variable for the world’s richest economy.

22

Climate change
To consider the potential economic impact of climate change using our main result, we simulate
economic production under two scenarios. In the first scenario, we compute the average withinyear distribution of daily temperatures and daily rainfall for each county during 1969-1990, the
pre-warming period. We then predict what economic production would be assuming that each
county is exposed to exactly this average weather distribution each year over a 20-year period.
Because we want to abstract from specific events during the time period of our data, we ignore the
estimated year fixed effects in this simulation.
In the second scenario, we replace the average temperatures during 1969-1990 with projections of the average within-year distribution of daily temperatures in each county during 2080-2099
under the “business as usual” warming scenario known as the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5. To account for uncertainty in these projections of future warming (Burke et al.
(forthcoming)), we use 44 model projections developed by Houser et al. (forthcoming) that provide
a range of estimates for total warming levels and spatial patterns of warming conditional on a
uniform greenhouse gas emissions scenario (RCP 8.5). Differences between these climate model
projections emerge from numerous differences in modeling decisions and techniques used by climate modeling teams around the world, with the set of model outputs representing the collective
research effort of tens of thousands of researchers across multiple decades. By employing all 44
projections, we are able to construct 44 possible county-level distributions of daily temperature
under this warming scenario, each of which generates a unique income trajectory for that county.
We aggregate county-level outcomes within each projection to a national income trajectory that
accounts for potential spatial covariances in each warming scenario.
To compute the effect of climate change on the behavior of national income growth, we compare
the 20-year trajectory of aggregate incomes in each of these 44 warming scenarios against the 20year trajectory simulated using each county’s 1969-1990 climatology. These 20-year simulations
provide perspective on the potential impact that warming may have on economic growth, but they
do not provide estimates for the total integrated impact of climate change over the 21st century.
Estimating the integrated impact of all warming experienced between 1990-2100 would require
county-level projections of daily events for each model over the entire 111 year period.
Figure 10A displays the estimated effect of warming over 20 years on national average income
relative to a pre-warming scenario. Each line represents the estimated effect of warming using one
of the 44 model simulations. After being exposed to an altered distribution of daily temperatures
for 20 years, our estimates suggest that average incomes would be lower by 2.31% relative to the
counterfactual with no warming from the 1969-1990 baseline. The full range of projections spans
-3.12% to -1.17% and the inner 36 projections (90% of simulations) span -2.90% to -1.72%.
We then estimate the distribution of effects that warming is expected to have on the growth rate
of income. For each of the 44 model simulations, we compute the rate of per capita income growth
and difference it from per capita income growth in the baseline scenario. We plot the distribution of
these differences in Figure 10B. Following the approach used by Houser et al. (forthcoming), each of
23

the 44 estimates has been up-weighted or down-weighted so that the collection of climate scenarios
mimics the distribution of global warming outcomes that we expect based on estimates for the
sensitivity of the global climate to greenhouse gas emissions. Importantly, this procedure captures
some of the impact of the “fat tail” in the global climate sensitivity discussed in Weitzman (2009).
Thus, the distribution of growth rate effects shown in Figure 10B can be literally interpreted as
the probability distribution of impacts that we expect (based on our reduced-form estimates) if
emissions follow the “business as usual” scenario described in RCP 8.5. Our median estimate is
that growth will slow by 0.12 percentage points per year under this warming scenario, with the
central 50% of probability mass (the inter-quartile range) spanning -0.13 to -0.11 percentage points,
the inner 90% of mass spanning -0.15 to -0.09 percentage points and the full range of projections
spanning -0.16 to -0.06 percentage points.
Similar to the temperature-optimization simulations above, these partial-equilibrium estimates
for the income growth effect of warming do not account for any general equilibrium adjustments.
Furthermore, these estimates do not account for any novel types of adaptation based on innovations
that were not available to counties in our sample. However, these estimates also do not account for
other changes in counties’ climates, such as changes in rainfall, natural disasters, or ecology. Nor
do they capture climate-related economic events in foreign countries that affect domestic incomes.
Thus, there are reasons to believe that the actual economic impact of climate change on the United
States may be smaller than our estimates suggest as well as reasons to believe the impact will be
larger.
It is useful to compare our estimates to results from Houser et al. (forthcoming), who take a
different but complementary approach of estimating the growth effect of climate change. Houser
et al. use sector-specific, county-level dose-response functions for changes caused by daily climatic
conditions to estimate economic impacts. For example, they compute the expected hours of labor
supply that are lost due to high temperatures in both high- and low-risk industries. These impacts
are then incorporated into a general equilibrium model of the US economy and changes in the
growth rate are computed under the same 44 climate scenarios that we use here. 90% of the
probability mass for growth changes in Houser et al. falls between −0.016 and −0.094 percentage
points per year (median: −0.042). We compare these to our estimates in Figure 10B. The two
distributions overlap substantially and are of a similar magnitude, suggesting that our reducedform approach – which does not model sectors specifically – obtains results broadly consistent with
an approach that does. The fact that our estimates tend to be larger than those of Houser et
al. is likely because the latter omits many factors that are known to be affected by the climate,
e.g. labor productivity, but which did not meet certain criteria for inclusion in that study.23 Our
reduced-form estimates account for all pathways through which daily temperature affects income;
thus, our estimates capture certain impacts that were omitted from Houser et al.
Our estimated effect of future warming on growth is much smaller than our estimated effect for
23

For example, mechanisms were required to have strong evidence from the econometric literature before they were
included in the analysis of Houser et al. (forthcoming).

24

the historical contribution of temperature as a component of geography. There are three reasons
for this. The first is mechanical: we do not extrapolate our response function beyond the support
of historical daily temperatures. However, under the climate change scenarios, many days will exceed historical maximums. Sticking with the original definition of our temperature bins causes the
marginal income effect of all days exceeding 30◦ C (86◦ F) to be capped at -0.0757 log points. If the
response function pictured in Figure 2A continues to slope downward at very high temperatures,
then our estimates for future impacts will be too small. The second reason that climate change
has a smaller effect than historical geography is simply that the environmental change that occurs
in our temperature-optimizing thought experiment is larger, from an economic standpoint, than
the environmental change under global warming. Most daily temperatures are fairly far from the
optimal temperature: the average distance from the optimum temperature is 9.01◦ C (16.2◦ F). By
contrast, the average increase in the county-level temperatures under our climate change scenarios
is only 5.2◦ C (9.36◦ F). Thus, allowing counties to remove all the dispersion in their daily temperatures is more dramatic than shifting the distribution of temperatures to warmer temperatures due
to climate change (see Appendix Figure A2). The third reason is that some counties benefit from
warming in the climate change scenario, since cold temperatures also appear to suppress productivity, although not as much as warm temperatures. Reducing the number of county-days that are
initially below the optimum temperature increases those counties’ output, an effect that partially
offsets the losses from warming up the days that are initially optimal, warm, or hot. In contrast,
all 91% of county-days that are at initially suboptimal temperatures benefit from having their
temperatures shifted to the optimum and there are no offsetting effects to attenuate the difference
between the historical and optimal simulations.

7

Discussion

Forward-looking and well-resourced producers will adapt to their environment through factor reallocation and defensive investments, while price adjustments may partially offset quantity shortfalls.
Furthermore, individuals may insure income via transfers. However, all of these adjustments have
costs, so optimal adaptation will equalize the marginal cost of adjustment with the marginal benefit
of reducing environmentally-caused losses. If environmental changes reduce income in equilibrium,
the implication is that the marginal costs of adaptation are sufficiently large such that it is optimal
for economic production to not be fully insulated from the environment. We find that even after
agents fully adjust, daily temperature affects the production possibility frontier of counties in the
United States, suggesting that even in a wealthy and sophisticated economy, the costs of adaptation
prevent it from being fully utilized.
Contrary to the notion that wealthy countries easily decouple their economy from the environment because they “have the resources to adapt,” the framework we present here suggests that
the quantity of optimal adaptation is determined by the marginal costs and benefits of adaptation technology, not simply by the wealth of the population. Some prior evidence supports the

25

notion that adaptation effort with respect to climatic conditions should not depend on income:
Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) and Hsiang and Jina (2014) observe that income losses following
hurricanes do not vary by income within and across countries, respectively. However, total wealth
could be important for allowing adaptation to occur if agents are credit constrained and existing
assets are an important resource to draw on for defensive investments or insurance. Thus, while
our results suggest that wealth is not a sufficient condition to entirely decouple an economy from its
local environment, it remains likely that poorer economies are more affected by their environment
than wealthy economies. Do credit constraints explain the large differential effect of temperature
on rich and poor economies characterized by Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012)? It is certainly possible,
and this question is an important area for future research. However, we note that in addition to
credit constraints, other explanations may also be playing a role in the apparent differences between
environmental sensitivities of rich and poor countries.
One hypothesis is that countries being poor and having their income tightly coupled to the
environment is correlated but not causal. This could occur if the same factors that cause individuals
to be poor also make their incomes sensitive to the environment. For example, economies dominated
by agriculture might generate low incomes because agriculture is less profitable than manufacturing
or services. These agricultural incomes may also be more strongly influenced by environmental
conditions, as has been documented in many contexts, including ours. One interpretation of this
observation is that it is simply more difficult to adapt agricultural production to changing climatic
conditions than it is to adapt manufacturing or services. For example, Hsiang and Narita (2012)
argue that the high spatial density of human and physical capital used in manufacturing and
services makes it more cost effective to invest in defensive infrastructure in these sectors, relative
to the low spatial density of capital in agriculture. If it is the high marginal cost of adaptation in
agriculture that makes poor countries more vulnerable to the climate, rather than poverty itself,
this theory would suggest that we may increase the climate resilience of poor countries with policies
that bring down the cost of adaptations in agriculture. In a second example where poverty and
climate vulnerability are correlated but not causally related, countries might be poor because they
have weak property rights regimes and unfavorable political institutions. These factors might also
make them relatively more susceptible to environmental conditions for a variety of reasons (Kahn
(2005)), including, for example, by altering the incentives to invest in defensive infrastructure.
A second hypothesis is that reverse causality is playing a role in generating observed patterns,
i.e. some populations are poor precisely because they are more susceptible or more heavily exposed
to environmental changes in ways that are not captured by average temperature. Many poor
countries are in tropical and subtropical climates where marginal changes in temperature might
have unique economic implications. For example, the generally negative correlation between rainfall
and temperature in these regions (which makes heat more damaging for agriculture) reverses sign
at higher latitudes (Auffhammer et al. (2013)), and tropical temperature changes are dominated
by the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, which has global economic and political impacts (Hsiang,
Meng, and Cane (2011)). In this analysis, we observe that the effect of temperature on income

26

is nonlinear, with more negative marginal effects appearing at higher temperatures. If a similar
structure occurs in other contexts, it is plausible that countries with higher baseline temperature
will suffer larger economic penalties on average because their daily temperature distributions are
centered at higher temperatures.24
Our counterfactual simulation where counties optimize their temperature suggests that the
current climate of the United States imposes a substantial economic cost, although there is not an
obvious way in which these costs can be avoided. Because there are no comparable prior estimates
for this cost, it is understandably difficult to gauge the reliability of these estimates. The only
loosely comparable estimate is from Hsiang and Jina (2014), who estimate the global economic
burden imposed by hurricanes using a similar technique and find similarly large costs.25 While
it may be tempting to dismiss both estimates as implausible, we emphasize that these findings
are indeed reasonable when one considers the pervasiveness of suboptimal climatic conditions. In
this analysis, counties are exposed to suboptimal temperatures 91% of days. Because income
accumulates and compounds with time, the total loss grows to be substantial.
While extraordinary achievements in science, technology, politics, and social institutions over
the last millennia have lifted modern economies to levels never before achieved, we find that these
forces are constantly in opposition to at least one environmental factor, temperature, that continuously slows down economic progress. The data suggest that this “environmental friction”—which
we estimate will worsen under climate change—slows income growth because many of the building blocks of the economy are each regularly exposed to suboptimal environmental conditions and
completely adapting to these conditions remains costly at the margin.

24
Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) investigate this idea using annual temperatures and a dummy variable for “hot”
countries and find limited evidence to support this notion, although it is possible that more granular analysis similar
to this study may reveal nonlinearities.
25
Estimates by Hsiang and Jina (2014) suggest global GDP growth is reduced roughly 1.3% per year by the
cumulative income effect of thousands of tropical cyclones.

27

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2002. “Reversal Of Fortune: Geography
And Institutions In The Making Of The Modern World Income Distribution.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117 (4):1231–1294.
Anttila-Hughes, Jesse K. and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2011. “Destruction, Disinvestment, and Death:
Economic and Human Losses Following Environmental Disaster.” Working paper URL http:
//conference.nber.org/confer//2012/EEEHC12/Hsiang_Antilla-Hughes.pdf.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2013. “Using
weather data and climate model output in economic analyses of climate change.” Review of
Environmental Economics and Policy 7 (2):181–198.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S Shapiro. 2013.
“Adapting to climate change: the remarkable decline in the US temperature-mortality relationship over the 20th century.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David B Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker Satyanath. forthcoming. “Incorporating Climate Uncertainty into Estimates of Climate Change Impacts.” Review
of Economics and Statistics .
Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick. 2013. “Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from US
agriculture.” Working paper .
Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller. 2011. “Robust inference with multiway
clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29 (2).
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2012. “Evolving Comparative Advantage
and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from a 9 Million-Field
Partition of the Earth.” Tech. rep.
Cressie, Noel and Christopher K Wikle. 2011. Statistics for spatio-temporal data. John Wiley &
Sons.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3):66–95.
Deryugina, T. 2014. “The Role of Transfer Payments in Mitigating Shocks: Evidence from the
Impact of Hurricanes.” Working paper .
Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.” American Economic
Review 97:354–385.
———. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations
in Weather in the US.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3:152–185.
Deschênes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. “Climate change and birth
weight.” The American Economic Review :211–217.

28

Deschênes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. “Climate Change and Birth
Weight.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99:211–217.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine. 2003. “Tropics, germs and crops: how endowments influence economic
development.” J. of Monetary Econ. 50:3–39.
Fisher, Anthony C, W Michael Hanemann, Michael J Roberts, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2012. “The
economic impacts of climate change: evidence from agricultural output and random fluctuations
in weather: comment.” The American Economic Review 102 (7):3749–3760.
Froom, Paul, Yeheskial Caine, Igal Shochat, and Joseph Ribak. 1993. “Heat Stress and Helicopter
Pilot Errors.” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 35:720–724.
Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D Sachs, and Andrew D Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and economic
development.” International regional science review 22 (2):179–232.
Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications for climate change.” Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1):1–26.
Hartwick, John M. 1977. “Intergenerational equity and the investing of rents from exhaustible
resources.” The American Economic Review :972–974.
Healy, Andrew and Neil Malhotra. 2009. “Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster Policy.” American
Political Science Review 103 (03):387–406.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and Long-Run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” The American Economic Review 102 (4):1477–
1507.
Houser, Trevor, Robert Kopp, Solomon M. Hsiang, Michael Delgado, Amir Jina, Kate Larsen,
Michael Mastrandrea, Shashank Mohan, Robert Muir-Wood, DJ Rasmussen, James Rising, and
Paul Wilson. forthcoming. American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United States.
Columbia University Press.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. “Temperatures and Cyclones strongly associated with economic production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
107 (35):15367–15372.
Hsiang, Solomon M, Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013. “Quantifying the influence of
climate on human conflict.” Science 341 (6151):1235367.
Hsiang, Solomon M. and Amir S. Jina. 2014. “The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on
Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence From 6,700 Cyclones.” Working Paper 20352, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are associated with
the global climate.” Nature 476 (7361):438–441.
Hsiang, Solomon M. and Daiju Narita. 2012. “Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the
Global Cross-Section.” Climate Change Economics 3 (2).
Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2010. “Climate shocks and exports.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 100:454–459.
29

Kahn, Matthew E. 2005. “The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: the role of Income, Geography,
and Institutions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 87:271–284.
Key, Nigel, Stacy Sneeringer, and David Marquardt. 2014. “Climate Change, Heat Stress, and US
Dairy Production.” USDA Economic Research Report Number 175.
Mackworth, NH. 1947. “High incentives versus hot and humid atmospheres in a physical effort
task.” British Journal of Psychology. General Section 38 (2):90–102.
Mackworth, Norman H. 1946. “Effects of Heat on Wireless Telegraphy Operators Hearing and
Recording Morse Messages.” British Journal of Industrial Medicine 3:143–158.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. “The Impact of Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis.” The American Economic Review 84:753–771.
Nickell, Stephen. 1981. “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects.” Econometrica :1417–1426.
Nordhaus, W. D. 2006. “Geography and macroeconomics: New Data and new findings.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (10).
Nordhaus, William. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
Policies. Yale University Press.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode. 2011. “Adapting North American wheat production to
climatic challenges, 1839–2009.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (2):480–
485.
Poterba, James M. 1993. “Global Warming Policy: A Public Finance Perspective.” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives 7 (4):pp. 47–63.
Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfram Schlenker. 2011. The Evolution of Heat Tolerance of Corn:
Implications for Climate Change. University of Chicago Press, 225–251.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1992. “Some Economics of Global Warming.” The American Economic
Review 82 (1):pp. 1–14.
Schlenker, W., W. M. Hanemann, and A. C. Fisher. 2005. “Will U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit
from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic Approach.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 95 (1):395–406.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 106 (37):15594–15598.
Schlenker, Wolfram, Michael J Roberts, and David B Lobell. 2013. “US maize adaptability.” Nature
Climate Change 3 (8):690–691.
Seppanen, Olli, William J Fisk, and QH Lei. 2006. “Effect of temperature on task performance in
office environment.” Tech. rep., Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Solow, Robert. 2012. “Sustainability: an economist’s perspective.” In Economics of the Environment, edited by Robert Stavins. W. W. Norton & Company.

30

Stern, Nicholas. 2006. Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press.
Tol, Richard SJ. 2009. “The economic effects of climate change.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23 (2):29–51.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2009. “On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
change.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1):1–19.
Welch, Jarrod R., Jeffrey R. Vincent, Maximilian Auffhammer, Piedad F. Moya, Achim Dobermann, and David Dawe. 2010. “Rice yields in tropical/subtropical Asia exhibit large but opposing
sensitivities to minimum and maximum temperatures.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences .

31

Average number of days in
temperature bin across all
years in Middlesex county
(absorbed by county fixed effect)

Number of days in
Middlesex county in
temperature bin during 2010
Identifying variation
from idiosyncratic
changes in daily
temperature distribution

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

75
20

25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 1: Example demonstrating the identifying variation in the distribution of county-level daily
temperatures from Middlesex county, Massachusetts. The average daily temperature distribution
(grey) is absorbed by the county fixed effect. Annual realizations of daily temperature distributions
are characterized by the number of days the county falls in each 3◦ C temperature bin in each
year—for example the 2010 distribution for Middlesex is the black-outline overlaid histogram.
Idiosyncratic differences between the number of days in each temperature bin for a given year and
the climatological average generate the identifying variation used for inference. The daily response
function is estimated by computing how changes in the number of days in each bin correspond with
total end-of-year income per capita.

32

A

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-0.15
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-0.15

65
15

Effect of prior year

0.1
Log annual total income per capita × 100

Log annual total income per capita × 100

B

Effect of current year

0.1

20

75
25

85

5

>30

-15

15
-10

25
-5

0

Daily temperatures in Celsius

C

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

D

Effect of current year
0.1

Effect of prior year
0.1

Log annual total earnings per capita × 100

Log annual total earnings per capita × 100

35

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-0.15
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-0.15

65
15

0.05

20

75
25

85

5

>30

-15

Daily temperatures in Celsius

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 2: (A) The effect of daily average temperatures on log annual total personal income per
capita×100 (i.e. percentage points) in US counties for 1970-2010. For reference, an average day
1
contributes 365
= 0.27% of annual income. (B) The effect of daily average temperatures in the
prior year on income per capita. (C) Same as Panel A, but for total earnings per capita. (D) Same
as Panel B, but for total earnings per capita. Panels A and B are estimated simultaneously in a
single regression model. The same is true for Panels C and D.

33

Log annual total income per capita × 100

Log annual total income per capita × 100

0.1

1970-1979

0

-0.1
5

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
15 25 35 45 55 65 75

-15 -10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

85

0.1

1980-1989

0

-0.1
5

25 >30

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
15 25 35 45 55 65 75

-15 -10

0.1

1990-1999

0

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5

15

-15 -10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

15

65
20

-5

0

5

10

15

20

25 >30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Log annual total income per capita × 100

Log annual total income per capita × 100

Daily temperatures in Celsius

85

75

85

25 >30

0.1

2000-2010

0

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5

15

-15 -10

Daily temperatures in Celsius

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

15

65
20

75

85

25 >30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 3: The effect of daily average temperatures on log annual total personal income per capita
×100 (i.e. percentage points) in US counties. Each panel uses a decade-long subsample of the data.

34

A
Weekdays

Log annual total income per capita × 100

0.1

0

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
-0.2

5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

B
Weekends

Log annual total income per capita × 100

0.1

0

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
-0.2

5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 4: (A) Log personal income per capita in response to daily temperatures on weekdays. (B)
The same, but for temperatures on weekend days. Panels A and B are estimated simultaneously
in a single regression model.

35

A

Effect of an additional day at 24−27ºC

B

Spatial lag annuli
(radii in km)

0.06
0.04

400−500
300−400

log points x 100

200−300

40N

100−200

Latitude

0−100

0.02

0

−0.02
−0.04
−0.06

30N

90W

100W

Own

0−100

Effect of an additional day at 27−30ºC
0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0

−0.02

−0.06

−0.06
100−200

200−300

300−400

400−500

−0.02
−0.04

0−100

300−400

0

−0.04

Own

200−300

Effect of an additional day above 30ºC

D

log points x 100

log points x 100

C

100−200

Spatial lag (km)

Longitude

400−500

Own

Spatial lag (km)

0−100

100−200

200−300

300−400

400−500

Spatial lag (km)

Figure 5: (A) Example of annuli used to construct spatial lags, relative to Stafford, Kansas (black).
(B) Effect on i of each additional day at 24-27◦ C for i and 24-27◦ C days experienced by j’s at various
distances from i. (C) Same but for 27-30◦ C . (D) Same but for > 30◦ C . All effects in (B)-(D) are
estimated simultaneously, along with own effects for lower temperatures and all controls.

36

A

Reproduced from
Schlenker & Roberts (PNAS, 2009)

Log crop yield

0

−0.02
−0.04
−0.06
maize
soy
cotton

−0.08
0

Log annual crop income per capita ×100

B

5

10

15
20
25
30
Hourly Temperatures in Celsius

35

40

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

Daily Temperatures in Fahrenheit
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily Temperatures in Celsius

Annual all farm income per capita (dollars)

C

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily Temperatures in Celsius

Figure 6: (A) Log annual crop yields vs. temperature during growing season for three major crops,
reproduced from Schlenker and Roberts (2009). Yield effects are depicted as the effect of 24 hours
at exact temperatures. (B) The effect of daily average temperature on log income from crops per
capita, from this study. (C) The effect of daily average temperature on farm income per capita (in
levels), from this study.
37

Daily high risk labor supplied
(minutes)

A

Reproduced from
Graff Zivin & Neidell (JLE, 2013)
50
0
−50
−100
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Daily maximum temperatures in Celsius

0

40

Log annual non-farm income per capita × 100

B
0.04

0.02

0

-0.02

-0.04

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5

15

-15

-10

25
-5

35

45
5

0

55
10

65
15

20

75
25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 7: (A) Change in minutes of labor supplied per day for high-risk workers vs daily maximum
temperature, reproduced from Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014). High-risk workers are defined as
workers who are likely exposed to outdoor temperatures (includes manufacturing). (B) The effect
of daily average temperature on non-farm income per capita, from this study.

38

0.15

full sample

C
Disaster payments per capita (dollars)

Log annual current transfers per capita × 100

A

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

5

0

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-5

65
15

1990-2010 only

10

20

75
25

85

5

>30

-15

15
-10

25
-5

Daily temperatures in Celsius

full sample

0.15

D

0.1

0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

0

45
5

55
10

65
15

75
20

25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Crop insurance indemnities per capita (dollars)

Log annual public medical benefits per capita × 100

B

35

20

75
25

1990-2010 only

10

5

0

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

-5

85

5

>30

-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

75
20

25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Figure 8: (A) The effect of daily average temperatures on log total government transfers to individuals per capita. (B) The same as A, but for the subset of transfers that are public medical benefits.
(C) The effect of daily temperatures on ad hoc crop disaster payments per capita (in levels). (D)
The effect of daily temperatures on crop insurance indemnities per capita.

39

Total personal income (trillion US$)

A

35
Observed
Historical temperature
Optimizing temperature

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Year

B
4
Historical
temperature

Probability density

3

2

1

Optimizing
temperature

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Growth rate (% per year)

Figure 9: (A) Comparison of observed nationally aggregated total personal income (dashed black)
with model prediction using observed temperature (orange) and temperature that is optimized to
maximize income (blue), i.e. 12-15◦ C every county-day. Shaded regions are 95% confidence intervals
from bootstrapped estimates. (B) Distribution of bootstrapped income growth rates implied by
Panel A.

40

Change in total personal income
(% relative to no warming)

A

1979-1990 climate scenario
0

-1

predictions
from 44
climate
simulations

-2

-3
2080

2085

2090

2095

Simulation year
Probability density
(conditional on “business as usual” emissions)

B
20
90% liklihood range from Houser et al.

15

10

5

0
-0.18

-0.15

-0.12

-0.09

-0.06

-0.03

0

Change in growth rate of total personal income per capita (% per year)

Figure 10: (A) Estimated change in total personal income in a “business as usual” climate change
scenario (RCP 8.5) relative to a projection where the climate is fixed to 1970-1990 conditions.
Both simulations are initialized in 2080 with the same income level. Each line is one of 44 different
climate model projections using the same emissions scenario, from Houser et al. (forthcoming). (B)
Estimated distribution for the growth rate effect of “business as usual” climate change scenarios
shown in Panel A. Following Houser et al., each of the 44 model projections is weighted to reflect
the overall probability distribution of global climate sensitivities estimated from historical climate
data. 90% likelihood range for analogous growth rate change in Houser et al. shown in gray
for comparison. Estimates from Houser et al. are computed by integrating detailed county-level
damage projections for labor supply, agriculture, mortality, energy, cyclones, and sea level rise into
a computable general equilibrium model.
41

Table 1: Summary statistics

Population
Personal income per capita
Non-farm personal income per capita
Percent of personal income that is non-farm income
Percent of personal income that is wage/salary income
Percent of personal income that is farm income
Percent of personal income that is rents
Percent of personal income that is transfers

(1)
Mean

(2)
Std.
Dev.

(3)
Min

(4)
Max

(5)
Obs

111,722
26,806
16,710
61.67
45.16
5.24
18.15
16.88

341,233
8,438
10,549
27.53
22.59
8.66
5.93
6.38

209
6,356
2,738
8
9
-235
2
2

9,889,056
136,936
336,356
916
757
77
123
65

76,646
76,646
76,646
76,646
76,646
76,646
76,646
76,646

Source: Regional Economic Information Systems. Unit of observation is a county-year. All monetary amounts are in
2011 dollars.

42

Table 2: The effect of daily temperature on log total annual income per capita
(1)

(2)

(3)

Pooled week model

Daily temperature

(4a)

(4b)

Joint weekend-weekday model

(Celsius)

(Fahrenheit)

All days

All days

All days

Weekday

Weekend

>30◦ C

>86◦ F

27-30◦ C

80.6-86◦ F

24-27◦ C

75.2-80.6◦ F

21-24◦ C

69.8-75.2◦ F

18-21◦ C

64.4-69.8◦ F

15-18◦ C

59-64.4◦ F

12-15◦ C

53.6-59◦ F

9-12◦ C

48.2-53.6◦ F

6-9◦ C

42.8-48.2◦ F

3-6◦ C

37.4-42.8◦ F

0-3◦ C

32-37.4◦ F

−3-0◦ C

26.6-32◦ F

−6-−3◦ C

21.2-26.6◦ F

−9-−6◦ C

15.8-21.2◦ F

−12-−9◦ C

10.4-15.8◦ F

−15-−12◦ C

5-10.4◦ F

< −15◦ C

<5◦ F

-0.000757***
(0.00013)
-0.000646***
(0.000108)
-0.000585***
(0.000104)
-0.000294***
(0.000089)
-0.000311***
(0.000088)
-0.000111
(0.000078)
0
-0.000036
(0.000076)
-0.000003
(0.000079)
-0.000074
(0.000085)
-0.000119
(0.000094)
-0.000195*
(0.0001)
-0.000322***
(0.000115)
-0.000269**
(0.000122)
-0.000144
(0.000167)
0.000126
(0.000269)
0.000234
(0.000268)

-0.000658***
(0.000235)
-0.000436**
(0.00017)
-0.000866***
(0.000159)
-0.000445***
(0.000137)
-0.000672***
(0.000138)
-0.000301**
(0.000121)
0
-0.000288**
(0.000124)
-0.00017
(0.000135)
-0.000195
(0.000149)
-0.000271*
(0.000157)
-0.000420**
(0.00017)
-0.000657***
(0.000187)
-0.000616***
(0.000216)
-0.000149
(0.00025)
0.000691*
(0.000376)
-0.000162
(0.000331)

-0.000279**
(0.000129)
-0.000235**
(0.000097)
-0.000109
(0.000091)
0.000033
(0.00008)
-0.000012
(0.000075)
0.000017
(0.000062)
0
0.000004
(0.000059)
-0.000001
(0.000069)
0.00004
(0.00008)
0.000123
(0.000084)
-0.000024
(0.00009)
-0.000195*
(0.000105)
0.000007
(0.000115)
0.000270**
(0.000135)
0.000083
(0.000179)
0.000478***
(0.000182)

-0.001255***
(0.000214)
-0.000874***
(0.000144)
-0.000666***
(0.00013)
-0.000407***
(0.000109)
-0.000390***
(0.000099)
-0.000169**
(0.000076)
0
0.000017
(0.000064)
-0.000054
(0.000078)
-0.000071
(0.000085)
-0.000038
(0.000098)
-0.000064
(0.000113)
-0.000081
(0.000139)
0.000032
(0.000157)
0.000237
(0.000182)
0.000666**
(0.000268)
0.000373
(0.000281)

0.000496***
(0.000192)
0.000262**
(0.000116)
0.000092
(0.000098)
0.00012
(0.000079)
0.000094
(0.000067)
0.000076
(0.000047)
0
-0.000054
(0.000049)
0.000054
(0.000065)
0.000014
(0.000077)
-0.000063
(0.000086)
-0.000114
(0.000096)
-0.000229**
(0.000114)
-0.000288**
(0.000138)
-0.000364**
(0.000153)
-0.000534**
(0.000227)
-0.000125
(0.000278)

Observations
R-squared

76,576
0.93

78,635
0.85

76,576
0.95

76,576
0.93

76,576
0.93

County Fixed Effects
Lagged Dependant Variable
Year Fixed Effects
State-by-Year Fixed Effects

Y
Y
Y
No

Y
No
Y
No

Y
Y
No
Y

Y
Y
Y
No

Y
Y
Y
No

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by
county and by state-year. All outcomes are in dollars per capita. Controls include year and county fixed
effects, lagged weather variables and the lagged dependent variable. Omitted category is 12-15 degrees
Celsius (53.6-59 degrees Fahrenheit). Columns 4a and 4b are estimates simultaneously as part of the same
model.

43

Table 3: Estimating the effect of daily temperature on annual county income per capita in dollars
(1)

(2)

(3)

Unweighted income

Daily temperature

(4)

(5)

(6)

Population-weighted income

(Celsius)

(Fahrenheit)

Total

Farm

Non-farm

Total

Farm

Non-farm

>30◦ C

>86◦ F

27-30◦ C

80.6-86◦ F

24-27◦ C

75.2-80.6◦ F

21-24◦ C

69.8-75.2◦ F

18-21◦ C

64.4-69.8◦ F

15-18◦ C

59-64.4◦ F

12-15◦ C

53.6-59◦ F

9-12◦ C

48.2-53.6◦ F

6-9◦ C

42.8-48.2◦ F

3-6◦ C

37.4-42.8◦ F

0-3◦ C

32-37.4◦ F

−3-0◦ C

26.6-32◦ F

−6-−3◦ C

21.2-26.6◦ F

−9-−6◦ C

15.8-21.2◦ F

−12-−9◦ C

10.4-15.8◦ F

−15-−12◦ C

5-10.4◦ F

< −15◦ C

<5◦ F

-20.56***
(3.33)
-16.71***
(2.73)
-14.78***
(2.61)
-6.92***
(2.29)
-7.46***
(2.30)
-2.77
(1.99)
0
-1.00
(2.01)
-1.07
(2.11)
-2.47
(2.37)
-3.12
(2.47)
-5.47**
(2.66)
-10.61***
(3.13)
-5.74*
(3.32)
-1.73
(4.38)
4.28
(6.74)
6.55
(6.85)

-21.07***
(2.85)
-15.36***
(2.21)
-11.63***
(2.12)
-5.49***
(1.90)
-4.85**
(1.88)
-1.50
(1.61)
0
-0.90
(1.59)
0.42
(1.67)
-2.58
(1.84)
-2.11
(1.94)
-4.84**
(2.14)
-6.76***
(2.60)
-0.29
(2.73)
-1.94
(3.47)
1.85
(5.66)
10.03*
(5.22)

0.53
(1.81)
-2.27**
(1.06)
-3.03***
(0.94)
-1.80**
(0.89)
-1.75**
(0.87)
-0.50
(0.87)
0
-0.73
(0.85)
-1.44
(0.91)
0.18
(0.98)
-0.16
(1.02)
-2.89***
(1.12)
-0.61
(1.38)
0.49
(1.57)
-0.99
(1.77)
2.32
(2.40)
-2.02
(1.57)

-2.39
(1.74)
-1.48
(2.35)
-4.80***
(1.66)
-2.72*
(1.59)
-2.12
(1.56)
-1.06
(1.70)
0
-0.21
(1.85)
-1.91
(1.35)
-1.66
(1.69)
1.07
(1.72)
-0.48
(1.90)
-4.09*
(2.26)
-0.37
(2.50)
-3.70
(3.94)
0.54
(4.90)
1.57
(3.71)

-2.87***
(0.60)
-2.08***
(0.41)
-0.67**
(0.34)
-0.11
(0.34)
0.09
(0.31)
0.24
(0.35)
0
-0.55
(0.44)
-0.37
(0.30)
-0.40
(0.44)
-0.49
(0.38)
-0.69
(0.44)
-0.78
(0.52)
-0.26
(0.53)
-1.20*
(0.66)
-0.85
(1.36)
4.05**
(1.84)

0.30
(2.08)
-1.95
(1.85)
-4.05***
(1.52)
-3.95**
(1.55)
-2.64*
(1.59)
-2.35*
(1.42)
0
-1.24
(1.67)
-1.97
(1.36)
-2.82*
(1.68)
0.26
(1.69)
-2.52
(1.91)
-5.34**
(2.31)
0.88
(2.34)
-3.09
(3.81)
2.24
(4.92)
-3.66
(2.63)

76,576
0.93

75,212
0.34

76,576
0.95

76,576
0.99

75,212
0.32

76,576
0.98

Observations
R-squared

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses)
clustered by county and by state-year. All outcomes are in 2011 US dollars per capita and are
Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. Controls include year and county fixed effects, lagged
weather variables and the lagged dependent variable. Omitted category is 12-15 degrees Celsius
(53.6-59 degrees Fahrenheit).

44

Appendix

2 - 10 years
11 - 18 years
19 - 27 years
28 - 36 years
37 - 43 years

Appendix Figure A1: Number of years that each county has a complete record of daily average
temperatures and daily rainfall. Years with incomplete records are dropped from the sample.

45

A

B
Historical temperature (1969-1990)

Historical temperature (1969-2011)

Clime change temperature counterfactual (2080-2099)

Optimizing temperature counterfactual
0.04

Density

Density

0.2

0.02

0.1

0

0

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
5
-15

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
65

15

75
20

25

85

5
-15

>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

15
-10

25
-5

35
0

45
5

55
10

65
15

75
20

25

85
>30

Daily temperatures in Celsius

Appendix Figure A2: (A) Distribution of daily temperatures in the sample and used in the historical
simulation (grey) and distribution of daily temperatures used in the counterfactual simulation
where counties select an optimal temperature that maximizes daily production (black outline). (B)
Distribution of daily temperatures used in the historical simulation (grey) and distribution of daily
temperatures used in the “business as usual” climate change simulation (black outline). Histogram
is weighted distribution across 44 climate models, data from Houser et al. (forthcoming).

46

Appendix Table A1: The effect of daily temperature on components of county income

Daily temperature
(Celsius)

(Fahrenheit)

>30◦ C

>86◦ F

27-30◦ C

80.6-86◦ F

24-27◦ C

75.2-80.6◦ F

21-24◦ C

69.8-75.2◦ F

18-21◦ C

64.4-69.8◦ F

15-18◦ C

59-64.4◦ F

12-15◦ C

53.6-59◦ F

9-12◦ C

48.2-53.6◦ F

6-9◦ C

42.8-48.2◦ F

3-6◦ C

37.4-42.8◦ F

0-3◦ C

32-37.4◦ F

−3-0◦ C

26.6-32◦ F

−6-−3◦ C

21.2-26.6◦ F

−9-−6◦ C

15.8-21.2◦ F

−12-−9◦ C

10.4-15.8◦ F

−15-−12◦ C

5-10.4◦ F

< −15◦ C

<5◦ F

Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log
total income
per capita

log
net earnings
per capita

log
non-farm inc.
per capita

log
crop income
per capita

log
transfers
per capita

-0.000757***
(0.00013)
-0.000646***
(0.000108)
-0.000585***
(0.000104)
-0.000294***
(0.000089)
-0.000311***
(0.000088)
-0.000111
(0.000078)
0
-0.000036
(0.000076)
-0.000003
(0.000079)
-0.000074
(0.000085)
-0.000119
(0.000094)
-0.000195*
(0.0001)
-0.000322***
(0.000115)
-0.000269**
(0.000122)
-0.000144
(0.000167)
0.000126
(0.000269)
0.000234
(0.000268)

-0.001193***
(0.000207)
-0.001095***
(0.000171)
-0.000924***
(0.00017)
-0.000456***
(0.000147)
-0.000466***
(0.000144)
-0.000124
(0.000126)
0
-0.000078
(0.000118)
0.000018
(0.000122)
-0.000126
(0.000131)
-0.000207
(0.000149)
-0.000392**
(0.000156)
-0.000467**
(0.000182)
-0.000324*
(0.000192)
-0.000214
(0.00026)
0.000109
(0.000439)
0.000303
(0.000433)

-0.000009
(0.000104)
-0.000159**
(0.000064)
-0.000213***
(0.000059)
-0.000119**
(0.000054)
-0.000118**
(0.000053)
-0.000041
(0.000052)
0
-0.000086*
(0.000051)
-0.000094*
(0.000053)
0.00001
(0.000056)
-0.000042
(0.00006)
-0.000174***
(0.000065)
0.000003
(0.000079)
-0.00001
(0.000088)
-0.000108
(0.0001)
0.000172
(0.000139)
-0.000112
(0.000096)

-0.005230***
(0.000647)
-0.001874***
(0.000438)
0.000051
(0.000392)
0.000088
(0.000358)
0.000223
(0.000331)
0.000196
(0.000287)
0
0.000187
(0.000303)
0.000659**
(0.000333)
0.001223***
(0.000362)
0.000384
(0.000363)
0.000497
(0.000393)
0.000768*
(0.000443)
0.001236**
(0.000513)
0.000843
(0.00064)
0.002097**
(0.000885)
0.00003
(0.00077)

-0.000081
(0.000103)
0.00005
(0.000058)
0.000065
(0.000056)
0.000045
(0.000052)
0.000012
(0.000052)
0.000039
(0.000044)
0
0.000056
(0.000044)
0.000055
(0.000055)
-0.00003
(0.000057)
-0.00003
(0.000059)
-0.000005
(0.000065)
-0.000075
(0.000072)
-0.000204**
(0.000087)
-0.000098
(0.000112)
-0.000211
(0.000132)
0.000136
(0.000097)

76,576
0.93

76,571
0.80

76,576
0.95

75,312
0.73

76,574
0.99

Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by
county and by state-year. All outcomes are in dollars per capita. Controls include year and county fixed
effects, lagged weather variables and the lagged dependent variable. Omitted category is 12-15 degrees
Celsius (53.6-59 degrees Fahrenheit).

47

