                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF EDUCATION ON HEALTH AND HEALTH BEHAVIOR IN A
               MIDDLE-INCOME, LOW-EDUCATION COUNTRY

                                          Resul Cesur
                                         Bahadir Dursun
                                          Naci Mocan

                                       Working Paper 20764
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20764


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2014




We thank Rexford Santerre, Jorge Agüero, Padmaja Ayyagari, Bob Kaestner and the participant of
the 2014 APPAM conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Resul Cesur, Bahadir Dursun, and Naci Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Education on Health and Health Behavior in a Middle-Income, Low-Education
Country
Resul Cesur, Bahadir Dursun, and Naci Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 20764
December 2014
JEL No. I1,I12,I15,I21,I25,I26

                                             ABSTRACT

Although the impact of education on health is important for economic policy in developing countries,
the overwhelming majority of research to identify the health returns to education has been done using
data from developed countries. We use data from three waves of a nationally-representative health
survey, conducted between 2008 and 2012 in Turkey, and exploit an education reform that increased
the mandatory years of schooling from 5 to 8 years in 1997. Using exposure to the reform as an instrument
for education, we find that for women ages 18-30, education has no impact on self-reported health,
BMI, overweight, obesity, or on the propensity or intensity of smoking. Education does not influence
women’s daily consumption of fruits, vegetables, or their propensity to get a flu shot either. The same
results are obtained for men of the same age group with one exception: education increases men’s
BMI and the propensity to be overweight and obese. Potential explanations for these findings are
provided.


Resul Cesur                                         Naci Mocan
Department of Finance                               Department of Economics
University of Connecticut                           Louisiana State University
2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041                        3039 BEC
Storrs, CT 06269-1041                               Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and University of Connecticut                       and NBER
cesur@business.uconn.edu                            mocan@lsu.edu

Bahadir Dursun
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2326A BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
odursu2@lsu.edu
                  The Impact of Education on Health and Health Behavior in a
                          Middle-Income, Low-Education Country


I. Introduction

       Grossman’s human capital model has created the theoretical foundation for the analysis

of the demand for health (Grossman 1972a, 1972b). In this model health capital depreciates over

time, and gross investment in health can be produced by a household production function that

uses the person’s own time and inputs such as medical care, diet, and cigarette and alcohol

consumption. Schooling affects health because education increases the efficiency of health

production; i.e. more educated individuals “produce” better health from a given set of health

inputs. In contrast to this productive efficiency channel, education can also directly impact

health outcomes through allocative efficiency. Under this mechanism, more educated people

produce better health outcomes because they choose different input allocations in comparison to

those who are less educated.      Specifically, education allows individuals to acquire more

information about the impacts of health inputs (medical care, cigarettes, exercise, and so on),

which alters the consumption of these inputs, health behaviors, and affects health outcomes.

       The positive relationship between education and health outcomes is well-documented,

regardless of whether the focus is on individuals (using data on self-reported health, sick days,

etc.) or whether aggregate units are analyzed (such as mortality or morbidity rates).

Identification of the causal impact of education on health, however, is complicated because

unobservable attributes of individuals may be correlated with their schooling as well as their

health behaviors and health outcomes. Examples of such difficult-to-observe attributes include

time preference and intelligence. A further complication arises because of potential reverse




                                                1
causality; i.e. poor health may cause lower educational attainment, producing a positive

correlation between education and health.

       A solution to endogeneity of education is to find an exogenous variation that can drive

education, but that is itself not related to health outcomes. For example, de Walque (2007) used

an instrumental variable approach based on the idea that college attendance could have served as

a strategy for draft avoidance in the U.S. during the Vietnam War. His results showed that more

education, due to exemption from military service, had a negative impact on smoking. Currie and

Moretti (2003) used college openings when a woman was 17 years old as an instrument for

education and showed that maternal education, instrumented this way, had a negative impact on

the incidence of low birth weight.

       A number of recent papers exploited variations generated by compulsory education laws

to investigate the extent to which education has a causal impact on health. For example, using

exposure to compulsory education laws in the United States from 1915 to 1939, Lleras-Muney

(2005) reported a negative impact of education on mortality. Chou, Grossman and Joyce (2010)

used the compulsory education reform implemented in Taiwan in 1968, which increased the

mandatory years of education from six to nine. Using exposure to the reform as an instrument

for education, they found that parents’ education caused favorable infant health outcomes during

the years 1978-1999.    Brunello, Fabbri and Fort (2013) analyzed data on males (females) who

live in seven (nine) European countries that increased compulsory years of education. The

instrumental variables regressions showed that additional schooling, triggered by the education

reforms, had a negative impact on the body mass index in case of females.

       Some other studies, however, reported weak or no effect of education on various health

outcomes using similar empirical designs. For example, Kemptner, Jürges and Reinhold (2011)



                                               2
employed an instrumental variables strategy using the compulsory education reforms

implemented in West Germany between 1949 and 1969. They found that education had a

negative impact on long-term illness for men, but not for women, and that education had little

impact on having weight problems and had no impact on smoking. McCrary and Royer (2011)

used age-at-school-entry policies in Texas and California and estimated the impact of female

education on infant health. Comparing women born before and after the school entry dates, they

reported only a small impact of education on birth weight and prematurity of newborns.

Clark and Royer (2013) exploited two changes to British compulsory schooling laws that

increased school-leaving-age from 14 to 15 in 1947 and from 15 to 16 in 1972. They could not

find a significant impact of education on various health outcomes such as mortality or self-

reported health, or on health behavior such as smoking and drinking. Similarly, Lindeboom et

al. (2009), who used the 1947 reform in the U.K., could not find an impact of the increase in

parental education on the health of the offspring. Albouy and Lequien (2009) could not detect a

causal impact of education on mortality in their analysis of a French panel data set using two

identifying changes to the school-leaving-age. Meghir, Palme and Simeonova (2012) analyzed

Swedish cohorts born between 1946 and 1957 that were impacted by education reforms

implemented in 1949 and 1962 which increased the compulsory years of schooling. The authors

could not detect significant effects of education on mortality up to age 60.        Palme and

Simeonova (forthcoming) found that an exogenous increase in education, due to the same

increase in in compulsory education in Sweden, has increased women’s risk of breast cancer

diagnosis and lowered the breast cancer survival probability.

       The impact of education on health is important for economic policy, especially in

developing countries. It is well-documented that education causes an increase in worker



                                                3
productivity and wages, and that the impact is larger in developing countries (Card 2001,

Oreopoulos 2006, Mocan 2014.) A distinguishing feature of developing countries is that their

education levels are low and health outcomes are worse in comparison to those of developed

countries. For example, among the 180 countries around the world with available data, the

median years of education is 8.2. Dividing countries into two groups as those with average

education greater than 8.2 years, and those with average education fewer than 8.2 years, we find

that life expectancy at birth is 65.5 years in the group of countries with low education, while it is

72.8 years among the high-education countries. Similarly, the infant mortality rate is 19.6 deaths

per 1,000 live births in the former group, while it is 39 deaths in the latter. The tuberculosis rate

is 90 cases per 100,000 residents in high-education countries, while the rate is more than twice as

high (193 cases per 100,000 residents) in low-education countries.1 Thus, if education has a

causal impact on health in developing countries, the importance of education as a policy lever is

magnified.2

         There is, however, a dearth of information on the causal impact of education on health in

developing countries. The research cited above has focused on developed countries, and data

limitations prevented similar analyses from being conducted in the developing country context,

although there is a sizable literature that investigates the impact of education on fertility, the use


1
 Country level education data are obtained from Barro et al. (2010). Infant mortality, tuberculosis and life
expectancy data are from World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
2
  A related question is the direct impact of health on economic development, the evidence on which is not clear-cut.
For example, Bleakley (2007) analyzes the impact of the eradication of hookworm disease from the Southern states
of the U.S. in the early 20th century, and finds that cohorts that benefitted from the hookworm eradication program
made substantial income gains. Lorentzen, McMillan and Wacziarg (2008) use cross-national and sub-national data.
Their cross-sectional instrumental variables regressions show that high adult mortality promotes higher levels of
risky behavior and lower investment in physical capital, and that adult mortality is a substantial determinant of
economic growth. On the other hand, Acemoglu and Robinson (2007) fail to detect an impact of a country’s per
capita GDP and its life expectancy. Similarly, using a simulation model Ashraf, Lester and Weil (2008) find that
large improvements in health lead to small gains in GDP per capita.



                                                          4
of contraceptives and the acquisition of health knowledge in developing countries (examples

include Osili and Long 2008, Cannonier and Mocan 2012, Agüero and Bharadwaj 2014).

        In this paper we use micro data on a large sample of Turkish residents, based on nation-

wide surveys conducted by Turkish Statistical institute in 2008, 2010 and 2012. This is one of

the very few papers that investigates the impact of education on health outcomes and health

behavior in a developing country. Turkey is a middle-income country with per capita income of

$10,900 in 2013. Average years of education is low: 6.5 years of schooling among those who

are 25 years of age or older. The main reason for the low level of education is that the mandatory

years of schooling was only 5 years until 1997. An education reform law was passed quickly in

August 1997, which became effective in Fall 1997. The law increased the mandatory years of

schooling from 5 years to 8. The details of the reform are explained in Section II below.

Exposure to this reform is used as an instrument for completed schooling to identify the impact

of education on various health outcomes and the consumption of health inputs.3

         The data contain detailed information on personal background characteristics of

individuals, along with information on self-reported health, height, weight, and various measures

of smoking. We also analyze such health behaviors as consumption of fruit, consumption of

vegetables, and flu vaccinations, although our primary focus is on smoking and obesity because

these are two major preventable causes of death (Mokdad et al. 2004). About 1.5 billion people

around the world were estimated to be overweight or obese in 2008 (Popkin et al. 2012).

Furthermore, as indicated by the World Health Organization, “Almost 6 million people die from

tobacco use each year, both from direct tobacco use and second-hand smoke. By 2020, this

number will increase to 7.5 million, accounting for 10 percent of all deaths. Smoking is

3
 Some recent papers also employed instrumental-variables regressions using this Turkish education reform. Cesur
and Mocan (2013) found that education, driven by the reform, impacts women’s religiosity; Dincer, Kaushla and
Grossman (2014) and Gunes (2013) report that education lowers the incidence of pregnancy and fertility.

                                                        5
estimated to cause about 71 percent of lung cancer, 42 percent of chronic respiratory disease and

nearly 10 percent of cardiovascular disease. The highest incidence of smoking among men is in

lower-middle-income countries” (WHO 2010).                  Obesity and smoking are listed among the most

important public health challenges faced by developing countries, and the reports of the World

Health Organization (WHO) and the World Bank (WB) frequently stress the importance of

education in promoting health and health behaviors in these countries (WHO, 2009; WB, 2011).4

        We find that in this middle-income country, education has no statistically significant

impact on self-reported health, BMI, smoking, consumption of fruits, consumption of vegetables

or flu vaccinations for women ages 18-30. Similarly, in case of men, education has no impact on

these health outcomes and health behavior, with the exception of BMI. An increase in education,

due to exposure to the education reform, has a positive impact on BMI and the propensity to be

overweight/obese in case of men.

        In section II, we provide the institutional details of the education reform. Section III

presents the empirical framework, and Section IV discusses the data. Section V presents the

results and extensions; Section VI is the conclusion.



II. The 1997 Compulsory Schooling Reform in Turkey as the Source of Identification

        In August 1997, the Turkish Parliament passed a law to modify secular mandatory

schooling. Prior to this education reform, mandatory education was limited to five years of

primary education. The reform increased the mandated years of education to eight years by

combining the primary and middle schools. The reform, however, did not involve any changes

4
  The Director-General of the WHO, Dr. Margaret Chan, started her speech in the 2010 United Nations Summit on
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by stating “Education and health go hand in hand. The evidence
demonstrating the links is overwhelming.” http://www.who.int/dg/speeches/2010/educationandhealth_20100920/en.
Education for All campaign of the United Nations repeatedly refers the potential health improvements as one of the
key external benefits of extending primary and secondary education (UNESCO, 2000).

                                                        6
in curriculum; neither the course contents nor the composition of courses are affected by the

reform (Dulger 2004).

           The law went into effect immediately in Fall 1997, and the students who were enrolled in

the fifth grade in Fall 1997 were required to continue their schooling until the end of the eight

grade. On the other hand, students who had already completed the fifth grade by the Summer

1997 were exempt from the mandate. The law was enacted very quickly, for political reasons.

During the time period when the law was enacted, Turkey was involved in negotiations for the

European Union membership and the government was concerned that European Union

negotiations would not proceed without the implementation of a reform that increased the level

of education in Turkey (Dulger 2004). The law was also an attempt to limit the extent of

religious education. Details on this point and the political landscape in Turkey in 1997 can be

found in Cesur and Mocan (2013).

           The relevant Turkish law states that a child may start the first grade in the Fall if he/she is

72 months old at the end of that calendar year.5 This means that those who are born towards the

end of 1986 (in October-December) could start school in 1992. At the same time, in Turkey the

age cut-off is not strictly enforced and children are allowed to start school if they are on the

margin of the 72-month cut-off. Thus, those who are born in early 1986 would start the first

grade in Fall 1991, rather than Fall 1992. This means that although most children who were born

in 1986 would have enrolled in the first grade in 1992 and therefore have completed the fifth

grade in Summer 1997 (therefore, exempt from the mandate of the law), some other children

who were also born in 1986 have completed only the fourth grade and these children were

impacted by the reform. Therefore, in the benchmark models of the paper we exclude those born

in 1986, although as we show later, including them does not alter the results.
5
    Resmi Gazete; Friday, 7 August 1992, Section 14.

                                                       7
III. Empirical Framework

         The relationship between health outcomes and education at the individual level is

depicted by Equation (1) below, where Hi stands for a particular health outcome (e.g. self-

reported health status, obesity) as well as various measures of tobacco consumption. In addition,

we also investigate the consumption of other health inputs such as fruits, vegetables, and flu

vaccinations. Middle School represents a binary indicator for holding at least a middle school

degree.6

(1)

Z is a (kx1) vector of control variables which includes linear and quadratic terms in age and

year-of-birth, and region of residence fixed-effects for the 12 regions of the country. To account

for potentially different trends in health by region, we follow Stephens and Yang (2014), and

also estimate alternative specifications in which we allow birth year trends differ by region (i.e.,

controlling for interactions between region fixed effects and year of birth in addition to other

controls). Standard errors are clustered at the region-by-birth cohort level. Alternative ways of

clustering (e.g. year of birth-by-treatment) provided almost identical standard errors. As

explained in the data section, we use three cross-sectional surveys, registered in three waves, in

two-year intervals. The superscript s identifies the wave of the survey; i.e. s in {1, 2, 3}.

         Estimating Equation (1) by OLS produces biased estimates of . This is because

educational attainment is likely to be correlated with a number of unobservable factors that may

also impact health outcomes. Alternatively, reverse causality may exist and health outcomes

may impact the level of education. To address the endogeneity of educational attainment, we

exploit the exogenous variation in the propensity of middle school graduation induced by the

6
 The HS surveys do not include information on years of schooling. Instead, information on the literacy status and
educational attainment of survey participant were obtained based on the following options: literate, less than basic 5-
year education, basic 5-year diploma, middle school diploma, high school diploma, and college education.

                                                          8
Education Reform of 1997.         As described in the previous section, birth cohorts born after 1986

were mandated to complete middle school (i.e., 8 years of schooling), while those who were born

prior to 1986 were not bound by the law.

        We employ an instrumental variables strategy and use exposure to the education reform

as an instrument for having middle school diploma, as depicted by Equation (2).



(2)

where Reform is a binary indicator that takes the value of one for those who were born after

1986, and it takes the value of zero for those who were born before 1986. As discussed earlier, it

is uncertain whether those who were born in 1986 were affected by the reform. Hence, the birth

cohort of 1986 is omitted from the main regression specifications.7

        By design, those who are younger in a particular survey year are more likely to have been

exposed to the reform and those who are older are likely to have missed the reform. For

example, people who were born in 1985 are 25 years old in 2010, and those who are born in

1987 are 23 years old in that same year. The former group is not treated by the reform, while the

latter group was exposed to it. If health behaviors are changing with age for reasons unrelated to

education, it would be difficult to separate the impact of education from that of aging. Our data

set, however, contains three waves of the same survey, registered in 2008, 2010 and 2012. This

means the age effect can be separated out from the cohort effect. For example, somebody who is

25 years old in 2012 was born in 1987 (exposed to the reform), while the person who was 25

years old in 2010 was born in 1985 (not exposed to the reform). Thus, having access to three




7
 We also estimated all our models by coding the Reform variable in two alternate ways: Reform=0.33 if birth
year=1986; and Reform=0.5 if birth year=1986. The results did not change.

                                                        9
waves of the survey that covers a time span of 5 years (2008-2012) allows us to isolate the

impact of age from the impact of treatment by the reform.

        Inserting equation (2) into Equation (1) enables us to investigate the impact of exposure

to the reform on health outcomes and health behaviors. This reduced-form relationship is

depicted by Equation (3):

(3)

        where represents the reduced form, (the intention-to-treat), effect of the reform.



IV. Data

        We use data drawn from the three available waves of the Turkish Statistical Institute’s

Health Survey (HS) registered in 2008, 2010, and 2012. The 2008 and 2010 waves include

20,624 and 20,200 participants, respectively; and the 2012 survey include 37,979 individuals.

The goal of the HS is to provide nationally representative estimates of health indicators in

Turkey. Three separate survey questionnaires are provided for the age groups 0-6, 7-14, and 15

and older.8 For those who are 15 and older, the survey collects detailed health information,

including self-reported health status, smoking habits, chronic diseases, height and weight. Also

included are personal background characteristics, such as education, gender and residential

location. Our estimation sample includes those who were between 18 and 30 years old at the

time of the survey.

         The key independent variable, Middle School, is a binary indicator of whether the

individual holds a middle school diploma or a higher degree. The survey does not include

information on years of schooling. Instead, individuals were classified as being literate, having


8
 For those respondents who are younger than 15, the parent or guardian completed the survey. By our empirical
design, people who are younger than 16 are not in our sample.

                                                       10
less than basic 5-year education, basic 5-year diploma, middle school diploma, high school

diploma, and college education. Middle school diploma corresponds to 8 years of education.

The mandate of the schooling reform was to provide at least a middle school education,

impacting the cohorts of children starting with those who were born in 1987. Figures 1 and 2

display the proportion of males and females who have at least 8 years of education (Middle

School diploma), by birth cohort. The data used in the figures consist of all three waves of the

HS.9 The proportion of individuals with at least a middle school diploma has been rising with

each younger cohort. For example, in the birth cohort of 1972, 28 percent of women and 45

percent of men have a middle school education or higher, whereas the rates are 51 percent and 75

percent, respectively, among those born in 1985. The first cohort that is fully exposed to the

reform is that of 1987. As shown in Figures 1 and 2, the proportion of individuals with at least a

middle school diploma jumps to about 70 percent for women and almost 90 percent for men

among the first cohort fully impacted by the law; and plateaus at around 87 percent for women

and 95 percent for men .10 These figures are very similar to those reported by other researchers

who analyzed the same education reform but used different data sets (Cesur and Mocan 2013,

Mocan 2014).

        We know the birth year of the respondents, but not their exact birthday. This is not an

issue because the birthday does not provide useful information for any analysis that uses this

Turkish education reform. This is because, as mentioned in Section II above, the exposure to the

law cannot be determined by the birth date of the student.                  More specifically, in Turkey the


9
  Figure 1 is utilizing 13,008 observations (approximately 600 females in each birth cohort), and Fig 2 uses 10,146
males (about 500 males in each cohort).
10
   Mandatory schooling is free in Turkey and non-attendance is subject to fines
(http://mevzuat.meb.gov.tr/html/24.html) although these fines are not strictly enforced (http://spm.ku.edu.tr/wp-
content/uploads/pdf/okulterk.pdf). Consequently, even though the middle school completion rates increased above
the 90 percent level after the reform was in effect, perfect compliance could not be achieved. However, these
compliance rates are similar to those observed in European countries (see Brunello et al 2013).

                                                        11
school starting age is not determined by the student’s age in September.                    The law states that

“Students who are 72 months old by the end of the calendar year (emphasis added) can start

school in September” (Resmi Gazete, dated August 7, 1992. No: 21308, page 4, Section 14).11

This means that children born in September, October, November or December 1986 were

exempt from the mandate of the law. Furthermore, given the fact that the 72-month-cutoff is not

strictly enforced, even those who are born in January 1987 may have started school in 1992, thus

avoiding the mandate. The upshot is that information on the birthday of the child would not, in

most cases, have provided any additional information as to whether a particular child was bound

by the mandate.

        Self-reported health status is determined by the question of “How is your health in

general?” which is asked in all three waves. Potential answers are; very good, good, average,

bad, very bad. The variable Good Health takes the value of 1 is the respondent declared his/her

health status as good or excellent, and zero otherwise. Eighty-eight percent of men and 82

percent of women declare that their general health is in good or excellent shape.

        Self-reported height and weight are also available in all three waves of the HS. Using

this information, we calculate the body mass index (BMI) for each individual, which is employed

as another health outcome.12 We also construct three binary variables to indicate whether the

person is underweight, overweight or obese, or obese. Specifically, Underweight takes the value

of 1 for individuals for whom the BMI score is less than 18.5, and 0 otherwise.

Overweight/Obese is equal to 1 for respondents with a BMI greater than or equal to 25, and zero



11
   http://www.resmigazete.gov.tr/main.aspx?home=http://www.resmigazete.gov.tr/arsiv/21308.pdf&main=http://ww
w.resmigazete.gov.tr/arsiv/21308.pdf
12
    BMI = [(Weight in Kilograms)/(Height in Meters Squared)]. BMI does not differentiate between the proportion of
fat and the proportion of muscle/bone in total weight. This could be especially important in determining the impact
of weight and body composition on outcomes such as wages (Burkhauser and Cawley 2008)

                                                        12
otherwise. The dichotomous variable Obese is coded as 1 if BMI is at least 30, and zero

otherwise.

         As Panel B of Table 1 shows, the average BMI in the sample is 24 for men and 23 for

women. Twenty-six percent of women and 32 percent of men are either overweight or obese. If

women are more concerned than men about their weight, the tendency to underreport weight in

the survey could be higher for women than men; and this could be one reason for the lower

overweight/obesity rates among women. In our analysis, however, we will divide the sample by

sex and investigate the impact of education on BMI within each sex. The obesity rate is five

percent among men, and six percent among women.

         Questions on tobacco use were asked in the 2010 and 2012 surveys. We construct three

dichotomous indicators representing smoking habits. Ever Smoked is equal to 1 if the individual

responded in the affirmative to the question “Have you ever regularly (at least 100 units per

year) consumed tobacco products?” The variable Current Smoker takes the value of 1 if the

respondent currently consumes tobacco products (at any frequency; i.e. every day, or once-in-a-

while). While the questions refer to the use of tobacco products, cigarette consumption is by far

the largest item in tobacco consumption in Turkey. Consumption of other tobacco items such as

chewing tobacco, smoking cigar, pipe or hukka are trivial in comparison to cigarettes. Among

those who indicated that they used tobacco products, 98 percent smoke cigarettes. As Panel C of

Table 1 shows, 49 percent of men and 16 percent of women are smokers in Turkey (in 2010 and

2012).

          Smokes Every Day is another dummy variable that indicates if the respondent consumes

tobacco products every day, conditional on being a smoker currently. Among those who smoke,

90 percent of men and 76 percent of women smoke every day. The question on the average



                                               13
number of cigarettes smoked per day was asked to those who smoke every day. Thus, among

those who smoke regularly (i.e. every day), the average number of cigarettes smoked per day is

12 for men, and about 9 for women.13

        Table 1 also presents the summary statistics by exposure to the education reform. We

restrict the sample to those who are born between 1982 and 1990. This means that we utilize

four cohorts that are exposed to the education reform (those born between 1987-1990) and four

cohorts that missed the reform (born between 1982-1985). The age range of the sample is 18-30

and the age distributions by sex are presented in Figures 3 and 4.14

        Panel A is based on the sample where information on self-reported health is available and

Panel B pertains to the individuals with non-missing height and weight information. Questions

displayed in these panels were asked in all three waves (2008, 2010 and 2012). Columns (2)

and (5) of Table 1 present the means and standard deviations of the variables for those who are in

the control group (not treated by the reform), and columns (3) and (6) pertain to those who are

exposed to the reform. Consistent with Figures 1 and 2, for both males and females, the

proportion with at least a middle school diploma is higher in the treatment group. Those in the

treatment group have slightly better self-declared health; and the rate of overweight/obesity is

lower in the treatment group (which is younger in comparison to the control group).

        Panel C of Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics related to tobacco consumption.

Because these questions were not asked in 2008, this sample is smaller in comparison to that in




13
  Because the question on Smoking Every Day is conditioned on being a current smoker, and the question on the
Number of Cigarettes is conditioned on smoking every day, the sample sizes that apply to these questions are
smaller to those of the other questions on smoking.
14
  In the regressions we also use the sample of individuals who are born between 1983 and 1989, in addition to the
1982-1990 cohorts.

                                                        14
Panel A. All three measures of smoking indicate that the propensity of smoking is lower in the

treatment group.

  V. Results

OLS Estimates

       We first present the OLS results, where educational attainment, measured by having at

least a middle school diploma, is assumed to be exogenous. The estimates obtained from these

OLS models are likely to be biased, but it is nevertheless interesting to compare them to the

estimates obtained from the instrumental variables regressions. Table 2 presents the OLS results

of health outcome regressions. All models include linear and quadratic terms of age and year-of-

birth, as well as region-fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by region-by-birth cohort.

All regressions in Table 2 (as well as in Table 3) use those who were born between 1982 and

1990. According to these OLS results, having a middle school diploma (as opposed to having an

elementary school degree or no degree) has a positive impact on self-reported good health for

both men and women. Also, education has a negative impact on women’s BMI. In case of

women, having at least a middle school degree increases the propensity for being underweight

and it reduces the propensity of being overweight and obese.

       The OLS estimates in Table 3 suggest that education reduces the propensity to smoke for

men, but it has the opposite effect for women; i.e. having a middle school diploma has a positive

impact on the likelihood of smoking for women.



Instrumental Variables Estimates

       Because the OLS results of Tables 2 and 3 are not credible, we report the instrumental

variables results, where having at least a middle school education is instrumented by exposure to



                                                15
the education reform. Table 4 presents the results of estimating equation (2), where the

propensity of having a middle school diploma is explained by the exposure to the reform as well

as all other covariates.    Two alternative samples are employed. The first sample uses

individuals who are born between 1982 and 1990. In this sample there are four cohorts on each

side of the treatment year (see the vertical lines in Figures 1 and 2). The second sample

(employed in the regressions reported in column 2) narrows the window around the treatment. It

contains people who were born between 1983 and 1989. The advantage is that individuals are

more similar in age, but the disadvantage is that the sample size is smaller. Table 4 shows that

exposure to the reform has a statistically significant impact on the propensity to have a middle

school education or higher. The impact is about 11-15 percentage points for men and 19-22

percentage points for women.15

        Table 5 presents the instrumental variables results of the impact of education on self-

reported health (top panel), on BMI, the propensity to be underweight, overweight/obese, or

obese (middle panel); and on indicators of smoking (bottom panel). Standard errors are clustered

by region-by-birth cohort. Alternative ways of clustering (e.g. year of birth-by-treatment)

provided almost identical standard errors. The first two columns display the results obtained

from the sample of men, and columns (3) and (4) pertain to women. The top panel of Table 5

shows that the first-stage regressions are powerful for both men and women, with F-values

ranging from 12 to 36, depending on the sample. The impact of education on self-reported

health is not statistically different from zero for either men or women, and one of the two point

estimates for men is negative.



15
  Mocan (2014) who used much larger sample sizes (about 75,000 females and 69,000 males) but reported an
impact of the reform on the probability of having a middle school diploma by very similar magnitudes: 17
percentage points for women and 13 percentage points for men.

                                                     16
        Panel B of Table 5 presents the instrumental-variables results where BMI, and the

propensities of being underweight, overweight/obese, or obese are used as health outcomes.

The first-stage regressions are once again powerful. For women, education has no impact on

BMI or on the propensity of being overweight or obese. In the sample of women who were born

between 1983 and 1989 (column 4), the impact of middle school education on being underweight

is negative, but the coefficient is significant only at the ten-percent level, and when the sample is

increased to include those women who are born in 1982 and in1990 (column 3), the coefficient

gets smaller and loses its statistical significance.

        Columns (1) and (2) of Panel B in Table 5 show that middle school diploma has a

positive and statistically significant impact on men’s BMI. Having a middle school diploma,

which is associated with an extra three years of schooling in comparison to the control group,

increases men’s BMI by 7 points from a base of about 24. This means that an additional year of

schooling increases men’s BMI by about almost 10 percent. Similarly, the results in Panel B of

Table 5 indicate middle school education has a positive impact on men’s propensity to be

overweight or obese.

        These results are in contrast to those obtained from the OLS regressions, reported in

Table 2. Specifically, the positive impact of education on self-reported health disappears when

we estimate the model by instrumental variables, accounting for the endogeneity of education.

The insignificant impact of education on BMI, obtained by OLS, becomes significant in the

instrumental-variables specification for men; and the opposite happens for women.

        The data used in panels A and B of Table 5 are obtained from the three available waves

of the HS (2008, 2010 and 2012). Panel C displays the results pertaining to smoking. Because

smoking questions were not asked in 2008, we utilize two waves of the HS survey for this



                                                   17
analysis. Consequently, sample sizes are smaller in the regressions displayed in Panel C. As can

be seen in the first part of Panel C, an increase in schooling, due to exposure to the education

reform, has no significant impact on any indicator of smoking. This result too, is in contrast to

that obtained from simple OLS regressions, reported in Table 3.16 The middle and bottom

section of Panel C of Table 5 present results of regressions that investigate the intensity of

smoking, conditional on smoking cigarettes. Because these samples exclude individuals who do

not smoke, they are smaller and the first-stage regressions are not powerful.

        It can be argued that there might be measurement error in reported smoking, especially in

case of females, if there is stigma attached to smoking. Non-systematic measurement error in

reported smoking does not produce a bias given that smoking is the dependent variable. If the

more educated have a tendency to underreport their true smoking propensity because they are

aware of the consequences of their unhealthy behavior and do not want to reveal the extent of the

smoking in the survey, one would obtain a larger negative impact of education than the true

impact. Given that we find no impact of education, this is not a concern.



Anti-Smoking Campaigns

        Since 2006, the Turkish Government has implemented three main policies to curb

smoking.17 Specifically, a law was passed in January 2008 to ban indoor smoking from public

spaces such as offices, restaurants and taxi cabs. The law became effective in two phases: the

first phase in May 19, 2008 and full implementation in July 19, 2009. In addition, a different law

16
   Tansel and Karaoglan (2014) use the same data as we do, but consider education as exogenous, and rely on OLS
regressions. They estimate their models using the combined sample of men and women who are older than 25 years
of age. We find very similar results when we employ the estimation sample of Tansel and Karaoglan (2014) and use
OLS as they do.
17
   The WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic (2013) acknowledges the tobacco control efforts in Turkey as
suggests that other developing countries should follow the policies implemented towards discouraging smoking in
Turkey.


                                                      18
mandated that starting in January 2010 all packs of cigarettes should contain warning labels and

pictures depicting harmful effects of smoking.18 Some examples of these warning labels and

pictures are presented in Appendix Figure 1. The first warning labels on packs of cigarettes in

Turkey was implemented starting in January 2006. These labels were similar to the warning

signs shown in Appendix 1, but they did not include any pictures. The warning labels contained

statements such as “Smoking while pregnant hurts the baby,” “Smoking may cause a slow and

painful death,” “Smoking causes lung cancer.” In addition, significant increases in cigarette

taxes were implemented in 2009 and 2010. (Yurekli et al. 2010).

        Because these anti-smoking campaigns were initiated in 2006, younger generations, who

had a higher chance of being treated by the education reform, were exposed to the anti-smoking

campaigns more intensely. Ignoring the potentially negative impact of the anti-smoking

campaigns on smoking may create a negative bias in the estimated impact of education on

smoking. Even though we do not find an impact of education on smoking and despite the fact

that half of the estimated coefficients are positive (see table 5, Panel C), we nevertheless

investigate the sensitivity of the results to exposure to anti-smoking campaigns.

        To control for the potentially negative effect of these campaigns on smoking, we created

measures of exposure to anti-smoking campaigns and used them as additional explanatory

variables to explain the smoking propensity. For example, given that these campaigns have

become more intense over time and that older individuals in the sample were exposed to them for

longer periods of time, we interacted the reform indicator with the year-of-birth and used it as an

additional control. Adding this variable had no impact on the results. Alternatively, including a

dummy variable for younger cohorts (born in 1988, 1989 and 1990), who were exposed to the


18
  A grace period was provided to market cigarettes that were produced before Jan 1, 2010. These packs, that did
not contain pictures, could be sold until June 30, 2010.

                                                       19
anti-smoking campaigns at younger ages, had no impact on the results.19 Finally, we excluded

the 2012 wave of the survey and estimated the smoking models using only the 2010 survey.

Because indoor smoking bans and warning labels with pictures became effective after Summer

2009 and Winter 2010 respectively, there was limited exposure of the respondent to these laws

by the time they took the survey in 2010. Nevertheless we obtained similar results to those

shown in Table 5.20 These results indicate that exposure to the warning labels on cigarettes have

no impact on the estimated impact of education on smoking.



Health Information

         The allocative efficiency hypothesis of health production assumes that more educated

individuals have more knowledge about the health production function and that the more

educated react to health information more powerfully than the less-educated. Put differently,

education increases information about the true impact of health inputs on health outcomes. In

support of this hypothesis, Price and Simon (2009) find that during the three-month period after

the publication of an article in the New England Journal of Medicine about the risk of a vaginal

birth following a previous C-section birth, the incidence of such births dropped more

significantly among the more educated mothers. This result suggests that more educated people

absorb new information more quickly, which may then change their behavior. Aizer and Stroud

(2010) report that more educated mothers reduced their smoking after the release of the 1964


19
   We also tried other, more ad hoc specifications. For example, assuming that smoking behavior can most be
impacted by age 25, we created a year-of-exposure variable until the year in which the respondent was age 25. For
example somebody who was born in 1987 and surveyed in 2010, was exposed to anti-smoking campaigns (which
started in 2006) for 5 years. Somebody else who was also born in 1987 but was surveyed in 2012 was exposed for 7
years. The results did not change.
20
 The sample sizes are smaller when we exclude the 2012 survey, and as a result, the first-stage is not significant for
males. Consequently, the instrumental-variables estimates for men blow up. The reduced-form estimates, however,
were in line with those reported earlier.

                                                         20
Surgeon General Report on smoking and health while the less-educated did not. While these

findings support the allocative efficiency hypothesis because they imply that education increases

information about the true impact of the inputs on health, Mathios (2000) could not find evidence

to support the hypothesis that more educated shoppers react differently to the information

content of salad dressing labeling than the less-educated. Altindag, Cannonier and Mocan

(2011) analyze data from the 1997 and 2002 waves of the NLSY97 and find no relationship

between education and health knowledge for individuals with a terminal high school degree.

       The Turkish Health Surveys include a question that asks the respondents whether they

believe that the warnings on packs of cigarettes are effective. Specifically, the question is “Do

you think the warnings on the packages of tobacco products are effective (in motivating people)

to quit?” Thirty-seven percent of the sample thinks that these warnings are effective. We used

the variable that specifies whether the individual thinks the warning signs are effective as an

outcome and estimated the same instrumental-variable specification. The results showed that,

both for men and for women, education had no impact on people’s belief in the efficacy of the

warning signs.

       It is possible that the beliefs about the effectiveness of warning labels/pictures might

depend on exposure to smoking; i.e. people who reside in areas with high smoking rates may

have different perceptions on the effectiveness of the warnings in comparison to those who live

in low-smoking areas. We calculated the smoking rates by region and divided the regions into

two groups: above-median smoking regions and below-median regions. Estimating the models

by this classification revealed that education does not alter individuals’ perceptions of the

effectiveness of smoking labels, regardless of whether the live in a high-smoking or low-

smoking region. When we re-estimated these models among those who are current smokers and



                                                 21
among non-smokers, we found the same result: education had no impact on people’s beliefs

regarding the efficacy of the warning labels, regardless of whether they were smokers.

         Finally, we ran the models by adding the Current Smoker variable as an explanatory

variable and interacting it with Middle School Diploma. This specification is defendable as the

results of Table 5 show that smoking (either at the intensive or at the extensive margin) is not

influenced by education. This specification allows us to investigate whether the belief on the

effectiveness of warning labels/pictures depends on whether the individual himself/herself is a

smoker, and whether education has a differential impact on this belief by smoking status. We

found that neither the smoking status of the person nor education had an impact on the belief

regarding the effectiveness of warning labels.

         Finally, we estimated reduced-form regressions, as depicted by Equation (3), that

correspond to the models displayed in Table 5. These reduced-form results are displayed in

Table 6. They represent the impact of having been part of the cohorts that were exposed to the

reform. As expected, exposure to the reform has no impact on self-reported health or smoking,

but it has positive impact on men’s BMI and obesity.21

         In summary, the results presented in Table 5 indicate that education has no impact on

self-reported health, body weight or smoking behavior for young adult women in Turkey. For

men, we find that education increases BMI and obesity. The detrimental impact of education

can emerge because of the influence of education on income. It is conceivable that an increase in

earnings, due to schooling, promotes the consumption of more calories, generating an increase in

BMI. This hypothesis is consistent with the pattern documented in recent research which shows




21
  The IV-coefficients reported in Table 5, can be recovered by taking the ratio of the reduced-form coefficients in
Tale 6 and the first-stage coefficients in Table 4.

                                                         22
an increase in BMI, obesity and overweight in developing countries over time, arguably the

result of increased incomes (Ng et al. 2014).



Income Effect?

        If personal income has a positive effect on BMI conditional on education, omission of

income from the analysis would bias the coefficient of education upwards in BMI and obesity

regressions. For example, Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) analyzed the extent to which the

impact of education on health behaviors is influenced by controlling for background variables.

They found that the effect of education is reduced when the regressions include income, health

insurance and family background characteristics. And, there exists recent research reporting

detrimental impact of income on health. For example, using three cross-section surveys from

England, Adda et al. (2009) found that permanent income shocks lead to poorer health behavior.

Schmeiser (2009) used the exogenous variation in Earned Income Tax Credit in the U.S. and

reported that higher income raised the probability of being obese for women. Boyce and Oswald

(2012) found that people’s psychological well-being declined after a job promotion in Britain. In

our case, lack of well-measured income data prevents us from investigating the extent to which

income is responsible for the detrimental impact of education on men’s BMI.22

        The education reform analyzed in this paper covered the entire country and all cohorts

starting with those born in 1987. Consequently, there are general-equilibrium effects of the

reform. For example, although the wage impact seems to have been concentrated on working

women rather than men (Mocan 2014), personal incomes nevertheless may have risen because of


22
   Although not directly related to our work because they focus on elderly people, Cawley et al. (2010) could not
find an impact of income, generated by Social Security Notch in the U.S, on BMI among the elderly. Snyder and
Evans (2006) used the same identification strategy and reported higher mortality rates related to higher income.


                                                        23
increased education. To investigate the extent to which the impact of education on BMI is

capturing the impact of income on BMI, we ran the models by controlling for household income.

The Health Surveys do not contain information on personal income, but they contain information

on family income. Binary indicators for 10 family income categories that are available in the

survey are included as additional control variables. The results showed that the coefficients of

education and their standard errors were almost identical to those presented in the benchmark

models of Table 5.

        When we added occupation dummies to the models to control for any potential impact of

the respondent’s occupation on BMI overweight and obesity propensity, neither the point

estimates nor the standard errors were impacted meaningfully.23 Finally adding family income

and occupation jointly did not alter the coefficients either. Although this result suggests that the

impact of education on BMI is not attributable to an income effect, we should emphasize that

income is measured as family income, not as personal income, and that it is only an estimate

provided by the respondent. Thus, we cannot reject, with confidence, the conjecture that

measurement error in family income makes it difficult to investigate whether the positive impact

of education on BMI is working through an income effect.



Education and Other Health Behaviors

        In this section we investigate if education has an impact on some other health behaviors

such as consumption of fruits, consumption of vegetables, and the propensity to have a flu shot.

The variable Daily Fruit Consumption takes the value of one if the respondent indicates that

23
  The occupation categories are: Member of Armed Forces; Legislator, Senior Official, or Managers; Professional;
Technician or Associate Professional; Clerk; Service or Shop and Sale Market Worker; Skilled Agricultural or
Fishery Worker; Craft and Related Trades Worker; Plant and Machine operator or Assembler; Elementary
Occupation Holder. The left-out category includes students and those who are not in the labor force.


                                                       24
he/she eats fruit at least once a day. Daily Vegetable Consumption gauges consumption of

vegetables in the same exact way. Flu Shot-Last 2 Years takes the value of one if the respondent

has received a flu shot this year of last year.24 Flu Shot-Ever is a dichotomous variable to

indicate if the person has ever received a flu shot. Fifty-five (49) percent of women (men)

indicate that they consume fruit each day. The rates are 66 percent for women and 60 percent for

men regarding daily vegetable consumption.

         Fifteen percent of Turkish men and 10 percent of Turkish women indicated that they have

received at least one flu shot during their lives (sample age range is 18-30). Only seven percent

of both sexes have received a flu shot during the least two years. The means of these variables

are very similar between the control and treatment groups.

         The results of the instrumental-variables regressions for these health behaviors are

displayed in Table 7. The point estimates of the impact of education are negative in all

regressions, other than the flu shot regressions for females. The estimated impacts, however, are

never statistically significant, indicating that education has no impact on the consumption of

fruits, vegetables, or the propensity to receive a flu shot.



Robustness

         To investigate the robustness of our results, we tried a number of different specifications.

In our main specifications, the birth cohort of 1986 was excluded from the analysis sample. This

is because, as discussed in Section II, by Turkish law, it is unclear whether those who are born in

1986 are impacted by the reform. Nevertheless, we investigated the sensitivity of the main

24
   We also used a variable that measures if the person has received a flu shot in the current calendar year, and could
not find an impact of education. The mean value of this variable in the sample was very low: 0.02; arguably because
the answer would depend on the month of the survey is given. Given that flu vaccinations are mostly given the Fall,
people who are surveyed in the Winter, Spring and Summer months are likely to indicate that they have not received
a flu shot “this year” (since January).

                                                         25
findings to the inclusion of the 1986 birth cohort. In order to approximate the probability of

treatment for that group we assigned two alternate values for exposure to the reform (i.e.,

Reform=0.33 and 0.5). These results, which are not reported in the interest of space, show that

our baseline findings remain unchanged.

        Our sample includes people with any level of education. To investigate the sensitivity of

the results to the educational composition of the sample, we restricted the sample to those for

whom the educational attainment is less than a college degree, and alternatively to those for

whom the highest degree earned is middle school diploma (8 years). The results, once again,

were not altered.

        The benchmark models do not include variables that may have been impacted by

education. An example is residency in an urban area. It is conceivable that people migrate from

rural to urban areas as a result of higher educational attainment. Other examples include labor

force participation, occupation, and marital status. Adding these variables to the models one-by-

one or jointly did not alter the results.

Heterogeneity

        To investigate the extent to which results vary by sub-group, we estimated the models by

dividing the sample into two groups: individuals with family incomes above or below the

median. Table 8 presents the results obtained from the sample of people with below-median

family income. The results are consistent with those obtained from the full-sample, reported in

Table 5. For women, education still has no impact on any outcome analyzed. For men, earlier

results hold regarding BMI and obesity, although the point estimates are smaller: an increase in

education raises the BMI and increases obesity in this group of low-income men. The results

obtained from the sample of individuals with above-median family income are reported in



                                                26
Appendix Table A1. Among this group of individuals, education has no impact on any health

outcome, including BMI. In these models, and for men in particular, the first-stage regressions

are not very informative, which reduces the reliability of the estimates.

       We also estimated the models by labor market status (working or looking for a job, vs.

not in the labor force) and marital status (never-married vs. ever-married). In no case did we

detect results that were different from those reported in Table 5, although in some cases (e.g.

women who are not in the labor force) the sample sizes were too small for reliable inference.

      This analysis indicates that the main results reported in Table 5 hold in various subgroups

and that the only statistically significant impact of education is found in the sample of men and

when BMI and overweight/obesity are used as health outcomes.



VI. Conclusion and Discussion

       Although theoretically well-determined, the causal impact of education on consumption

of health inputs and health outcomes is difficult to establish empirically. This is because

education is correlated with unobservable attributes of individuals that can also impact health

behaviors and health outcomes. To determine the causal impact of education on health, recent

research employed identification strategies that involved finding instruments which moved

individuals’ education levels, independent of their health outcomes. A widely-used strategy is to

rely on education reforms that changed the mandatory years of education of particular cohorts in

a country, without altering the minimum years of education mandated for older cohorts in that

same country. Papers that used this identification strategy analyzed data from developed

countries, and reported conflicting findings as to the impact of education on health. While some

research revealed a positive impact of education on health outcomes (e.g. Brunello et al. 2013,



                                                 27
Chou et al. 2010, Lleras-Muney, 2005), others could not find a significant impact (e.g. Clark and

Royer, 2013, Meghir, Palme and Simeonova 2012, Lindeboom et al. 2009). Inference from

developing countries, based on exogenous variation in education, is extremely limited.

       In this paper we analyze a nationwide survey from the Republic of Turkey, which is a

middle-income, low education country with per capita income of less than 11,000 in 2013, and

average education of 6.5 years among those who are 25 years or older. We exploit an education

reform, implemented in 1997, that increased the mandatory years of education from an

elementary school diploma (5 years of schooling) to a middle school diploma (8 years of

schooling). The education reform law was passed by theTurkish Parliament in Summer 1997

and implemented in the Fall of the same year. Cohorts born after 1986 were exposed to the

mandate of the law and had to complete eight years of schooling, while those who were born

before 1986 were exempt from the mandate.

       We use a large nationwide health survey conducted by the Turkish Statistical Institute in

2008, 2010 and 2012 to identify the causal impact of education on self-reported health, body

mass-index (BMI), the propensity to be overweight and obese, and a variety of smoking

measures. We also investigate the impact of education on consumption of such health inputs as

fruits, vegetables, and flu vaccinations. We focus on individuals who are between the ages of 18

and 30 at the time of the survey (born between 1982 and 1990).

       Exposure to the reform is used as an instrument for educational attainment. Consistent

with other studies that exploited the same Turkish education reform, but used different data sets

(Mocan 2014, Kirdar et. al. 2014, Cesur and Mocan 2013), we find that the reform had a

significant impact on educational attainment of both men and women. By design of our analysis,

those who are younger in a particular survey year are more likely to have been exposed to the



                                                28
reform and those who are older. If health behaviors change with age for reasons unrelated to

education, it would be difficult to separate the impact of education from that of aging. However,

because we employ three waves of the same survey, registered in 2008, 2010 and 2012, the age

effect can be separated out from the cohort effect.25

         After controlling for region of residence, and linear and quadratic terms in age and in

year-of-birth, we find that for women, an increase in education, triggered by the reform, has no

impact on self-reported health, BMI, overweight, obesity, or the consumption of cigarettes either

at the extensive or intensive margin. Along the same lines, education does not influence

women’s daily consumption of fruits, vegetables, or the propensity to get a flu shot. Similar to

the results for women, we find that in case of men, education has no impact on self-reported

health, smoking, or the consumption of fruits, vegetables, or flu vaccinations. Education,

however, increases men’s BMI and the propensity to be overweight and obese.

         The detrimental effect of education on BMI may stem from an impact of education on

personal income. Akee et al. (2013) show that an increase in income, due to transfer payments,

generated weight gain and obesity in adolescents and young adults among Native Americans

from the Eastern Band of Cherokee, and that this effect is stronger for those who are from poor

households. Our data do not contain information on personal income, but some family income

indicators are provided. Controlling for family income and occupation does not change the

results, although we cannot rule out the possibility that conditioning on carefully-measured

personal income could have reduced the coefficient of education (Cutler and Lleras-Muney

2010).

25
   For example, somebody who is 25 years old in 2012 was born in 1987 (exposed to the reform), while the person
who was 25 years old in 2010 was born in 1985 (not exposed to the reform). Thus, having access to three waves of
the survey that covers a time span of 5 years (2008-2012) allows us to isolate the impact of age from the impact of
treatment by the reform.


                                                        29
       A variety of robustness analyses do not alter the results. Similarly, accounting for anti-

smoking campaigns initiated by the Turkish government in 2006 and accelerated in 2009 does

not change the findings. We also find that the extent to which people believe in the effectiveness

of the warning labels/signs placed on packs of cigarettes (Appendix Figure 1) are not impacted

by people’s educational attainment, or the interaction of education and smoking status.

       These findings may be the result of the margin in which the education reform is

implemented. The reform has increased compulsory schooling from 5 years (elementary school

diploma) to 8 years (middle school diploma). While the extra three years of education would

contribute to the development of cognitive and social skills, it can be argued that analytical and

critical thinking skills would most be fostered by relatively rigorous math and science

curriculum, which does not get introduced before the ninth grade. That is, as discussed by Clark

and Royer (2013), the health returns to education can be larger for high school education and for

college education. Other, more nuanced mechanisms are also possible. For example, more

education may encourage relocation from rural areas to cities, which may cause dietary and

lifestyle changes, such as easier access to fast food, calorie-rich soft drinks and a more sedentary

lifestyle, which in turn may increase BMI (Popkin 2007). While our data set does not allow for

an investigation of these and other potential mechanisms, the end result is that education has no

impact of smoking, BMI or the consumption of health inputs for women in this developing

country. The same is true for men, with the exception that men’s education has a detrimental

impact on BMI.




                                                 30
31
32
                                                          Table 1
                                                    Descriptive Statistics
                                                          (1)           (2)      (3)                 (4)       (5)      (6)
                                                                        Males                                 Females
  Variable Name            Variable Descriptions           All        Control Treatment              All     Control Treatment

                                       A. Descriptive Statistics for Self-Reported Health
  Middle School         = 1 if completed middle         0.80        0.69       0.93                 0.63       0.50           0.77
                        school, = 0 otherwise          (0.40)      (0.46)     (0.26)               (0.48)     (0.50)         (0.42)
   Good Health          = 1 if health is good or        0.88        0.88       0.87                 0.82       0.80           0.84
                        =0 otherwise                   (0.33)      (0.32)     (0.33)               (0.39)     (0.40)         (0.37)

Number of Observations                                  3,530      1,889       1,641        4,614             2,465          2,149
                                            B. Descriptive Statistics for Body Weight Measures

  Middle School         = 1 if completed middle            0.80        0.69        0.93             0.67       0.53          0.81
                        school, = 0 otherwise
                                                          (0.40)      (0.46)      (0.26)           (0.47)     (0.50)         (0.39)
       BMI              Body Mass Index                   23.89       24.45       23.22            23.01      23.58          22.41
                                                          (3.44)      (3.46)      (3.30)           (4.02)     (4.04)         (3.92)
   Underweight          = 1 if BMI<18.5,                   0.03        0.02        0.05             0.09       0.07           0.12
                        = 0 otherwise                     (0.18)      (0.14)      (0.22)           (0.29)     (0.25)         (0.32)
 Overweight/Obese       = 1 if BMI>=25,                    0.32        0.39        0.24             0.26       0.32           0.19
                        = 0 otherwise                     (0.47)      (0.49)      (0.43)           (0.44)     (0.47)         (0.39)
      Obese             = 1 if BMI>=30,                    0.05        0.06        0.04             0.06       0.07           0.05
                        = 0 otherwise                     (0.22)      (0.24)      (0.19)           (0.25)     (0.26)         (0.23)
       Age              Age in years                      24.29       26.54       21.65            24.20      26.61          21.63
                                                          (3.18)      (1.99)      (2.11)           (3.18)     (1.98)         (1.99)

Number of Observations                                 3,383      1,833      1,550                 4,136      2,218          1,918
                                       C. Descriptive Statistics for Smoking Indicators
  Middle School         = 1 if completed middle         0.82       0.72       0.93                  0.65       0.53           0.79
                        school, = 0 otherwise         (0.39)      (0.45)     (0.26)                (0.48)     (0.50)         (0.41)
   Ever Smoked          = 1 if ever smoked              0.51       0.55       0.47                  0.17       0.21           0.11
                        regularly, =0 otherwise       (0.50)      (0.50)     (0.50)                (0.37)     (0.41)         (0.32)
  Current Smoker        = 1 if currently smokes,        0.49       0.51       0.47                  0.16       0.20           0.13
                        =0 otherwise                  (0.50)      (0.50)     (0.50)                (0.37)     (0.40)         (0.34)
Smokes Every Day*       = 1 if smokes everyday          0.90       0.91       0.89                  0.76       0.78           0.73
                        = 0 otherwise                 (0.30)      (0.28)     (0.32)                (0.43)     (0.41)         (0.45)
 No. of Cigarettes*     Number of Cigarettes           12.07      12.35      11.74                  8.74       8.93           8.39
                        Smoked Per Day                (9.76)      (9.79)     (9.72)                (7.65)     (7.50)         (7.90)
       Age              Age in years                   25.23      27.51      22.69                 25.14      27.55          22.58
                                                      (2.84)      (1.54)     (1.50)                (2.90)     (1.51)         (1.50)

Number of Observations                                    2,566       1,360        1,206           3,323      1,816          1,507
       Standard deviations are in parentheses. The treatment group consists of those who were born in 1987-1990 and the
       treatment groups includes those born 1982-1985 constitute the control group.
       (*) “Smokes Every Day” is conditional on being a current smoker and “No. of Cigarettes” is conditional on smoking
       every day; therefore, the associated samples sizes are smaller for these variables: (N=1293 for males and N=572 for
       females) for the Smokes Every Day; and (N=1156 for males and N=437 for females) for No. of Cigarettes.


                                                                 33
                                                Table 2
                             The Impact of Education on Health Outcomes
                                           OLS Estimates
                               (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)                                (5)
                              Good         BMI        Underweight Overweight/                           Obese
                              Health                                 Obese

                                                      Males
     Middle School           0.102***            0.108             0.003               0.018            0.015
                              (0.017)           (0.170)           (0.006)             (0.024)          (0.012)

      Observations             3,530             3,383             3,383               3,383             3,383

                                                     Females
     Middle School           0.089***         -1.329***      0.047***               -0.133***         -0.040***
                              (0.015)           (0.166)       (0.009)                 (0.019)           (0.009)

      Observations             4,614             4,136             4,136               4,136             4,136
 Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth, are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
 indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of
 residence fixed effects and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.


                                               Table 3
                            The Impact of Education on Smoking Outcomes
                                           OLS Estimates
                                               (1)              (2)                                  (3)
                                          Ever Smoked     Current Smoker                         Smokes Every
                                                                                                    Day

                                                       Males
             Middle School                          -0.036                 -0.066**                 -0.072***
                                                   (0.024)                  (0.028)                   (0.025)

              Observations                          2,566                    2,566                     2,566

                                                     Females
             Middle School                        0.064***                 0.047***                 0.053***
                                                   (0.013)                  (0.014)                  (0.012)

              Observations                          3,323                    3,323                     3,323
Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth , are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence
fixed effects and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.




                                                         34
                                       Table 4
  The Impact of Compulsory Schooling Reform on Having at least a Middle School Degree
                                                     (1)                   (2)
                                                Birth Cohorts         Birth Cohorts
                                                1982 to 1990          1983 to 1989

                                                       Males
                         Reform                                      0.112***                      0.141***
                                                                      (0.031)                       (0.037)

                      Observations                                      3,531                        2,586

                                                      Females
                         Reform                                      0.217***                      0.185***
                                                                      (0.036)                       (0.042)

                      Observations                                      4,615                        3,406
Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth, are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence
fixed effects and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth. Reform is =1 if birth year>=1987, and =0
otherwise. Birth cohort of 1986 is excluded from the specifications because its exposure to the reform is uncertain.




                                                         35
                                         Table 5
                 The Impact of Education on Health Outcomes and Smoking
                             Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)
        Cohorts born in          1982 to      1983 to          1982 to     1983 to
                                  1990          1989            1990        1989
                                        Males                      Females
                   A. The Impact of Education on Self-Reported Health
     Dependent Variable
     Good/Excellent Health        0.051        -0.087           0.034       0.138
                                 (0.237)      (0.239)          (0.116)     (0.160)
         First Stage F-test       12.39        14.49            36.36                                            19.18
           Observations           3,530        2,585            4,614                                            3,405
                       B. The Impact of Education on Body Weight
             BMI                7.075**      7.470**            0.557                                            0.861
                                (3.311)       (2.973)         (1.539)                                           (2.128)
          Underweight            -0.109        -0.050          -0.108                                           -0.229*
                                (0.136)       (0.107)         (0.093)                                           (0.134)
        Overweight/Obese         0.696*      0.727**           -0.101                                            -0.114
                                (0.406)       (0.336)         (0.161)                                           (0.223)
             Obese               0.354*      0.459**            0.081                                            0.107
                                (0.198)       (0.196)         (0.076)                                           (0.111)

         First Stage F-test          12.35         16.76                                       38.97             19.75
           Observations              3,383         2,484                                       4,136             3,066
                           C. The Impact of Education on Smoking
           Ever Smoked               0.193         -0.202                                      -0.024            0.048
                                    (0.396)       (0.284)                                     (0.105)           (0.126)
         Current Smoker              0.439         -0.163                                      -0.008            0.059
                                    (0.412)       (0.285)                                     (0.117)           (0.144)
         First Stage F-test                      8.480                15.64                     53.23            33.51
           Observations                          2,566                1,924                     3,323            2,479
        Smokes Every Day                         0.027                -0.118                   -0.343            -0.629
                                                (0.488)              (0.567)                  (0.492)           (0.527)
         First Stage F-test                      5.828                4.738                    6.423            4.370
           Observations                          1,293                 956                      572              435
         No. of Cigarettes                      -11.566               -6.949                  -1.468            8.163
                                               (15.504)              (18.733)                (13.685)          (17.349)
         First Stage F-test                      6.369                4.356                    1.977             1.841
           Observations                          1,156                 856                      437               328
 The entries are the instrumental-variables coefficients of having at least a middle school education. Dependent variables are
listed on each row. Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth, are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence fixed effects
and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.


                                                                36
                                        Table 6
          The Impact of Education Reform on Health Outcomes and Smoking
                               Reduced Form Estimates
                                  (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)
      Cohorts born in          1982 to        1983 to          1982 to    1983 to
                                 1990           1989            1990       1989
                                  Male Sample                 Female Sample
                   A. The Impact of Education on Self-Reported Health
    Dependent Variable
    Good/Excellent Health        0.006         -0.012           0.007      0.025
                                (0.026)       (0.034)          (0.025)    (0.030)
          Observations            3,530         2,585           4,614                                     3,405
                       B. The Impact of Education on Body Weight
            BMI                0.763***      1.066***           0.117                                     0.152
                                (0.233)       (0.270)         (0.323)                                   (0.370)
         Underweight             -0.012        -0.007          -0.023                                  -0.040**
                                (0.015)       (0.016)         (0.019)                                   (0.020)
       Overweight/Obese         0.075**      0.104***          -0.021                                    -0.020
                                (0.035)       (0.036)         (0.034)                                   (0.039)
            Obese               0.038**      0.066***           0.017                                     0.019
                                (0.017)       (0.020)         (0.015)                                   (0.018)
          Observations           3,383          2,484          4,136                                      3,066
                       C. The Impact of Education on Smoking
         Ever Smoked             0.020         -0.032         -0.006                                     0.012
                                (0.040)       (0.045)        (0.027)                                    (0.033)
        Current Smoker           0.045         -0.026         -0.002                                     0.015
                                (0.039)       (0.045)        (0.030)                                    (0.038)
         Observations                        2,566                1,924                  3,323            2,479
       Smokes Every Day                      0.003               -0.013                 -0.054           -0.101
                                            (0.051)             (0.064)                (0.079)          (0.081)
         Observations                         1,293               956                    572              435
        No. of Cigarettes                    -1.271              -0.811                 -0.175           1.027
                                            (1.840)             (2.325)                (1.677)          (1.926)
          Observations                       1,156                856                     437              328
The entries are the reduced-form estimates of the impact of exposure to the reform. Robust standard errors,
corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence fixed effects and linear and
quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.




                                                           37
                                               Table 7
                             The Impact of Education on Health Inputs
                                 Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                          (2)            (3)           (5)        (6)
              Cohorts born in          1982 to        1983 to       1982 to    1983 to
                                         1990           1989          1990       1989
                                                Males                      Females
                                     Daily Fruit Consumption
               Middle School            -0.088         -0.292        -0.070     0.048
                                       (0.300)        (0.297)       (0.133)    (0.171)

              First Stage F-test                12.95        14.98                       36.05           19.29
                Observations                    3,526        2,581                       4,605           3,399
                                          Daily Vegetable Consumption
               Middle School                   -0.289        -0.233                      -0.101          -0.033
                                              (0.356)       (0.368)                     (0.146)         (0.219)

              First Stage F-test                   12.7         14.74                    37.04           19.84
                Observations                      3,526         2,581                    4,607           3,400
                                                     Flu Shot-Ever
               Middle School                     -0.119         -0.003                   0.135           0.121
                                                (0.241)        (0.255)                  (0.103)         (0.168)

              First Stage F-test                 13.14         14.89                     36.40           19.39
                Observations                     3,496         2,559                     4,589           3,385
                                               Flu Shot- Last 2 Years
               Middle School                    -0.142         -0.156                    0.065           0.047
                                               (0.145)        (0.153)                   (0.065)         (0.112)

              First Stage F-test                 13.56             16.09                 35.36           18.89
                Observations                     3,497             2,557                 4,585          3,3391
    The entries are the instrumental-variables coefficients of having at least a middle school education. Robust
    standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
    statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence fixed
    effects and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.
.
.




                                                            38
                                                 Table 8
                         The Impact of Education on Health Outcomes and Smoking
                                       Below Median Income Sample
                                      Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                                  (1)                   (2)                       (3)                (4)
Cohorts born in                                 1982 to               1983 to                   1982 to            1983 to
                                                 1990                  1989                      1990               1989
                                                          Males                                           Females
                            A. The Impact of Education on Self-Reported Health
     Dependent Variable
     Good/Excellent Health                       0.157                 0.061                     0.041              0.162
                                                (0.230)               (0.217)                   (0.140)            (0.194)
         First Stage F-test                      14.30                 17.44                      33.64              20.29
           Observations                          1,710                 1,200                      2,541              1,848

                      B. The Impact of Education on Body Weight
            BMI                 3.337**        3.192**           -0.311                                             -0.750
                                (1.566)        (1.420)          (1.370)                                            (1.827)
         Underweight             -0.062         -0.111           -0.043                                              0.007
                                (0.107)        (0.089)          (0.072)                                            (0.086)
       Overweight/Obese         0.573**        0.455**           -0.143                                             -0.161
                                (0.234)        (0.200)          (0.147)                                            (0.191)
            Obese                0.237*        0.216**           0.004                                               0.061
                                (0.128)        (0.109)          (0.082)                                            (0.118)
        First Stage F-test                    14.06         19.39           37.58                                    23.89
          Observations                        1,614         1,138           2,184                                    1,592
                                       C. The Impact of Education on Smoking
          Ever Smoked                         0.273         0.347           -0.034                                  -0.016
                                             (0.298)       (0.253)         (0.118)                                 (0.139)
         Current Smoker                       0.367         0.250           -0.069                                  -0.042
                                             (0.266)       (0.211)         (0.114)                                 (0.132)
        First Stage F-test                       14.25                 23.36                     47.23               39.64
          Observations                           1,091                  785                      1,640               1,222
       Smokes Every Day                          0.158                 0.355                     -1.411             -1.973
                                                (0.268)               (0.272)                   (1.641)            (1.987)
        First Stage F-test                      10.60                  12.13                     1.038               1.149
          Observations                           539                    394                       264                 200
        No. of Cigarettes                       -0.903                -3.112                   -1,132.22            91.548
                                               (12.283)              (12.622)                 (43,025.5)          (275.579)
        First Stage F-test                       11.06                 11.16                   0.000629              0.106
          Observations                            476                   347                       195                 147
The entries are the instrumental-variables coefficients of having at least a middle school education. The dependent variables are
listed on each row. Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on region by year-of-birth level are in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control region of residence fixed
effects and linear and quadratic terms in age and in year-of-birth.

                                                                39
                                         References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2007. "Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
Expectancy on Economic Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 925.

Adda, Jérôme, James Banks and Hans‐Martin Gaudecker, 2009. "The Impact of Income Shocks
on Health: Evidence from Cohort Data." Journal of the European Economic Association 7(6):
1361-1399.

Agüero, Jorge M., and Prashant Bharadwaj, 2014. “Do the More Educated Know More about
Health? Evidence from Schooling and HIV Knowledge in Zimbabwe.” Economic Development
and Cultural Change, Vol. 62(3): 489-517

Aizer, Anna, and Laura Stroud, 2010. “Education, Knowledge and the evolution of Disparities in
Health.” NBER Working Paper No: 15840.

Akee, Randall, Emilia Simeonova, William Copeland, Adrian Angold and Jane Costello, 2013.
“Does More Money Make You Fat? The Effect of Household Income Transfers on Adolescent
and Young Adult Health. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Albouy, Valerie, and Laurent Lequien, 2009. “Does Compulsory Education Lower Mortality?”
Journal of Health Economics 28(1): 155–68.

Altindag, Duha, Colin Cannonier, and Naci Mocan, 2011. "The impact of education on health
knowledge." Economics of Education Review 30(5): 792-812.

Ashraf, Q. H., A. Lester, and D. N. Weil. 2009. "When does Improving Health Raise
GDP?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23: 157-204.

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, 2013. "A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
World, 1950-2010." Journal of Development Economics, Vol 104, pp.184-198.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. "Disease and development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 73.

Boyce, Christopher and Andrew Oswald, 2012.” Do People Become Healthier After Being
Promoted?” Health Economics. 21” 580-96.

Brunello, Giorgio, Daniele Fabbri, and Margherita Fort, 2013. "The Causal Effect of Education
on Body Mass: Evidence from Europe," Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 31(1): 195 - 223.

Burkhauser, Richard and John Cawley, 2008. “Beyond BMI: The Value of More Accurate
Measures of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research,” Journal of Health Economics, 27:
519-29.




                                              40
Cannonier, Colin and Naci Mocan, 2104.’ Empowering Women through Education: Evidence
from Sierra Leone,” NBER Working Paper No: 18016.

Card, D. 2001. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
Problems.” Econometrica, 69(5), pp. 1127-60.

Cawley, John, John Moran and Kosali Simon, 2010.” The impact of Income on the Weight of
Elderly Americans.” Health Economics, 19: 979-93.

Cesur, R. and Naci Mocan, 2013. “Does Secular Education Impact Religiosity, Electoral
Participation and the Propensity to Vote for Islamic Parties? Evidence from an Education
Reform in a Muslim Country.” NBER Working Paper, No. 19769.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, Ted Joyce, 2010. "Parental Education and Child
Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan," American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, Vol. 2(1): 33-61.

Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer, 2013. “The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and
Health: Evidence from Britain.” American Economic Review, 103(6): 2087-2120

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, 2003. "Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(4): 1495-1532.

Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney, 2010. "Understanding Differences in Health
Behaviors by education." Journal of Health Economics 29(1): 1-28.

De Walque, Damien. 2007. "Does education Affect smoking Behaviors?: Evidence Using the
Vietnam draft as an Instrument for College Education." Journal of Health Economics 26( 5):
877-895.

Dinçer, Mehmet A., Neeraj Kaushal, and Michael Grossman, 2014. “Women's Education:
Harbinger of Another Spring? Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Turkey.” World
Development, 64, pp. 243-58.

Dulger, I, 2004. “Turkey: Rapid coverage for compulsory education—the 1997 basic education
program.” Shanghai. World Bank Conference, Scaling Up Poverty Reduction: A Global
Learning Process.

Grossman, Michael, 1972a. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
Journal of Political Economy, 80(2): 223-255.

Grossman, Michael. 1972b. The Demand for Health: A theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic research




                                              41
Güneş, Pınar Mine, 2013. “The Impact of Female Education on Fertility: Evidence from
Turkey.” Grand Challenges Canada Working Paper, GCC 13-01.

Kempter, D., H. Juerges and S. Reinhold , 2011. “Changes in Compulsory Schooling and
the Causal Effect of Education on Health: Evidence from Germany”, Journal of Health
Economics 30(2):340–354.

Kirdar, Murat, Meltem Dayioglu and Ismet Koc, 2014.” Does Longer Compulsory Education
Equalize Schooling by Gender and Rural/Urban Residence?” IZA Working Paper No: 7939.

Lindeboom, Maarten, Ana Llena-Nozal, and Bas van Der Klaauw, 2009. "Parental Education
and Child Health: Evidence from a Schooling Reform." Journal of Health Economics 28(1):
109-131

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
United States.” Review of Economic Studies 72: 189–221.

Lorentzen, Peter, John McMillan, and Romain Wacziarg, 2008. "Death and Development.”
Journal of Economic Growth 13(2): 81-124.

Mathios, Alan, 2000. "The Impact of Mandatory Disclosure Laws on Product Choices: An
Analysis of the Salad Dressing Market." The Journal of Law and Economics 43(2): 651-678.

McCrary, Justin, and Heather Royer. 2011. "The Effect of Female Education on Fertility and
Infant Health: Evidence from School Entry Policies Using Exact Date of Birth." American
Economic Review, 101(1): 158-95.

Meghir, Costas, Mårten Palme, and Emilia Simeonova. 2012. “Education, health and mortality:
Evidence from a social experiment.” NBER Working Paper No: No. 17932.

Mocan, Leyla. 2014. “The Impact of Education on Wages: Analysis of an Education Reform in
Turkey.” University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Business Working Paper.

Mokdad, Ali H., James S. Marks, Donna F. Stroup, and Julie L. Gerberding, 2004. "Actual
Causes of Death in the United States, 2000." Journal of the American Medical Association,
291(10): 1238-1245.

Ng, Marie, Tom Fleming, Margaret Robinson, Blake Thomson, Nicholas Graetz, Christopher
Margono, Erin C. Mullany et al. 2014."Global, regional, and national prevalence of Overweight
and obesity in Children and Adults during 1980–2013: A Systematic Analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2013." The Lancet.

Oreopoulos, Philip, 2006. “Estimating Average and Local Average Treatment Effects of
Education when Compulsory Schooling Laws Really Matter,” American Economic
Review. 96(1): 152-75.



                                              42
Osili, U., and B. Long, 2008. “Does Female Schooling Reduce fertility? Evidence from Nigeria.”
Journal of Development Economics 87(1), pp. 57-75.

Palme, Mårten and Emilia Simeonova, forthcoming, “Does Women’s Education Affect Breast
Canver Risk and Survival? Evidence from a Population-Based Social Experiment in Education.”
Journal of Health Economics.

Popkin, Barry, Linda Adair, abd Shu Wen Ng, 2012.” Global Nutrition Transition and the
Pandemic of obesity in Developing Countries,” Nutrition Reviews, 70(1): 3-21.

Popkin, Bary, 2007. “The World is Fat,” Scientific American, 297(3): 88-95.

Price, Joseph, and Kosali Simon, 2009. "Patient Education and the Impact of New Medical
Research." Journal of Health Economics 28(6): 1166-1174.

Schmeiser, Maximilian D, 2009. “Expanding Waistlines and Wallets: The Impact of Family
Income on the BMI of Women and Men Eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit.”
Health Economics 18 (11): 1277-1294.

Snyder, Stephen and William Evans, 2006.”The effect of Income on Mortality: Evidence from
the Social Security Notch.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 8893): 482-95.

Stephens, Melvin Jr. and Dou-Yan Yang, 2014. "Compulsory Education and the Benefits of
Schooling." American Economic Review, 104(6): 1777-92.

Tansel, Aysit, and Deniz Karaoglan, 2014 "Health Behaviors and Education in Turkey." Koc
University-TUSIAD Economic Research Forum Working Paper, No: 1414.

UNESCO (Paris). (2000). The Dakar Framework for Action: Education for All: Meeting
Our Collective Commitments: Including Six Regional Frameworks for Action.
UNESCO.

Yürekli A, Önder Z, Elibol M, Erk N, Cabuk A, Fisunoglu M, Erk SF, Chaloupka FJ.
2010. “The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Taxation inTurkey.” Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.

World Bank. 2011. “Learning for All: Investing in People’s Knowledge and Skills to Promote
Development.” World Bank Group Education Strategy 2020. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Health Organization. 2009. “2008-2013 Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the
Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases: Prevent and Control Cardiovascular
Diseases, Cancers, Chronic Respiratory Diseases and Diabetes.” Geneva: World Health
Organization.

World Health Organization. 2010. “Global Status Report on Non-communicable Diseases 2010.”
Geneva: World Health Organization.

                                              43
World Health Organization. 2013. “WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2013:
Enforcing Bans on Tobacco Advertising, Promotion and Sponsorship.” Geneva: World Health
Organization.




                                           44
                                        Appendix Table A1
                     The Impact of Education on Health Outcomes and Smoking
                                   Above Median Income Sample
                                  Instrumental Variable Estimates
                                                        (1)                     (2)                          (3)                 (4)
            Cohorts born in                           1982 to                 1983 to                      1982 to             1983 to
                                                       1990                    1989                         1990                1989
                                          Males                     Females
                    The Impact of Education on Self-Reported Health
     Dependent Variable
     Good/Excellent Health         -0.149        -0.732          0.078       0.146
                                  (0.611)       (1.016)         (0.182)     (0.296)
          First Stage F-test       2.607         1.693                                                      12.54               4.904
            Observations           1,785         1,363                                                      2,021               1,522
                        The Impact of Education on Body Weight
             BMI                 18.963         26.356                                                      3.013                5.001
                                (15.047)       (21.586)                                                   (3.409)              (6.745)
          Underweight             -0.268         0.355                                                     -0.313               -0.955
                                 (0.437)        (0.539)                                                   (0.245)              (0.696)
        Overweight/Obese           0.847         1.949                                                      0.057               -0.078
                                 (1.432)        (1.919)                                                   (0.340)              (0.631)
             Obese                 0.579         1.446                                                      0.254                0.220
                                 (0.573)        (1.167)                                                   (0.167)              (0.269)
          First Stage F-test                     2.621         1.764                                        12.01               3.385
            Observations                         1,740         1,328                                        1,913               1,449
                                        The Impact of Education on Smoking
             Ever Smoked                        -0.952         -3.828                                      -0.002               0.236
                                               (2.042)        (4.177)                                     (0.274)              (0.409)
          Current Smoker                         0.243         -2.932                                       0.114               0.369
                                               (2.101)        (3.393)                                     (0.313)              (0.482)
         First Stage F-test                            0.592                   0.705                       11.03                5.937
           Observations                                1,449                   1,122                       1,649                1,235
        Smokes Every Day                              -5.280                   3.844                       0.324                1.209
                                                     (52.609)                 (9.592)                     (0.851)              (2.527)
          First Stage F-test                           0.009                  0.187                        2.588                0.504
            Observations                                744                    557                          303                  231
          No. of Cigarettes                          -117.447                80.839                       -15.301              -16.052
                                                    (257.098)               (317.341)                    (22.230)             (55.546)
          First Stage F-test                           0.206                   0.078                        1.891               0.321
            Observations                                673                     505                          237                 177
Robust standard errors, corrected for clustering on the region by birth cohort, are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. All models control for the survey year fixed effects, survey region fixed effects,
and re-centered birth year in a quadratic form. In columns (1) and (2) the full set of age dummies are controlled for and in columns (3) and (4)
age and age squared are whether specified. Reform is =1 if birth year>=1987, and =0 otherwise. Birth cohort of 1986 is excluded from the
specifications because they were exposed to the compulsory reform is uncertain.

                                                                    45
                                        Appendix Figure 1




Photo Credit: http://eczanehaber.tv/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/sigara-paketi-uzerindeki-uyari-
resimleri.jpg. October, 2014.

Top row, from left to right:
    1) Smoking reduces blood flow and causes impotence.
    2) Health institutions can help you to stop smoking.
    3) Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility.
    4) Smokers die young.
Second row, from left to right:
   5) Smoking when pregnant harms your baby.
    6) Smoke contains carcinogenic substances including; benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde,
        hydrogen cyanide.
    7) Smoking causes fatal lung cancer.
    8) Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.
Bottom row, from left to right:
    9) Smoking can cause a slow and painful death.
    10) Smoking is highly addictive, don’t start.
    11) Protect children: Don’t make them breathe your smoke.
    12) Get help from your doctor or primary health care center to stop smoking.




                                                  46
