                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               RACE, ETHNICITY AND HIGH-COST MORTGAGE LENDING

                                            Patrick Bayer
                                          Fernando Ferreira
                                           Stephen L. Ross

                                        Working Paper 20762
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20762


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank the Ford Foundation, Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at
Wharton, and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut
for financial support. Gordon MacDonald, Kyle Mangum, and Yuan Wang provided outstanding research
assistance. The analyses presented in this paper uses information provided by one of the major credit
reporting agencies. However, the substantive content of the paper is the responsibility of the authors
and does not reflects the specific views of any credit reporting agencies.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20762.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Race, Ethnicity and High-Cost Mortgage Lending
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 20762
December 2014
JEL No. G0,G21,R21,R3

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper examines how high cost mortgage lending varies by race and ethnicity. It uses a unique
panel data that matches a representative sample of mortgages in seven large metropolitan markets
between 2004 and 2008 to public records of housing transactions and proprietary credit reporting data.
The results reveal a significantly higher incidence of high costs loans for African-American and Hispanic
borrowers even after controlling for key mortgage risk factors: they have a 7.7 and 6.2 percentage
point higher likelihood of a high cost loan, respectively, in the home purchase market relative to an
overall incidence of 14.8 percent among all home purchase mortgages. Significant racial and ethnic
differences are widespread throughout the market – they are present (i) in each metro area, (ii) across
high and low risk borrowers, and (iii) regardless of the age of the borrower. These differences are reduced
by 60 percent with the inclusion of lender fixed effects, implying that a significant portion of the estimated
market-wide racial differences can be attributed to differential access to (or sorting across) mortgage
lenders.


Patrick Bayer                                         Stephen L. Ross
Department of Economics                               University of Connecticut
Duke University                                       Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences                                   341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Durham, NC 27708                                      Storrs, CT 06269-1063
and NBER                                              stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

        Whether African-American and Hispanic mortgage borrowers face a higher cost of credit

than comparable white borrowers has been a long-standing question in academic and policy

debates about inequities in financial markets. Interest in this question has been motivated by

several related issues. Most directly, a large legal history and scholarly literature has considered

claims of racial discrimination in mortgage lending.                     While historically focusing on

discrimination in mortgage underwriting (Ross and Yinger 2002) and redlining against minority

neighborhoods (Holmes and Horvath 1994; Tootell 1996), attention has increasingly turned to

differences in the price of mortgage credit (Ross 2005; Haughwout, Tracy, and Chen In Press),

including several high profile U.S. Department of Justice cases in the wake of the recent

financial crisis.1 A second motivation for estimating racial and ethnic differences in mortgage

lending has been the concern that these differences create barriers to homeownership,

contributing to low minority homeownership rates and growing wealth disparities (Belsky,

Retsinas and Duda 2005; Herbert, Haurin, Rosenthal and Duda 2005; and Quercia, McCarthy

and Wachter 2003). And, finally, risk based pricing and high cost mortgage lending has been a

defining feature of the subprime mortgage market.2 In the recent housing boom, lending in the

subprime market was heavily concentrated in minority neighborhoods, potentially contributing to

especially high foreclosure rates in these neighborhoods in the subsequent financial crisis




1
  Recent cases have been filed or settled against National City Bank, Wells Fargo, GFI Mortgage Bankers and Bank
of America based on the past actions of Countrywide Mortgage.
2
  Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2011) find that the quality of loans deteriorated for six consecutive years before the
crisis and that securitizers were aware of this quality decline. They argue that the subprime mortgage market
followed a classic lending boom-bust scenario with unsustainable growth leading to the collapse of the market.


                                                       2
(Gerardi and Willen 2009; Reid and Laderman 2009; Edminston 2009; Calem, Gillen, and

Wachter 2004).3

         The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 was amended in 1989, expanding regulatory

coverage to include non-depository lenders and mandating the creation of a loan-level database

that eventually captured virtually the entire population of mortgage applications nationwide.

Historically, the HMDA database has been used to document large racial and ethnic differences

in the likelihood of having a mortgage approved (Avery, Beeson and Sniderman 1996). While a

substantial fraction of the racial differences are certainly attributable to differences in borrower

and loan risk factors, Munnell, Tootell, Browne, McEneany (1996) in a seminal, but

controversial,4 study showed that substantial racial differences remained in a sample of HMDA

loans in Boston even after controlling for detailed mortgage risk factors. With the growing size

of the subprime mortgage market and the increased use of risk based pricing, the HMDA

database was expanded in 2004 to contain information on whether the APR5 on a loan exceeded

the interest rate on 10 year treasury notes by 3 percentage points. Loans that exceed this

threshold are often described as rate spread loans, and this threshold is typically used to identify

high cost or subprime loans. Avery, Canner and Cooke (2005) documented large racial and

ethnic differences in the incidence of rate spread loans in HMDA, but were unable to control for

common mortgage risk factors (e.g., borrower credit score), which are not included in the

HMDA database.6


3
  Bhutta and Canner (2013) and Bayer, Ferreira and Ross (In Press) show that substantial racial and ethnic
differences in foreclosure exist during the crisis even after controlling for traditional mortgage risk factors.
4
  See Ross and Yinger (2002) for a detailed review of the debate surrounding the “Boston Fed” study.
5
  The Annual Percentage Rate or APR includes both the interest or note rate on the loan and the effect of closing
costs on the cost of credit.
6
  The sometimes very high rates of interest charged in the subprime sector has led to a significant debate about
whether these loans are predatory. Bond, Musto and Yilmaz (2009) develop a model of predatory lending that
implies highly collateralized loans, inefficient refinancing of subprime loans, lending without due regard to ability to


                                                           3
        In light of this limitation of the HMDA database, most of the studies that have

documented differences in the prevalence of high cost loans have used one of two sources:

proprietary data aggregated from individual lenders or data obtained directly from individual

lenders. Ghent, Hernandez-Murillo, and Owyang (2013), Haughwout, Mayer and Tracy (2009),

Bocian, Ernst and Lee (2006) used proprietary data aggregated from the reports of many lenders

and merged with the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act database.7 While these studies have

documented substantial unexplained differences by race, they are often restricted to samples that

represent a subset of the market, usually emphasizing loans that are securitized privately or

lenders that operate primarily in the subprime sector. Several other studies have examined the

mortgage pricing behavior of individual lenders (Black, Boehm, DeGennaro 2003; Nelson 2005;

Courshane 2007; Courshane and Nickerson 1997). These studies have found very small, if any,

within-lender differences between white and minority borrowers in the incidence of high cost

mortgage credit.

        In this study, we examine racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost

mortgage loans in a market-wide sample covering several large U.S. metropolitan areas or

regions. The shift to market-wide data changes the question being asked from whether similar

borrowers receive different prices from the same lender (e.g., disparate treatment discrimination)

to whether unexplained racial differences exist in market outcomes, a phenomenon that

Heckman (1998) described as market discrimination.8 Significant market level differences in the


pay, prepayment penalties, balloon payments, and poorly informed borrowers. Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David,
Chomsisengphet, and Evanoff (2014) examine the effects of an anti-predatory loan program in Chicago finding that
the program cut lending activity in half mostly through the exit of lenders specializing in especially risky loans.
7
  A larger set of studies examine racial and ethnic patterns of high cost lending at the neighborhood level solely
using proprietary data (Mayer and Pence 2007; Mayer, Pence and Sherlund 2009; Reid and Laderman 2009; Fisher,
Lambie-Hanson and Willen 2010).
8
  See Ross and Yinger (2002) and Blackburn and Vermilyea (2006) for evidence of significantly larger market level
differences in mortgage underwriting than the differences observed at the lender level.


                                                        4
price of credit have important consequences for the dynamics of racial and ethnic inequality in

homeownership, wealth, and credit worthiness, even if only small differences exist at the lender

level.

         To build the database for our analysis, we first linked HMDA data on home purchase and

refinance mortgages between 2004 and 2008 to public records data on housing transactions and

liens in seven distinct metropolitan housing markets.                    The public records data contain

information on all liens as well as the name and address of the individual purchasing the housing

unit or refinancing their mortgage and in many cases the name of the individual’s spouse.9 We

drew a sample of matched mortgages that were originated between May and August of each year

and provide the names and addresses resulting from this sample to one of the major credit

reporting agencies. The credit reporting agency then used the name and address to match

borrowers to archival credit reporting data from March 31 in the year preceding the mortgage

origination and from March 31 for every following year through 2009 providing in each year a

vantage credit score plus detailed credit line information from each individual’s report. The

credit reporting agency also provided information on borrower age, which has not typically been

available in studies of mortgage lending or pricing.

         Our empirical analysis reveals significant unexplained racial and ethnic differences in the

incidence of high cost or subprime mortgage credit. These differences persist after controlling

for detailed measures of borrower and loan characteristics including credit score, ratio of the loan

amount to housing price, presence of subordinate liens, and housing and debt expenses relative to

individual income. Relative to a model based on control variables available in HMDA, the

9
 Information on subordinate liens is typically not available except in lender provided samples of mortgages because
only individual loans are tracked in most mortgage samples, not entire mortgage transactions. See Foote, Gerardi,
Goette, and Willen (2010) for another example where HMDA is matched to housing transaction data in order to
obtain information on subordinate liens.


                                                        5
inclusion of these additional controls erodes about half of the racial and ethnic differences in

loan pricing. Still, the remaining differentials are sizable with African American and Hispanic

borrowers having a 7.7 and 6.2 percentage point higher likelihood of a rate spread or high cost

loan, respectively, in the home purchase market relative to an overall incidence of 14.8 percent

among home purchase mortgages. In the refinance sample, the estimated differences are smaller

at 4.2 and 1.7 percentage points compared to a base rate of 17.1 percent. These loan-pricing

differences exist across a variety of large metropolitan housing markets including not only faster-

growing markets in California and Florida that experienced especially severe housing market

downturns, but also slower-growing Eastern and Midwestern housing markets.

        The further inclusion of lender fixed effects substantially erodes the unexplained

differences for all groups by 60 to 70 percent.10 These findings suggest that sorting across or

differential access to lenders plays a significant role in creating market wide differences in

mortgage pricing, a finding that is consistent with the high concentration of subprime loans in

minority neighborhoods.

        In the home purchase market, further analysis indicates that differences in the likelihood

of a high cost loan are distributed widely across the distribution for African-American borrowers.

In particular, substantial differences in the incidence of high cost loans remain for the subsample

of borrowers who have prime credit scores, conventional loan to value ratios, and reasonable

debt expense to income ratios. On the other hand, the differences for Hispanic borrowers are

concentrated primarily among borrowers with high LTV ratios. For refinance mortgages, the



10
   These lender fixed effect estimates are comparable to the findings in Munnell et al. (1996) of underwriting
discrimination in Boston, except that the racial differences arising from their within lender comparisons were 80
percent of sample denial rates, significantly larger than the 2.9 to 22.3 percent within lender racial and ethnic
differences found in this study.


                                                       6
pattern for African-Americans is similar to that of Hispanic borrowers with the greatest

differences arising for borrowers with subprime credit scores and high LTV mortgages.

       Finally, we examine the geographic dimension of racial and ethnic differences in high

cost lending by interacting two measures of neighborhood and market demographics with

borrower race and ethnicity. The first control variable is percentage of households in poverty

within the borrower’s census tract, which is intended to proxy for neighborhood level

disadvantage. The second variable is intended to capture information on the broader geographic

housing and mortgage submarket in which current homebuyers participate. Specifically, we use

data at the county level from the American Community Survey in order to measure the fraction

of recent movers into owner-occupied housing in a county who have less than two years of

college by race and ethnicity in order to capture the demographic composition of recent

homebuyers in each county. We find that the observed racial and ethnic differences in the

incidence of high cost loans are concentrated in high poverty census tracts for both African-

Americans and Hispanics.       Further, for African-Americans, racial differences tend to be

concentrated in the counties where recent African-American homebuyers have lower levels of

education.

       Taken as a whole, the results of our analysis imply that African-American and Hispanic

borrowers have a higher incidence of high cost loans, even after controlling for a detailed set of

standard underwriting variables designed to measure credit risk, and that these racial and ethnic

differences are not confined to a particular segment of the market. In this way, even among

borrowers with comparable credit scores, loan terms, homes and locations, African-Americans or

Hispanics are much more likely to have a high cost loan. Further, even African-Americans with

favorable credit scores and loan terms experience a significantly higher incidence of high cost



                                                7
loans than equivalent white borrowers, and these differences are most prevalent in specific

neighborhoods and submarkets where disadvantaged borrowers are concentrated. While these

market-level differences do not necessarily imply discrimination on the part of individual

lenders, the differential exposure to high cost loans can impact a wide array of subsequent

outcomes including wealth accumulation, rates of delinquency and default, credit scores, and

long-term home ownership.

          The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the data

used in the analysis and our econometric model. Section 3 then presents the main results, and

heterogeneity estimates by several measures. Finally, section 4 concludes the paper.



2. Data and Model Specification

        Our data are based on public Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data from

between 2004 and 2008 and proprietary housing transaction/lien and assessor’s databases

purchased from Dataquick Inc.11 We begin with a convenience sample of seven major housing

markets where Dataquick has information on refinance mortgages going back to at least 2004:

Chicago IL CMSA, Cleveland OH MSA, Denver CO MSA, Los-Angeles CA CMSA, Miami-

Palm Beach Corridor, Maryland Counties excluding Baltimore City, and San Francisco CA

CMSA. We restrict our HMDA data to home purchase or refinance mortgages on owner-

occupied, 1-4 family properties. In the Dataquick sample, we eliminate non-arm’s length

transactions, transactions where the name field contains the name of a church, trust, or where the

first name is missing, and transactions where the address could not be matched to a 2000 Census


11
  The property transaction data is collected by Dataquick or by intermediaries from county assessor’s offices and
contains a population of all sales and liens of all types including refinance mortgages, home improvement loans, and
home equity lines of credit from the present back to 1995 to 1997 for most states and back to 1988 for California.


                                                         8
tract or the zip code was missing.12 The HMDA and Dataquick data are then merged based on

year, loan amount, name of lender, state, county and census tract. We obtain high quality

matches for approximately 50% of our HMDA sample.13

         Next, we draw a sample of mortgages to provide to a credit reporting agency. These

mortgages were sampled from May through August so that the March 31st archival credit report

for the year of the mortgage provides appropriate information on the borrowers’ credit quality

prior to obtaining the mortgage. We oversample mortgages to minority borrowers, mortgages to

white borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods, and high cost mortgages as

designated in HMDA as high rate spread loans. In order to maximize the number of minority

loans given the likelihood of sample saturation, we first draw the following oversamples based

on race and ethnicity: 500 in each site, year and group (400 for 2004) selected randomly from

mortgages to African-American borrowers, mortgages to Hispanic borrowers, and mortgages to

white borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods.14 We then split the remaining sample

into rate spread and non-rate spread loans drawing 1000 borrowers associated with rate spread

loans in each year and site (800 for 2004) and 2714 borrowers (2286 for 2004) from the non-rate

spread sample in each year and site.               Weights are developed based on the probability of

selection,15 and initialized so that each site receives equal weight in the pooled sample.16

12
   This eliminates very few records due to the high quality of the name and address records in the assessor files.
13
   The key factor limiting the match rate is the lender name because the lender of record in the local assessor’s data
often differs from the respondent in HMDA. Less restrictive match criteria can yield a match rate closer to 80%, but
in order to be conservative we restricted ourselves only to instances where we successfully match on lender name.
14
   Our budget at the credit reporting agency is based on number of borrowers so whenever a mortgage is sampled
which contains the name of the co-borrower, typically the borrower’s spouse, this was counted as having sampled
two borrowers.
15
   The sampling is explicitly based on 8 strata for each site: African-American borrowers, Hispanic borrowers, white
borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods, and all other borrowers divided into rate spread and non-rate
spread loans. All loans from the same strata and year receive equal weight.
16
   We have a convenience sample of housing markets so it would be inappropriate to weight based on the number of
mortgages. In any stratified sampling scheme, Los Angeles, which dominates our sample in terms of total number
of HMDA mortgages, would be selected with certainty while housing markets like Denver and Cleveland would be


                                                          9
         This sample is provided to a major credit repository who matches the name and address

of each borrower and co-borrower to archival credit report data from the March 31st preceding

the mortgage transaction and March 31st for every year that follows this transaction through

2009. Our match rate for the pre-mortgage archive is 81.4 and 84.5 percent in the home

purchase and refinance samples, respectively. For years following the mortgage, the match rate

rises by 4 to 5 percentage points. In many cases, these individuals also may not have had

sufficient information on record when the lender requested a report for the credit reporting

agency to provide a credit score, in which case lack of a score matches the information that the

lender would have had when approving and pricing the loan, but lenders can enter by hand

additional information that is not available to us such as social security number or previous

addresses.17

         Table 1 illustrates the impact of our match process on the sample mean of whether the

loan is a high cost (rate spread) loan,18 race and ethnicity of the borrower, gender, loan amount,

family income of the borrower, whether there is a co-borrower, whether the loan is with a non-

depository lender,19 relative lender size,20 whether the loan is a jumbo,21 and census tract



assigned to a stratum with other similarly sized and located metropolitan areas and if chosen would receive a higher
weight (offsetting the smaller number of mortgages) based on the probability of being selected from the stratum.
17
   For home purchase mortgages, we only observe the address of the new housing unit, but in practice this does not
present a major problem for the credit data match because the archival data can be matched based on current and
several past addresses and in practice we observe only a small difference between the home purchase and refinance
match rate.
18
   The rate spread variable is based on whether the Annual Percentage Rate or APR, which includes both the interest
rate and the effect of closing costs on the cost of credit, is 2 or more percentage points above the yield on the 10 year
treasury bond. HMDA only reports the actual APR if it exceeds this rate spread, and so our dependent variable is
defined as a binary variable capturing whether the APR exceeds the reporting threshold or the rate spread.
19
   This variable is based on the lenders regulator or the agency code variable in HMDA.
20
   The relative lender size is based on number of loans in market divided by the maximum number of loans for a
single lender in that market so that it always falls between zero and one. The mean is relatively high because the
very largest lenders dominate the sample of loans.
21
   The jumbo variable is set to one if the loan amount exceeds the jumbo threshold for loans on single family homes
which was $333,700 in 2004, 359,650 in 2005, and 417,000 in 2006 through 2008. In the second half of 2008,
higher thresholds were temporarily approved for high cost markets. However, loan amounts above $417,000 have


                                                          10
variables including median income, percent African-American, Hispanic and Asian residents,

percent of households in poverty, percent of properties owner-occupied, percentage of

households in poverty and the ratio of mean rents to mean house values.22 The first column

shows the mean for the entire HMDA sample for our seven sites where each site receives equal

weight in the mean. The second column shows the mean for our HMDA-Dataquick match, and

the third column restricts our sample to mortgages between May and August. The fourth column

shows the weighted mean for the sample of mortgages that was provided to the credit reporting

agency. The last column in Table 1 shows the weighted means on these common variables for

just the subsample where the name and addressed was matched to the minimum amount of credit

line data in order to generate a record.23 The sample composition is quite stable except for a

moderate decline in share white and moderate increase in loan amount between columns 1 and 2

associated with the difficulty of matching lender names between HMDA and the Dataquick

provided assessor files. While our HMDA-Dataquick match algorithm loses 50 percent of the

HMDA mortgages, the composition of the match sample is quite similar to the composition of

the population of mortgages, and the other aspects of our sample construction have virtually no

impact on the composition of mortgages over key attributes.




never been viewed as fully conforming by the GSE’s, and early concerns about the temporary nature of these higher
limits limited the impact of these limits especially during the second half of 2008.
22
   The last variable is a common measure of neighborhood equity risk because current rents can only be high relative
to values if investors expect rents to fall in the future.
23
   Some borrowers are not matched with a credit score because insufficient credit information was available for that
borrower or co-borrower. If a credit score is not observed for both the borrower and co-borrower, the observation
will be dropped in our regression analysis. Similar results are observed using the full sample with dummies for
missing credit score data, but the resulting racial and ethnic differences are slightly larger in those models. In order
to be conservative, we present results using a regression sample that is restricted to observations where a credit score
is matched.


                                                          11
         Table 2 shows the weighted means for our final home purchase and refinance subsamples

that were successfully merged to pre-mortgage credit report data.24 The first two columns show

the mean and standard deviation for our sample of home purchase mortgages, and the last two

columns show these values for refinance mortgages. The first set of rows present the full set of

demographic, loan and census tract variables that are available in HMDA and that we use in our

regressions.     From the match with transaction data, we observe the presence and size of

subordinate liens, whether the liens are fixed or variable rate mortgages, the loan to value ratio

based on sales price for home purchase mortgages and on an estimated value based on either

previous sales price25 or assessed value when a previous sale is unobserved for refinance

mortgages,26 and detailed property attributes including whether a single family home, a

condominium, and number of units on the property. The borrowers’ (or if unavailable co-

borrower’s) Vantage score is drawn from the credit report data from the March 31st prior to the

mortgage origination.27 The credit report observation following the mortgage is used to obtain

monthly mortgage payment, which when combined with HMDA income is used to calculate the




24
   This sample is somewhat smaller than the last column in Table 1 because some small lenders could not be
identified based on the reporting restrictions of the credit reporting agency. If the lender was not identified, the
observation is dropped from the regression sample. As with credit score, similar results are observed using the full
sample with dummies for missing lender identity, but the resulting racial and ethnic differences are larger in those
models (primarily in the model with lender FE's). Again, in order to be conservative, we present results using the
smaller sample.
25
   We use our extensive housing transaction data to develop both a hedonic and repeat sales quarterly price index for
each county. When we observe a previous sale of the property, we simply adjust that earlier sales price to estimate
current value based on the hedonic index. However, the repeat sales index yields quite similar estimates.
26
   When a previous sale is not observed, we use the county assessment and adjust that value by the average ratio of
sales price to assessed value for that county and quarter, see Clapp, Nanda and Ross (2008). In California, our
refinance sample is restricted to mortgages where a previous purchase is observed because property assessments are
uninformative as to the value of the underlying property. This restriction is feasible because the Dataquick data in
California contains transactions back to the late 1980s.
27
   The Vantage Score is a proprietary credit score developed by the credit reporting agencies as an alternative to the
traditional FICO index of credit score. The two scores are very highly correlated.


                                                         12
mortgage payment to income ratio.28 The monthly mortgage payment is combined with debt

payments from the pre-mortgage credit data and HMDA income to calculate debt payment to

income ratio. Finally, age is observed for many borrowers and co-borrowers in the credit history

files.

         In terms of our model specification, we regress whether the loan was high cost (i.e., a

HMDA rate spread loan) on the detailed borrower, tract, and loan attributes from Table 2 plus

year by week fixed effects and site by origination year fixed effects.29 Separate models are

estimated for home purchase and refinance mortgages, as well as by site in a later analysis. The

loan to value ratio is included as bins below 0.6, 0.6 to 0.8, 0.8 to 0.84, 0.85 to 0.89, 0.90 to 0.94,

0.95 to 1.00, 1.00 to 1.04, and 1.05 and above. In addition to controlling for the combined loan to

value ratio, we control for the number of subordinate liens and whether each is a fixed or

variable rate loan. The vantage score is included as a series of dummy variables based on 20-

point intervals. The mortgage payment and debt to income ratios are also divided into bins. The

bins vary in size because the data is thin for unusual income ratios. For mortgage payment to

income ratios, the smallest bins are 0.02 near the pre-crisis secondary market criteria of 0.33, and

for total debt payment to income ratios the smallest bins are 0.03 near the pre-crisis threshold of




28
   The mortgage payment for the current mortgage is only observed in the credit line data from the year following
the mortgage. However, in most instances, borrowers who are matched by the credit reporting agency prior to the
mortgage are also matched in the following year.
29
   The fraction of loans classified as rate spread loans in HMDA is affected by the spread between treasury and
market mortgage rates. These spreads changed substantially in late 2004 so that the fraction of rate spread loans is
much lower in 2004 than other years. Using the information available on APR above the rate spread threshold, we
defined an alternative rate spread variable holding constant the fraction of rate spread loans in a housing market,
year and sector (home purchase or refinance) at the fraction observed in 2004. While magnitudes may vary, results
presented are robust to alternative definitions of the rate spread variable that define rate spread loans as a constant
fraction of the market.


                                                         13
0.45.30 Finally, we include either controls for lender size based on loan volume and dummy

variables for the agency that regulates the lender or in some models lender fixed effects.



3. Rate Spread Models

        Table 3 presents the rate spread regression results for the pooled samples with the

estimates for home purchase mortgages in panel 1 and for refinance mortgages in panel 2. For

comparison with results in the previous literature, the first column presents the model with just

the standard HMDA controls including the demographic variables, family income, a jumbo loan

dummy amount, the census tract attributes, and the year by site fixed effects. The second

column adds additional controls made available by merging the HMDA data with the Dataquick

housing transaction data including loan to value ratio, whether the loan is an adjustable rate

mortgage, information on subordinate liens, and year by week fixed effects. The third column

adds the dummies for credit score and housing and debt expense to income ratio categories. The

fourth column adds additional controls for the potential effect of subprime lending, identifying

borrowers with Vantage scores below 701 as subprime borrowers31 and then interacting the

subprime dummy with dummy variables associated with key thresholds of loan to value ratio,

debt to income ratio, mortgage payment to income ratio,32 the presence of subordinate debt and

whether the primary mortgage is adjustable rate. The fifth column includes lender fixed effects.

The rows present the coefficient estimates for race and ethnicity categories.

30
   The formal GSE income ratio guidelines were 0.28 and 0.36, respectively, but these guidelines were relaxed
substantially during the period leading up to the crisis due in part to increased reliance of the GSE’s on automated
underwriting programs and the data indicates that the GSE’s purchased many loans with income ratios above these
formal guidelines.
31
   The credit reporting agencies that developed the Vantage score algorithms describes scores below 701 as non-
prime. Further, a Vantage score of 701 is comparable to a FICO score of 660, a common FICO threshold for
subprime, in that in both cases approximately 30% of individuals have credit scores below these thresholds.
32
   The loan to value thresholds of 0.80, 0.90, 0.95 and 1.00, the debt to income thresholds used are 0.36 and 0.45,
and the mortgage payment to income ratio thresholds used are 0.28 and 0.33


                                                        14
          Based on the standard HMDA controls, we find 17.1 and 11.6 percentage point

differences in the likelihood of receiving a rate spread loan for African-American and Hispanic

borrowers relative to whites for home purchase mortgages, while differences are small for

Asians.      For refinance mortgages, the estimated differences for African-Americans and

Hispanics are smaller, 10.6 and 4.3 percentage points, respectively.

          The addition of standard underwriting controls in columns 2 and 3 reduces the estimated

differences for African-American and Hispanic borrowers to 8.0 and 6.1 for the home purchase

and 4.5 and 1.7 for the refinance market, reductions on the order of 50 percent for all four

coefficients,33 while the inclusion of additional subprime controls in Column 4 has little impact

on the estimated differences.34 In the home purchase market, these differences are consistent

with 54.0 and 41.2 percent differentials measured as a share of the overall incidence of rate

spread loans, and in the refinance market the differentials are 26.3 and 9.9 percent for African-

Americans and Hispanics, respectively. These results imply both that a significant portion of the

observed racial and ethnic differences of the receipt of high cost loans by race and ethnicity can

be explained by differences in standard underwriting variables and that economically and

statistically significant differences remain even after controlling for these most commonly used

measures of credit worthiness and risk.

          The addition of lender fixed effects model in column 5 leads to substantially eroded, but

still statistically significant differences in the incidence of high cost loans. The point estimates in

the home purchase sample decline from 8.0 and 6.1 to 3.3 and 2.5 percentage point differences

33
   The coefficients on the additional controls suggest that the model is well specified. For example, we find that the
likelihood of rate spread loans changes monotonically with the vantage score, loan to value ratio, housing expense to
income ratio and debt expense to income ratio bins in the expected directions, and we find that the likelihood of a
rate spread loan is higher for jumbo loans and for primary loans with subordinate liens.
34
   The addition of LTV in column 2 and credit score and income ratios in column 3 both explain a significant
fraction of the racial and ethnic differences, especially in the home purchase market.


                                                         15
for African-Americans and Hispanics, respectively, and for the refinance sample differences

decline from 4.5 and 1.7 to 1.7 and 0.5.35 The inclusion of lender fixed effects shifts the focus

from understanding market disparities between equally qualified minority and white borrowers36

to racial and ethnic differences observed within lenders. As evidence of discrimination, the

lender fixed effect estimates are comparable to the findings in the Munnell et al. study of

underwriting discrimination in Boston, which also used lender fixed effects in a sample

combining loan applications for many lenders in a common market. However, the racial

differences arising from their within lender comparisons were significantly larger, 80% or 8

percentage point difference over a 10 percent rejection rate, than the within lender racial and

ethnic differences in the incidence of rate spread loans, which fell between 2.9 and 22.3 percent.

        These results imply that a sizeable majority of the unexplained racial and ethnic

differences in market outcomes can be explained by the differential access to traditional lenders

and/or selection into high cost or subprime lenders. Many users of the subprime market are

qualified for financing in the primary market based on assessment using automated underwriting

tools (FreddieMac, 2000), and Lax, Manti, Raca, and Zorn (2004) find that only half of the two

percentage point difference between prime and subprime interest rates can be explained by

differential credit risk and servicing costs. As noted earlier, subprime lending tends to be

concentrated in predominantly minority neighborhoods (Geradi and Willen 2009; Reid and

Laderman 2009; Edminston 2009; Calem, Gillen, and Wachter 2004). Further, a National

Community Reinvestment Coalition paired testing study found that minority testers were never

counseled on up referral to an affiliated prime lender, while 7 percent of white testers were

35
   These findings are comparable to Avery, Canner, and Cooke (2005) who estimate racial and ethnic differences in
the incidence of rate spread loans controlling for information available in HMDA and find that lender fixed effects
explain a majority of the unexplained racial and ethnic differences.
36
   This phenomenon has been described by Heckman (1998) as market discrimination.


                                                       16
counseled (Harney, 2006), and in Chicago Ross, Turner, Godfrey and Smith (2008) found that

minority testers received less time and attention than white testers during pre-application

inquires.   Stein and Libby (2001) found that three-quarters of all subprime borrowers in

California that they surveyed did not approach a bank prior to applying for a mortgage, one-third

experienced aggressive marketing as the lender attempted to initiate a loan, and almost three-

quarters claimed that loan terms changed for the worse at closing; and Courchane, Surette and

Zorn (2004) find that subprime borrowers are less likely to search for a better interest rate and

are less likely to be offered a choice of mortgage products.



Heterogeneity in Racial and Ethnic Differences

       Having presented our baseline findings in Table 3, the remainder of our analysis aims to

provide further insight in the nature of the observed racial and ethnic differences by exploring

how these effects vary along a number of dimensions including (i) metropolitan area, (ii)

borrower and loan characteristics, and (iii) residential location.

       Table 4 presents the estimated results for each metropolitan housing market.           The

structure of the table follows Table 3 except that the columns represent in order Chicago,

Cleveland, Denver, Los Angeles, Maryland Counties, Miami-Palm Beach Corridor, and San

Francisco Bay Area. The first panel presents the estimates for the subprime model in column 4

of Table 3 for the home purchase sample, the second panel presents the lender fixed model for

the same sample, and the third and fourth panels present the results for the corresponding models

using the refinance sample. While there is some variation, racial and ethnic differences exist for

all seven sites in the home purchase sample in models both with and without lender FE's. In the

home purchase market without lender FE's, differences range between 4.5 and 10.3 for African-



                                                 17
Americans, and 5.4 and 10.9 for Hispanics.            The inclusion of lender FE's lowers these

differences to ranges of 1.7 to 4.1, and 1.1 to 3.3, respectively. Significant differences exist for

all groups in most sites for the refinance sample in models without lender FE's, but differences

are confined to a small number of areas for refinance mortgages once lender FE's are included in

the models. For refinance mortgages in the model without lender FE's, the significant estimated

differences range between 2.1 and 5.4 for African-Americans and 1.1 and 3.0 for Hispanics.

Taken together, we conclude that the market wide differences in the incidence of high cost loans

are present in all of our market areas especially in the home purchase sample. Estimated

differences for Asians are small in all sites except for Denver in the home purchase sample.

       Next in order to assess how widespread racial and ethnic differences are across the

mortgage market, we estimate models in which group membership is interacted with three key

risk variables: subprime credit score or Vantage score below 701, non-conforming loan to value

ratio or a ratio above 0.95, and a high debt to income ratio, i.e. above 0.45. Panel 1 replicates the

results from Table 3 for comparison purposes, and Panel 2 presents the estimated effects by race,

ethnicity and loan terms. Starting with the subprime model for the home purchase sample shown

in Table 5 Column 1, we continue to find large racial differences in the likelihood of a high cost

loan for low-risk African-American borrowers, i.e. those with prime credit scores, conforming

loan to value ratios and reasonable debt to income ratios. In particular, low-risk African-

American borrowers have a 7.6 percentage point higher likelihood of receiving a rate spread

compared to low-risk white borrowers (an identical gap to the estimate reported for the full

sample in Panel 1). This estimate falls to 2.6 percentage points (column 2) when lender fixed

effects are included in the model, suggesting that about two-thirds of the racial differences for

low-risk borrowers can be attributed to differential sorting across (or access to) lenders. For the



                                                 18
refinance mortgage market as show in columns 3 and 4, the estimates imply a greater

concentration of the racial difference in the incidence of the high cost loans among higher-risk

borrowers, although significant differences remain for low-risk African-American borrowers

relative to low-risk whites.

       There are much smaller differences between low-risk Hispanic and white borrowers in

the incidence of high cost loans (2.2 percentage points without lender fixed effects and basically

zero with fixed effects). Instead, having a non-conforming LTV increases the Hispanic-white

difference in the incidence of high cost loans by 10.5 and 5.1 percentage points in models

without and with lender fixed effects, respectively. In this way, the overall differences estimated

for Hispanic borrowers in Table 3 appear to be driven by especially large differences for a group

of borrowers with a particular mortgage risk factor, rather than by widespread differences

throughout the entire market.

       Table 6 presents the results for models where we interact race and ethnicity with age

dummies. Lax, Manti, Raca and Zorn (2004) observe that older, potentially more vulnerable

borrowers are more likely to have subprime loans, and so we examine whether older African-

American borrowers have especially likely to have a rate spread loan. While racial and ethnic

differences are slightly lower for the youngest African-American and Hispanic borrowers, we do

not observe any systematic relationship between age and estimated racial and ethnic differences

for other borrowers.

       Finally, we estimate additional models that interact geographic controls for borrower

location with race and ethnicity. Our first control is simply the percent of households in poverty

within the census tract where the borrower resides, which is included as a general proxy for a

disadvantaged neighborhood. Second, we use the American Community Survey (ACS) to



                                                19
measure the education level of borrowers in particular housing and mortgage submarkets.

Specifically, we pool data from the 2005-2009 ACSs selecting heads of households who reside

in owner-occupied housing and for which everyone in the household has resided in the house for

less than one year as a proxy for individuals who recently purchased a home with a mortgage.

Then, by county and by race/ethnicity category we measure the fraction of these recent movers

into owner-occupied housing who do not have at least two years of college.37 In this way, we

identify counties for which specific groups have below average levels of education. These

models are only estimated for the home purchase models because the ACS does not contain

information on whether households refinanced their mortgage.

         Table 8 presents the results for this model using the home purchase sample. The first and

the third column present the baseline results from Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 after the direct

inclusion of these geographic variables.38 The second and four columns present the results after

the inclusion of the interactions of these two variables with the race and ethnicity dummy

variables. A higher neighborhood percent poverty implies significantly higher rates of high cost

lending for both African-Americans and Hispanics, and a higher share of same race borrowers

with less than two years of college in a county is associated with more rate spread loans for

African-American borrowers. In fact, racial and ethnic differences are near zero for borrowers in

low poverty rate neighborhoods and in counties where borrowers typically have at least two

years of college. These results hold for both the models without and with lender fixed effects.



37
   Similar results are obtained using fractions by county by group by year matching the 2005 ACS with the 2004
originations etc, but the sample sizes within many cells are quite small leading to substantial measurement error,
which attenuates the estimated effects.
38
   Percent poverty was in the original Table 3 specifications as part of the broad vector of neighborhood controls and
is positively associated with a higher incidence of rate spread loans. The share homebuyers in the county without
two years of college is added to this specification, but is statistically insignificant and its inclusion has virtually no
effect on the estimates of racial and ethnic differences.


                                                           20
        The finding that racial and ethnic differences are concentrated in neighborhoods with

elevated poverty rates is consistent with the literature that documents the concentration of

subprime lending in poor and minority neighborhoods (Mayer and Pence 2007; Mayer, Pence

and Sherlund 2009; Reid and Laderman 2009; Fisher, Lambie-Hanson and Willen 2010). To our

knowledge, however, ours is one of the few studies to document such neighborhood effects after

the inclusion of detailed underwriting controls, and ours is the first study to document the

increased level of racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost lending in

disadvantaged neighborhoods.

        Several studies also document the correlation between high cost lending and either

borrower or neighborhood education levels (Courchane, Surette and Zorn 2004; Calem, Hershaff

and Wachter 2004; Smith, Fink and Huston 2011).39 As with many of those studies, we cannot

distinguish between differences that arise between borrowers with different levels of education

and differences that arise across locations or submarkets with different average or typical

education levels because education is not observed in the vast majority of mortgage data sets.

Regardless, the finding that the county average education level of African-American borrowers

is associated with larger racial differences in the incidence of high costs loans, with no similar

finding for Hispanics, is suggestive that less educated African-American borrowers are at a

significant disadvantage in the mortgage market, especially given the earlier findings that racial

differences in high cost lending are distributed throughout the quality distribution of African-

American mortgages.




39
  Also see Germais (In Press) who finds a link between neighborhood education levels and mortgage borrower
mistakes on loan terms, and Campbell (2006) who documents the role of borrower education in explain the rate of
poor decisions in financial investment.


                                                      21
4. Summary and Conclusion

       In this paper, we identify robust differences between whites and minority borrowers in

the likelihood of receiving a rate spread mortgage in both the home purchase and refinance

market after controlling for detailed borrower and loan attributes. A substantial fraction of these

differences are attributable to sorting across (or differential access to) lenders as opposed to

differential treatment of equally qualified applications by lenders. Racial and ethnic differences

are observed in all metropolitan or regional markets in most samples and specifications with the

exception of the refinance sample when lender fixed effects are included in the pricing model.

       In the home purchase sample where estimated differences are the largest, racial

differences are widespread with large differences arising even for borrowers with prime credit

scores, conforming loan to value ratios, and reasonable debt to income ratios. On the other hand,

ethnic differences are concentrated among borrowers with either subprime credit scores or non-

conforming loan to value ratios. For both groups, differences are concentrated among minority

borrowers residing in higher poverty rate neighborhoods, and for Hispanics differences are very

small in low poverty rate neighborhoods.          For African-American borrowers, substantial

differences remain, but these differences are entirely explained by a second location control, i.e.

the education composition of African-American borrowers at the county level. Therefore, while

racial differences may persist among credit worthy borrowers in low poverty neighborhoods, the

remaining racial differences are concentrated in submarkets where African-American borrowers

have lower levels of education.

       The results of our analysis have important implications for the dynamics of racial and

ethnic differences along a number of dimensions related to wealth, credit-worthiness and home

ownership. In particular, the greater financial burden associated with high cost loans not only



                                                22
leads directly to slower wealth accumulation due to the higher mortgage payments, but also to a

higher risk of future delinquency and default, with serious long-term consequences for long-term

credit scores and home ownership rates. In fact, using the same sample of loans, Bayer, Ross

and Ferreira (2012) show that having a rate spread loan is associated with an 8.0 percentage

point higher incidence of foreclosure notices on an individual’s credit report among home

purchase loans. This implies that the unexplained racial and ethnic differences estimated in this

paper (in models without lender fixed effects) are associated with a 0.62 and 0.50 percentage

point increase in foreclosure rates for African-Americans and Hispanics, respectively, relative to

a population average foreclosure rate of 5.3 percent, i.e. 12 and 9 percent increases in foreclosure

rates. Importantly, these implications hold regardless of the underlying explanation for the large

observed market-wide differences in the incidence of high cost loans.

       The results of our analysis also have several implications for strategies that are likely to

be effective at reducing racial and ethnic differences in the incidence of high cost loans. First,

across our entire analysis, the inclusion of lender fixed effects substantially reduced the

estimated coefficients, by over 50 percent in every specification. The strong explanatory power

of lender fixed effects suggests that the structure of the mortgage market involving separate

prime and subprime subsidiaries for most major lenders may play a much larger role in creating

mortgage market disparities than differential treatment of whites and minorities applying for

credit through the same credit market channel. In fact, recent Justice Department settlements

with Countrywide and Wells Fargo specifically focused on the impact of cost differentials

between the prime and subprime subsidiaries and the potential steering of minority borrowers

(Savage, 2011, 2012).




                                                23
References

Apgar, William, Alegra Calder, and Gary Fauth. 2004. Credit, Capital and Communities: The
       Implications of the Changing Mortgage Banking Industry for Community-Based
       Organizations. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University.

Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and Douglas D.
      Evanoff. 2014. Predatory lending and the subprime crisis. Journal of Financial
      Economics, 113(1), 29-52.

Avery, Robert B., Patricia E. Beeson, and Mark S. Sniderman. 1996. Accounting for Racial
       Differences in Housing Credit Markets. In Mortgage Lending, Racial Discrimination,
       and Federal Policy (J. Goering and R. Wienk, Eds.). Washington, DC: Urban Institute
       Press.

Avery, Robert B., Glen B. Canner, and Robert E. Cooke. 2005. New Information Reported under
       HMDA and Its Implications in Fair Lending Enforcement. Federal Reserve Bulletin
       (Summer 2005).

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferriera and Stephen L. Ross. In Press. The Vulnerability of Minority
       Homeowners in the Housing Boom and Bust. American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferriera and Stephen L. Ross. 2012. The Vulnerability of Minority
       Homeowners in the Housing Boom and Bust. NBER Working Paper #19020.

Belsky, Eric S., Nicolas P. Retsinas and Mark Duda. 2007. Chapter 9, The Financial Returns to
   Low-Income Homeownership, In: Chasing the American Dream: new perspectives on
   affordable homeownership, ed. William M. Rohe and Harry L. Watson, p. 191-212. Ithaca
   and London: Cornell University Press.

Bhutta, Neil and Glenn B. Canner. 2013. Mortgage Market Conditions and Borrower Outcomes:
       Evidence from the 2012 HMDA Data and Matched HMDA--Credit Record Data.
       Federal Reserve Bulletin, 99.

Black, Harold A., Thomas P. Boehm, and Ramon P. DeGennaro, 2003, “Is There Discrimination
       in Mortgage Pricing? The Case of Overages.” Journal of Banking and Finance, 27(6), pp.
       1139-65.

Blackburn, McKinley and Todd Vermilyea. 2006. Journal of Financial Services Research, 29,
      125-47

Bocian, Debbie G., Keith S. Ernst, and Wei Li. 2006. Unfair Lending: The Effect of Race and
       Ethnicity on the Price of Subprime Mortgages. Durham, NC: Center for Responsible
       Lending.



                                              24
Bond, Philip, David K. Musto, and Bilge Yilmaz. 2009. Predatory mortgage lending. Journal of
       Financial Economics, 94(3), 412-427.

Calem, Paul S., Kevin Gillen, and Susan Wachter. 2004. The Neighborhood Distribution of
       Subprime Mortgage Lending, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29, 393-
       410.

Calem, Paul S., Jonathan E. Hershaff, and Susan M. Wachter. 2004. Neighborhood Patterns of
       Subprime Lending: Evidence from Disparate Cities. Housing Policy Debate, 15, 603-622.

Campbell, John Y. 2006. Household Finance. The Journal of Finance, 61(4), 1553–1604.

Chan, Sewin, Andrew Haughwout, and Joseph Tracy. In Press. How Mortgage Finance Affects
       the Urban Landscape. In the Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics (Eds. G.
       Duranton, W. Strange and V. Henderson).

Courchane, Marsha J. 2007 The Pricing of Home Mortgage Loans to Minority Borrowers: How
      Much of the APR Differential Can We Explain? Journal of Real Estate Research, 29,
      399-439.

Courchane, Marsha and David Nickerson. 1997. Discrimination Resulting from Overage
      Practices. Journal of Financial Services Research, 11, 133-151.

Courchane, Marsha J., Brian J. Surette, and Peter M. Zorn. 2004. Subprime Borrowers:
      Mortgage Transitions and Outcomes, Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics,
      29(4): 365-392.

Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert. 2011. Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Crisis.
     Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 1848-1880.

Edminston, Kelly D. 2009. Characteristics of High-Foreclosure Neighborhoods in the Tenth
      District. Economic Review (2nd Quarter), 51-75.

Fisher, Lynn, Lauren Lambie-Hanson, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. A Profile of the Mortgage
        Crisis in Low and Moderate Income Neighborhoods. Boston Federal Reserve Working
        Paper.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. “Reducing
       Foreclosures: No Easy Answers.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual Volume 24, ed.
       Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, 89–138. Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press.

Germaise, Mark J. In press. Borrower Misreporting and Loan Performance. The Journal of
      Finance.




                                             25
Gerardi, Kristopher S. and Paul Willen. 2009. Subprime Mortgages, Foreclosures, and Urban
       Neighborhoods. BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 9 (3), Symposium Article
       12.

Ghent, Andra C., Rubén Hernández-Murillo, and Michael T. Owyang. 2013. Race, Redlining
       and Subprime Mortgage Pricing. St Louis Federal Reserve Working Paper.

Harney, Kenneth. 2006. Study Finds Bias in Mortgage Process. Washington Post (June 17, 2006,
      page F01).

Haughwout, Andrew , Christopher Mayer, and Joseph Tracy. 2009. Subprime Mortgage Pricing:
     The Impact of Race, Ethnicity and Gender on the Cost of Borrowing. New York Federal
     Reserve Working Paper.

Heckman, James J. 1998. Detecting Discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, 101-
     116.

Herbert, Christopher E., Donald R. Haurin, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and Mark Duda. 2005.
   “Homeownership Gaps Among Low Income and Minority Borrowers and Neighborhoods.”
   Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   http://www.huduser.org/publications/HOMEOWN/HGapsAmongLInMBnN.html.

Holmes, Andrew and Paul Horvitz. 1994. Mortgage Redlining: Race, Risk, and Demand. The
      Journal of Finance, 49(1) 81-99.

Lax, Howard, Michael Manti, Paul Raca, and Peter Zorn. 2000. Subprime Lending: An
      Investigation of Economic Efficiency. Housing Policy Debate, 15, 533-571.

Mayer, Chris and Karen Pence. Subprime Mortgages: What, Where and To Whom? Columbia
       University Working Paper.

Mayer, Chris, Karen Pence and Shane M. Sherlund. 2009. The Rise in Mortgage Defaults.
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi . 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
   from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449–96.

Munnell, Alicia H., Geoffrey M. B. Tootell, Lynn E. Browne, and James McEneaney. 1996.
      Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data. American Economic Review, 86,
      25-53.

Nelson, Ashlyn Aiko. 2005. Better Credit, Better Schools: Credit Quality, Race, and Discrete
       Choice Residential Sorting. Doctoral Dissertation. Stanford University.




                                              26
Quercia, Roberto G., George W. McCarthy, and Susan M. Wacther. 2003. “The Impacts of
   Affordable Lending Efforts on Homeownership rates.” Journal of Housing Economics 12(1),
   p. 29-59.

Reid, Carolina and Elizabeth Laderman. 2009. The Untold Costs of Subprime Lending:
       Examining the Links among Higher‐Priced Lending, Foreclosures and Race in California,
       Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper.

Ross, Stephen. 2005. The Continuing Practice and Impact of Discrimination. University of
       Connecticut Working Paper 2005-19.

Ross, Stephen L., Margery Austin Turner, Erin Godfrey, and Robin R. Smith. "Mortgage
       Lending in Chicago and Los Angeles: A Paired Testing Study of the Pre-application
       Process." Journal of Urban Economics 63 (May 2008): 902-919.

Ross, Stephen L. and John Yinger. 2002. The Color of Credit: Mortgage Lending
      Discrimination, Research Methodology, and Fair-Lending Enforcement. Cambridge,
      MA: MIT Press.

Savage, Charlie. 2012. Wells Fargo Will Settle Mortgage Bias Charges. The New York Times
      (July 12, 2012).

Savage, Charlie. 2011. Countrywide Will Settle a Bias Suit. The New York Times (July 12,
      2012).

Smith, Hyrum, Michael S. Finke, and Sandra J. Huston. 2011. The Impact of Financial
       Sophistication on Adjustable Rate Mortgage Ownership. Journal of Financial Counseling
       and Planning 22: 3-15.

Stein, Kevin and Margaret Libby. 2001. Stolen Wealth: Inequities in California’s Subprime
        Mortgage Market. Durham, NC: Center for Responsible Lending.

Tootell, Geoffrey. 1996. Redlining in Boston: Do Lenders Discriminate Against Neighborhoods.
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 1049-1079.




                                              27
Table 1: Sample Selection of HMDA Variables

                                                                                             DQ High quality                                       Credit Data
                                                                   DQ High quality
                                      HMDA full sample                                       match May-               Sample, weighted           Matched Sample,
                                                                       match
                                                                                                  Aug                                              weighted2
                                                 Stand.                     Stand.                     Stand.                    Stand.                     Stand.
 Variable                             Mean        Dev.           Mean        Dev.           Mean        Dev.          Mean        Dev.          Mean         Dev.
 African American                     0.111      0.339           0.116      0.345           0.114      0.343          0.114      0.343          0.112       0.315
 Hispanic                             0.174      0.410           0.194      0.427           0.193      0.426          0.192      0.426          0.185       0.388
 Asian                                0.075      0.284           0.086      0.303           0.085      0.301          0.086      0.303          0.089       0.284
 White                                0.678      0.505           0.601      0.529           0.605      0.528          0.605      0.528          0.611       0.487
 Loan Amount (in 1000s)                247        243             271        221             274        224            274        227            278         211
 Applicant Income (in 1000s)           107        142             105        128             105        127            106        132            106         115
 Tract Median Income (in
 1000s)                               59.1       25.6            59.6       25.2            59.7       25.2           59.7      25.2            60.4      23.5
 Tract Pct African American           0.126     0.238            0.116     0.225            0.115     0.224           0.115     0.224           0.113     0.204
 Tract Pct Hispanic                   0.169     0.227            0.165     0.221            0.164     0.220           0.165     0.221           0.163     0.202
 Tract Pct Asian                      0.063     0.109            0.065     0.112            0.065     0.111           0.065     0.111           0.066     0.104
 Number of Observations                   9,345,709                  4,002,996                  1,459,468                  273,589                   238,785
Notes: The first column presents the means and standard deviations for all Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) home purchase and refinance mortgages in
our seven market areas between 2004 and 2008 where each market is given equal weight in the means. The second column presents the means for the subsample
where we have a high quality match between HMDA and the housing transaction file based on loan amount, type of loan, census tract and lender name, and the
third column is based on further restricting the sample to mortgages originated between May and August. The fourth column presents means for the stratified
sample that was merged to the credit history data weighted by the inverse of the sampling probabilities again with equal weights for each market, and the fifth
column presents weighted means for the subsample that was successfully merged to an established credit history prior to mortgage origination.




                                                                              28
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
                                                     Purchase Sample              Refinance Sample

HMDA Data                                           Mean        Std. Dev.         Mean        Std. Dev.
Rate Spread                                         0.148         0.110           0.171         0.122
American Indian                                     0.003         0.020           0.003         0.023
Asian                                               0.098         0.110           0.086         0.118
African American                                    0.090         0.078           0.129         0.105
Hispanic                                            0.188         0.128           0.183         0.132
White                                               0.621         0.164           0.599         0.176
Male                                                0.642         0.165           0.639         0.174
Female                                              0.356         0.165           0.358         0.173
Loan Amount (in 1000s)                              289.3          74.4           262.7          69.1
Applicant Income (in 1000s)                         107.9          37.1           100.8          34.8
Coborrower Present                                  0.347         0.169           0.467         0.184
Jumbo Loan                                          0.263         0.155           0.180         0.151
Tract Median Income (in 1000s)                      60059         8272            60263         8746
Tract Share African American                        9.995         5.428           12.484        7.112
Tract Share Hispanic                                15.799        6.786           16.994        7.232
Tract Share Asian                                   6.402         3.606           7.067         4.271
Tract Share Owner Occupant                          68.27          8.17           69.17          8.14
Tract Share in Poverty                              0.004         0.001           0.004         0.001
Tract Rent/Price                                    7.699         2.333           7.936         2.558

Dataquick Data
Loan to Value Ratio                                 0.884         0.086           1.310         5.964
Subordinate Lien                                    0.003         0.018           0.063         0.081
First Lien Adjustable Rate                          0.453         0.174           0.445         0.183
Condo                                               0.218         0.143           0.142         0.128
Mobile                                              0.001         0.011           0.001         0.014
Single Family                                       0.771         0.145           0.835         0.135
Lot Size (sf in 1000s)                              12902         42999           12789         35464
Unit square feet (in 1000s)                          1788         10552            1678          5144
Number of Bathrooms                                 1.975         2.511           1.983         0.396
Number of Bedrooms                                  2.150         2.618           1.990         0.621
Number of Stories                                   1.180         0.564           1.214         0.460
Units in Building                                   1.387         4.703           1.510         7.830

Credit Data
Vantage Score                                      784.9293    0.3571101         779.8701    0.4003712
Mortgage Payment to Income Ratio                  0.2626551    0.0010006        0.2498142    0.0024357
Debt Payment to Income Ratio                      0.3274709    0.0012041        0.3505712    0.0028699
Borrower Age                                       27.77746    0.0801383         35.20718    0.0903688

 Sample Size                                               120,732                      115,763
Notes: The first two columns present means and standard deviations for our sample of post-mortgage credit reports
for each home purchase mortgage borrower for which a credit score was observed prior to mortgage origination.
The last two columns present the same information for the post-mortgage reports of mortgage refinancers.


                                                       29
Table 3. Rate Spread Models

                                               Home Purchase Sample
 Variable Names                   HMDA           Dataquick      Credit Data             Subprime         Lender FE

 Asian                          0.0084***        0.01263***          0.0098***         0.0102***         0.0051**
                                  (0.003)          (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)
 African American               0.1711***        0.1329***           0.0800***         0.0768***         0.0327***
                                  (0.005)          (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.003)
 Hispanic                       0.1169***        0.0792***           0.0613***         0.0620***         0.0249***
                                  (0.003)          (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)

 Observations                    120,732           120,732            120,732           120,732           120,732
 R-squared                        0.224             0.311              0.369             0.418             0.594

                                                  Refinance Sample
 Variable Names                   HMDA            Dataquick      Credit Data            Subprime         Lender FE

 Asian                           0.0069*           0.0055            0.0099***         0.0097***           0.0043
                                  (0.004)          (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.003)           (0.003)
 African American               0.1064***        0.0967***           0.0455***         0.0419***         0.0172***
                                  (0.005)          (0.005)             (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)
 Hispanic                       0.0432***        0.0290***           0.0170***         0.0173***          0.0050*
                                  (0.003)          (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)

 Observations                    115,763           115,763            115,763           115,763           115,763
 R-squared                        0.169             0.234              0.347             0.384             0.555
Notes: The table presents the estimates on racial and ethnic dummy variables for a linear probability model of
whether the borrower received a rate spread loan as defined in the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data.
The first panel presents estimates for a sample of home purchase mortgages, and the second panel presents estimates
for a sample of refinance mortgages. The first column presents estimates for a model that includes the standard
controls available in HMDA, the second column is based on adding controls made available by the merge with the
housing transaction data, and the third column is based on adding controls made available by the merge with credit
reporting data prior to the mortgage origination. The fourth column specification includes the interaction of key
loan terms with whether the borrower had a subprime credit score, and the final column specification includes lender
fixed effects.




                                                        30
Table 4A. Metropolitan Area Estimates: Home Purchase Sample
                                                      Subprime Model
Variable Names     Chicago        Cleveland       Denver       Los Angeles        Maryland       Miami       San Francisco

Asian             -0.016601**     -0.000598     0.041067***         0.008678      -0.002892    0.038082**     0.019873***
                    (0.008)         (0.009)       (0.011)            (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.018)        (0.004)
Black             0.087678***    0.057813***    0.070384***        0.046933***   0.074821***   0.103266***    0.055526***
                    (0.012)         (0.009)       (0.011)            (0.010)        (0.007)      (0.010)        (0.009)
Hispanic          0.055575***     0.010872      0.058828***        0.054424***   0.068167***   0.067046***    0.068724***
                    (0.008)         (0.011)       (0.007)            (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.006)

Observations        16,673         15,449         17,282             17,670        17,867        17,416         18,375
R-squared           0.427          0.407          0.398              0.434         0.418         0.457          0.409

                                                  Lender Fixed Effect Model
Variable Names     Chicago        Cleveland       Denver          Los Angeles     Maryland       Miami       San Francisco

Asian             -0.012413*      -0.001078     0.034481***         0.003173     -0.012308**    0.020421       0.004621
                    (0.007)         (0.007)       (0.009)            (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.015)        (0.004)
Black             0.039574***    0.027588***    0.027102***        0.016852**    0.032805***   0.047284***    0.015321**
                    (0.010)         (0.008)       (0.010)            (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.009)        (0.008)
Hispanic          0.019452***     0.011615      0.023155***        0.019768***   0.020666***   0.033113***    0.022658***
                    (0.007)         (0.010)       (0.006)            (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.005)

Observations        16,673         15,449         17,282             17,670        17,867        17,416         18,375
R-squared           0.586          0.583          0.585              0.627         0.636         0.601          0.637




                                                              31
Table 4B. Metropolitan Area Estimates: Refinance Sample
                                                                      Subprime Model
Variable Names           Chicago             Cleveland            Denver        Los Angeles              Maryland              Miami           San Francisco

Asian                    -0.002592            0.017576           -0.008664           0.010181            0.011034            0.010618            0.007224*
                           (0.012)             (0.021)             (0.013)            (0.009)              (0.012)            (0.022)             (0.004)
Black                   0.048830***          0.024649*           0.021422*          0.035434***         0.043667***         0.054432***         0.028042***
                           (0.012)             (0.013)             (0.011)            (0.009)              (0.009)            (0.010)             (0.008)
Hispanic                0.029117***          -0.005653          0.030217***         0.021825***          0.015993*          0.020390**          0.010716**
                           (0.008)             (0.017)             (0.009)            (0.006)              (0.009)            (0.008)             (0.005)

Observations              16,358              14,030              16,673               17,031              17,171              16,902              17,598
R-squared                  0.420               0.371               0.333                0.360               0.443               0.429               0.283

                                                                  Lender Fixed Effect Model
Variable Names           Chicago             Cleveland            Denver          Los Angeles            Maryland              Miami           San Francisco

Asian                   -0.006155            0.010619           -0.021589*           0.009468            0.003507            -0.000479            0.002306
                          (0.009)             (0.018)              (0.011)            (0.008)             (0.011)              (0.019)             (0.003)
Black                    0.015606            0.010079            -0.000242          0.018679**          0.015747**          0.027021***           0.007116
                          (0.011)             (0.012)              (0.011)            (0.009)             (0.007)              (0.009)             (0.007)
Hispanic                0.012992*            0.009339           0.017030**           0.009017            0.005642            0.001030             0.002403
                          (0.007)             (0.015)              (0.007)            (0.006)             (0.008)              (0.007)             (0.004)

 Observations             16,358               14,030               16,673              17,031               17,171               16,902                17,598
 R-squared                 0.615                0.574                0.554               0.500                0.621                0.576                 0.492
Notes: The table presents the estimates on racial and ethnic dummy variables for a linear probability model of whether the borrower received a rate spread loan.
The first and second panels present estimates for a sample of home purchase mortgages, and the third and fourth panels present estimates for a sample of
refinance mortgages. The first and third panels present estimates for models that include all of the standard control variables plus the interaction of key loan
terms with whether the borrower had a subprime credit score, and the second and fourth panel specifications are based on the same controls plus lender fixed
effects. Each column presents estimates for the subsample of mortgages in a particular metropolitan market.




                                                                               32
Table 5. Rate Spread Racial and Ethnic Differences by Credit Quality Indicators
                                        Baseline Racial and Ethnic Differences
                             Home Purchase Sample                     Refinance Sample
Variable Names             Subprime        Lender FE            Subprime          Lender FE

Black                     0.076816***           0.032651***           0.041889***           0.017197***
                            (0.004)               (0.003)               (0.004)               (0.004)
Hispanic                  0.061963***           0.024886***           0.017307***            0.004977*
                            (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.003)               (0.003)

Observations                120,732               120,732               115,763               115,763
R-squared                    0.418                 0.594                 0.384                 0.555

                                            Differences by Credit Quality
                             Home Purchase Sample                    Refinance Sample
Variable Names             Subprime        Lender FE           Subprime          Lender FE

Black                     0.076060***           0.025619***           0.027124***            0.008291*
                              (0.006)              (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.005)
Hispanic                  0.021514***             0.003590            0.014641***            0.008470**
                              (0.004)              (0.003)               (0.004)               (0.003)
Black*Subprime            0.025590***           0.014424**            0.018174**             0.011244*
                              (0.008)              (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)
Hispanic*Subprime         -0.028763***           -0.008953              0.003810             -0.000408
                              (0.007)              (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)
Black*High DTI              0.004354              0.005799             -0.001503             -0.008372
                              (0.007)              (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)
Hispanic*High DTI           -0.003893             0.000611             -0.000139            -0.011027**
                              (0.006)              (0.005)               (0.006)               (0.005)
Black*High LTV              -0.010247             0.003475            0.019656***           0.018107***
                              (0.007)              (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)
Hispanic*High LTV         0.105151***           0.050799***             0.004803              0.001866
                              (0.006)              (0.005)               (0.005)               (0.005)

 Observations                120,732               120,732                115,763               115,763
 R-squared                     0.423                 0.595                  0.384                0.555
Notes: The table presents the estimates on racial and ethnic dummy variables for a linear probability model of
whether the borrower received a rate spread loan. The first panel repeats the baseline estimates from Table 3 for the
model that includes the standard control variables plus the interaction of key loan terms with whether the borrower
had a subprime credit score (columns one and three) and for the model that also includes lender fixed effects
(columns two and four). The second panel presents the estimates after interacting the race and ethnicity with
dummy variables for whether the borrower has a subprime vantage credit score below 701, a debt expense to income
ratio above 0.45 and a loan to value ratio above 0.95.




                                                         33
Table 6. Rate Spread Racial and Ethnic Differences by Age
                              Home Purchase Sample                            Refinance Sample
Variable Names              Subprime        Lender FE                    Subprime         Lender FE

Black                      0.069855***            0.034293***           0.043922***            0.028605**
                                (0.008)              (0.007)                (0.015)               (0.012)
Hispanic                   0.060058***            0.026722***           0.037297***            0.017732**
                                (0.007)              (0.005)                (0.009)               (0.008)
Age 36-41                  0.025561***            0.017057***           0.024362***            0.017438***
                                (0.003)              (0.002)                (0.006)               (0.005)
Age 42-48                  0.038654***            0.021316***           0.029717***            0.017570***
                                (0.003)              (0.003)                (0.005)               (0.005)
Age 49-55                  0.041781***            0.025544***           0.032271***            0.015073***
                                (0.003)              (0.003)                (0.005)               (0.004)
Age 56+                    0.047956***            0.027959***           0.039665***            0.021322***
                                (0.003)              (0.003)                (0.005)               (0.004)
Age 36-41*Black               -0.010492            -0.011064              0.004582              -0.007823
                                (0.011)              (0.009)                (0.018)               (0.015)
Age 42-48*Black            -0.033818***           -0.015694*              -0.025124            -0.030570**
                                (0.011)              (0.009)                (0.016)               (0.013)
Age 49-55*Black               -0.004663           -0.017080*              0.004696              -0.004491
                                (0.012)              (0.010)                (0.016)               (0.014)
Age 56+*Black                 -0.015515            -0.011349              -0.005326             -0.018321
                                (0.012)              (0.010)                (0.016)               (0.013)
Age 36-41*Hispanic          -0.022467**           -0.014061*             -0.027264**           -0.021000**
                                (0.009)              (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.010)
Age 42-48*Hispanic         -0.029809***            -0.010636             -0.021917**            -0.010864
                                (0.010)              (0.008)                (0.011)               (0.009)
Age 49-55*Hispanic          -0.022291**            -0.016259            -0.029702***           -0.023095**
                                (0.011)              (0.010)                (0.011)               (0.010)
Age 56+*Hispanic             -0.021837*            -0.014994            -0.028763***            -0.011105
                                (0.012)              (0.010)                (0.011)               (0.010)

 Observations                 120,732                120,732              115,763                115,763
 R-squared                     0.419                  0.594                0.384                  0.555
Notes: The table presents the estimates on racial and ethnic dummy variables for a linear probability model of
whether the borrower received a rate spread loan. All model specification interact the race and ethnicity variables
with dummy variables for age categories where the omitted category is for borrowers younger than age 36. The first
and third columns present estimates for the model that includes the standard control variables plus the interaction of
key loan terms with whether the borrower had a subprime credit score, and the second and fourth columns present
estimates for the model that also includes lender fixed effects.




                                                         34
Table 7. Rate Spread Racial and Ethnic Differences by Neighborhood Poverty and County Average Homebuyer Educational Level
                                                           Subprime Model                                               Lender FE Model
Variable Names                                  Baseline               Location Controls                       Baseline              Location Controls

African-American                               0.0754***                        0.0141                        0.0345***                          -0.012
                                                 (0.004)                        (0.016)                         (0.004)                         (0.013)
Hispanic                                       0.0595***                        0.0257                        0.0289***                          0.006
                                                 (0.005)                        (0.016)                         (0.004)                         (0.014)
African American*Share < 2 Years                                              0.1008***                                                       0.0849***
                                                                                (0.034)                                                         (0.028)
Hispanic*Share < 2 Years                                                        0.0425                                                          0.0269
                                                                                (0.028)                                                         (0.024)
African American*Pct Poverty                                                  0.0019***                                                       0.0010***
                                                                                (0.000)                                                         (0.000)
Hispanic*Pct Poverty                                                          0.0019***                                                       0.0015***
                                                                                (0.000)                                                         (0.000)

 Observations                                   120,422                          120,422                         120,422                         120,422
 R-squared                                        0.418                           0.419                           0.594                           0.594
Notes: The table presents the estimates on racial and ethnic dummy variables for a linear probability model of whether the borrower received a rate spread loan
using the home purchase sample. The first and third columns present estimates for the models that include the standard control variables plus the interaction of
key loan terms with whether the borrower had a subprime credit score and for the model that also includes lender fixed effects, respectively, with the addition of
a control for share borrower by county and race with less than two years of education (the standard controls already include percent poverty). The second and
third columns present estimates for models that also include the interaction of race and ethnicity with the census tract percent poverty and the county average
education level among homebuyers.




                                                                                35
