                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN HEALTH IN LONG-RUN PERSPECTIVE:
                            A BRIEF INTRODUCTION

                                           Leah Boustan
                                          Robert A. Margo

                                        Working Paper 20765
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20765


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




A version of this paper will appear as a chapter in J. Komlos, ed. Oxford Handbook of Economics
and Human Biology (New York: Oxford University Press, forthcoming). Helpful discussions with
Dora Costa and Michael Haines are gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Leah Boustan and Robert A. Margo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Racial Differences in Health in Long-Run Perspective: A Brief Introduction
Leah Boustan and Robert A. Margo
NBER Working Paper No. 20765
December 2014
JEL No. I14,J15,N11,N12

                                             ABSTRACT

The United States has a long and ongoing history of racial inequality. This paper surveys the literature
on one aspect of that history: long-run trends in racial differences in health. We focus on standard
measures such as infant mortality and life expectancy but also consider the available data on specific
diseases and chronic conditions. Our basic conclusion is that large improvements have occurred in
the average health of African Americans over the twentieth century, both in absolute terms and relative
to Whites. These health advancements occurred steadily throughout the twentieth century, with the
peak period of improvement between 1920 and 1945 (for infant mortality) and 1940 and 1960 (for
overall life expectancy). We attribute the improvements to successful efforts to fight specific diseases,
improvements in public health, and narrowing racial gaps in education and income. Although racial
inequality in health outcomes has fallen in the long term, significant disparities remain today.


Leah Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu

Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
margora@bu.edu
1.0 Introduction

       The United States has a long and ongoing history of racial inequality. Labor economists

and economic historians have documented the secular evolution of racial differences in income,

wealth, and education over the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries.1 Our chapter follows in

this tradition by describing long-term trends in racial differences in health.

       Like other economists, we view health as a component of human capital that can

contribute directly to a person’s well-being. Better health is also an input into the production of

income. A healthy person can provide more labor and earn more income, if she desires; and

health and other forms of human capital, such as schooling, may complement each other.2 Health

is a function of inherited characteristics (genetics) and environmental conditions experienced

throughout the life cycle. These environmental factors include income and wealth, which can be

used to purchase commodities that create better health – better diet, shelter, clothing, access to

medical care – and local public goods, such as clean water.

       We begin our chapter with a short review of contemporary racial differences in health,

setting the stage for our discussion of long-term health trends. We focus on standard measures of

health, namely life expectancy and infant mortality, but also consider the available data on

specific diseases and chronic conditions.

       Large improvements have occurred in the average health of African Americans over the

twentieth century, both in absolute terms and relative to Whites. These health advancements

occurred steadily throughout the twentieth century, with the peak period of improvement

between 1920 and 1945 (for infant mortality) and 1940 and 1960 (for overall life expectancy).

1
  This extensive literature includes Higgs (1982), Smith (1984), Margo (1984, 1990), Smith and
Welch (1989), Donohue and Heckman (1991), and Collins and Margo (2006, 2012).
2
  On these points, see Deaton (2003), Currie (2009) and Bleakley, Costa, and Lleras-Muney
(2014).
                                                  2
The best current estimates indicate that life expectancy at birth for African Americans at the turn

of the twentieth century was about 42 years, nine years shorter than life expectancy at birth for

Whites. The most recent data show Black life expectancy at birth to be about 75 years in 2011,

approximately four years shorter than Whites. Since 1900, the absolute racial gap in years of life

has been cut in half, and, expressed as a percentage of Black life expectancy, the racial gap has

declined even further (from around 20 percent to around five percent). Other indicators of health

show analogous improvements.

       However, we emphasize that examining trends in health over the long run requires

considerable care. We argue that, in previous research, limited data availability led to large

overstatements in the degree of improvement in Black (but not White) life expectancy over the

twentieth century, especially from 1900 to 1940. In particular, the first estimates of life

expectancy were based on states with early death registries, a sample that is biased toward urban

areas, thereby leading Black life expectancy to be severely understated circa 1900. More

nationally representative evidence on child mortality from the census suggests that Black life

expectancy at birth was substantially higher in 1900 than previously thought, implying less

improvement over the twentieth century.

       After surveying historical trends in life expectancy and infant mortality, we discuss

potential causes of improvements in Black health conditions over time. Large advances in Black

health in the first decades of the twentieth century can be attributed, in part, to investments in

public health, including clean water supplies and sewerage, in urban areas. Yet, only 25 percent

of the Black population lived in cities at the time, suggesting that efforts to eradicate diseases

endemic in the South may have been quantitatively more important. Given that cities continued




                                                3
to have higher death rates at the time, black migration from the rural South to industrial cities

counterbalanced some of the improvements in life expectancy before 1940.

       The most rapid improvements in Black life expectancy occurred between 1940 and 1960,

corresponding to a period of rising real incomes and racial convergence in both income and

educational attainment. Existing estimates suggest that higher income and education levels can

explain much of the advancements in Black health. Black infant mortality also notably declined

from 1965 to 1980, which can be attributed in large part to the desegregation of southern

hospitals during the Civil Rights era. Yet, despite these improvements, stubborn racial

differences in health remain today even after controlling for many relevant factors – such as

income and access to medical care.



2.0 Racial Disparities in Health and Their Long-Term Evolution

2.1 Contemporary Racial Disparities in Health

       Racial disparities in health in the modern United States have been widely noted by

specialists in public health, health economics, and medicine.3 Table 1 presents racial differences

in life expectancy at various ages in 2011, using the most recent data available. In 2011, life

expectancy at birth for African Americans was 75.3 years, compared with 79 years for Whites, a

gap of 3.7 years.

       Conditional on surviving the first year of life, the racial gap in life expectation declines –

for example, at age one, the racial gap in life expectation fell to 3.2 years. By middle age, the gap

in years of life expectation falls to 2.6 and, by age 70, the gap is less than one year. Blacks who

survive to age 80 or older have very similar or even lower mortality than Whites, perhaps due to

3
  For brief introduction to the medical literature, see Smedley, Stith and Nelson (2009); Peterson,
et al. (1997); Bach, et al. (1999) and Barnato, et al. (2005).
                                                 4
selective attrition. That is, persons who survive to old age likely have a genetic predisposition to

longer life or an unusual healthy lifestyle; because of the higher mortality rates at younger ages,

these forces of selective attrition may be greater in the Black population, causing those who

survive to age 80 to be hardy relative to Whites in this age bracket.

       The age patterns observed in Table 1 suggest that racial disparities in health begin very

early in life – essentially, in the womb. Early racial differences in health are also apparent in

infant mortality rates. In 2011, the black infant mortality rate was twice as high as the White

infant mortality rate (1,058 versus 516 deaths per 100,000 live births). Early disparities are a key

factor in the emergence of chronic conditions later in life which, in turn, produce higher levels of

adult mortality for the middle-aged Blacks and those nearing retirement.4

       The lower levels of Black life expectancy suggest that blacks face higher mortality rates

than whites today at given ages. Figure 1 presents the share of deaths attributable to various

causes by race in 2011. Overall, the distribution of causes of death today is remarkably similar

by race, suggesting that excess Black mortality is not concentrated in a particular set of diseases.

A higher proportion of Blacks succumb to heart disease but a somewhat smaller fraction die

from cancer, the two largest killers. Among less common conditions, Blacks are more likely to

die from complications from diabetes and hypertension, but are less likely to commit suicide, die

in accidents, or succumb to Alzheimer’s disease.

       In an accounting sense, higher rates of Black mortality can be due either to a higher

prevalence of particular conditions or to a lower probability of survival, conditional on



4
  The relationship between health conditions in utero and later life disease was first proposed by
David Barker and his co-authors (Barker, et al., 1989a and 1989b). Almond and Currie (2011)
survey the literature in economics testing the “Barker hypothesis.” Preston, Hill and Drevenstedt
(1998) show that some childhood conditions, including having literate parents and being co-
resident with both parents, are associated with longevity for African Americans.
                                                 5
contracting a particular disease. It is difficult to get accurate data on racial disparities in the

prevalence of disease because individuals typically need to be in contact with the medical

establishment in order to receive a diagnosis. If access to medical care varies by race, self-

reported health conditions may be biased. Survival rates conditional on having a particular

disease are easier to observe and do seem to vary by race. Cancer is an important example. Table

2 shows racial differences in surviving cancer conditional on having received a cancer diagnosis.

For the most recent period for which data are available (2004-10), Black cancer patients exhibit

lower survival rates than White patients (60 percent versus 67 percent). Blacks may be less likely

to survive a cancer diagnosis either because they receive their diagnosis at a later stage in the

disease or because they are less likely to have access to high quality treatment even at a given

stage.



2.2 Historical Data on Health by Race: Issues of Data Comparability

         The remainder of this section places current racial disparities into long-run perspective by

presenting historical trends on health for Blacks and Whites. Before doing so, this subsection

describes the available historical data on health outcomes for the United States, along with

concerns about data comparability over time. Our discussion begins with historical mortality data

and then proceeds to health outcomes among the living.

         In the contemporary United States, “vital events” – births and deaths – are recorded by

public officials at the time of their occurrence. The Census Bureau also tracks the age structure

of the population by conducting annual surveys, supplemented by full population counts in the

decennial census years. With this information in hand, it is possible to measure changes in

population on an annual basis; and, in particular, to produce reliable annual estimates of age-



                                                  6
specific death rates and complete life tables both for the overall population and for various sub-

groups, such as by race.

       Today, births and deaths are recorded in official birth and death registries. The first state

to implement such a system was Massachusetts in the 1850s. Other states followed but sufficient

information to construct national life tables was only available by 1900 (Glover, 1921). By 1933,

all states met government standards to be incorporated into the official Birth Registration Area

(BRA) and Death Registration Area (DRA). Yet under-reporting was still a problem in some

states. By 1950, the records are believed complete enough to be regarded as reliable by most

demographers. With regard to age structure, the Census Bureau began to routinely collect the

Current Population Survey, a moderate sample that tracks population on a monthly basis shortly

after World War II; and in 2001, the American Community Survey, a much large random sample

that is conducted on an annual basis.

       For the years before the official birth and death registries began, estimates of life

expectancy can be inferred from the age structure of the population in decennial censuses. In

particular, demographers combine information on changes in the age structure between

successive censuses with data on net migration to estimate ten-year survival rates for various age

groups.5 These survival rates are then matched to standard model life tables in order to compute

life expectancy at birth or other ages.6 The earliest census for which such calculations are




5
  Survival rates are usually not calculated for persons under age 5 or over age 40 in the base year
because of concerns over under-enumeration (under age 5), or age mis-reporting (over age 50).
Because the survival estimates do not cover the full range of ages, the data alone cannot be used
to provide a full life table and must instead be matched to model life tables to generate life
expectation estimates.
6
  A model life table is the average of a set of country-specific life tables which are known to be
based on accurate data. Model life tables are grouped into “systems” thought to represent similar
overall mortality conditions. The most commonly used Princeton tables are grouped into four
                                                7
feasible for either race is 1850. Using these methods, trends in White life expectation can be

measured (fairly) reliably from the middle of the nineteenth century to the present. Yet the

statistical situation for Blacks is far less sanguine. While there are estimates of Black life tables

prior to 1900, their quality is questionable due to measurement problems in the underlying

census data on age.

       Until recently, historical estimates of Black life expectancy were based on two sources of

evidence that are subject to severe biases: death records from the selected states incorporated into

the DRA and census survival rate methods. We believe that both approaches produce estimates

of Black life expectation circa 1900 that are too low, thereby overstating the degree of

improvement in Black health that took place in the first half of the twentieth century.

       Using data from the DRA states, Glover (1921) estimated that Black life expectation at

birth was 33 years in 1900-02. Based on this estimate, it would appear that Black life expectation

at birth increased by 42 years since 1900, more than doubling from 1900 to the present. Even at

the time, the Census Bureau recognized that the infant mortality experience of Blacks in the

DRA states was not likely to be representative of the national Black population (U.S. Bureau of

the Census, 1918). Most DRA states in 1900 were in the North, and Blacks resident in these

states were predominantly urban. Circa 1900, there was a substantial urban penalty in infant

mortality (Preston and Haines, 1991; Condran and Cummins, 1980; Haines, 2001). The Census

Bureau believed that infant mortality in the rural South, where the vast majority of African

Americans lived in 1900, was considerably lower than for Blacks in the DRA states.7 Correcting




such systems – North, South, East, and West – representing different regions of the world, and
then further categorized by mortality level.
7
  Less than five percent of the Black population lived in the DRA states in 1900; see Preston and
Haines (1991, p. 50). In contrast, nearly 30 percent of the White population lived in a DRA state
                                                 8
for this bias could easily produce a higher estimate of Black life expectation at birth in the early

twentieth century.

       To evaluate this concern, demographers applied the census survivorship technique

discussed above to the Black age structure data in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century

censuses (Demeny and Gingrich 1967; Meeker 1976). These calculations again yielded estimates

of Black life expectation at birth in the vicinity of 33 years, similar to Glover’s. Because these

calculations were based on the national Black age structure, rather than data from the DRA states

alone, they seemed to validate Glover’s original figure. However, census survivorship estimates

are generated from Census counts of individuals between the ages of five and 40 (see footnote

6). Yet Black mortality rates at these prime ages were relatively high in the late nineteenth

century, while infant and child mortality was correspondingly low. Thus, in fitting the high

prime-age mortality to model life tables, Blacks were assumed to have a low level of life

expectation at birth.

       In considering the evidence, we believe that estimates of Black life expectancy based on

either DRA states or on census survival methods are understated circa 1900. Instead, we are

convinced by Preston and Haines (1991), who build new estimates of Black life expectancy from

census data on child mortality by race in 1900 and 1910. In these years, the census asked adult

women to report both their number of children ever born and their number of surviving children

(as of the census date). Ages of children still present in the household are also known. Preston

and Haines use this data to produce estimates of “q(A),” or the cumulative probability of death




in this year and the White urbanization rate did not differ much between covered and non-
covered states.
                                                 9
prior to exact age A. Preston and Haines then fit these estimates to model life tables to recover

life expectancy.8

        After extensive data analysis Preston and Haines consider their most reliable estimates to

be q(3), q(5), and q(10). For Whites, these estimates differ relatively little from Glover’s but, for

Blacks, the differences are substantial. Consider q(5), the cumulative probability of death before

exact age 5. Glover’s estimate for Blacks is 0.338 – that is, approximately 34 percent of Black

children born at the turn of the twentieth century died before reaching their fifth birthday.

Preston and Haines’ preferred estimate is 0.255, considerably lower. Preston and Haines’ best

estimate of Black life expectation at birth is 41.8 years circa 1900, almost nine years higher than

earlier estimate. The major source of discrepancy between Preston and Haines’ estimate and the

estimate based solely on census survival methods is the fact that Blacks had lower child

mortality circa 1900 than one would expect given the relatively high rates of adult mortality in

that year.9

        Beyond mortality data, it is also useful to have information on morbidity, both chronic

and acute, among the living. Although there are numerous modern sources of data on health

outcomes among the living, their historical counterparts are few. Questions on certain types of

disabilities – for example, blindness – were asked of the population from 1850-80 (in 1850-60,

for slaves as well as free persons). The 1880 census also included questions on whether the



8
  In particular, Preston and Haines calculate the proportion of children surviving to the census
date by age for women in a given age range, or in a given range of marital duration.
Alternatively, they propose a method that uses as a starting point a model life table to get an
initial set of q(A)’s, and then iterates backwards from the age structure of surviving children to
produce a final set of q(A)’s that match the total number of children ever born and surviving
along with their ages.
9
  To compare their estimate with Glover’s, Preston and Haines use their methods to estimate
Black child mortality for the DRA states in 1900. Their estimates in these states closely resemble
Glover’s, further confirming that the DRA states were not representative of the national average.
                                                 10
individual was sick on the day of enumeration “so as to be unable to attend to ordinary business

or duties,” or whether the individual was “maimed, crippled, bedridden, or otherwise

disabled. Reported rates of sickness and disability in 1880 were low (around two percent of the

population), suggesting that the true prevalence of these conditions was underreported. If taken

at face value, the Census measure suggests little difference in sickness and disability by race; 1.7

percent of prime-age Blacks (16-64 years old) report being sick or disabled in 1880, compared to

1.8 percent of Whites. In the 2000 Census, prime-age Blacks are substantially more likely than

prime-age Whites to report having “a lasting physical or mental health condition that causes

difficulty working” (17 percent versus 11 percent).

       The historical census data on disability have the merit of covering the national

population. Other historical data with race-specific information on health, however, are less

representative (if still informative). An important example, which we refer later in the chapter,

involves archival data on health outcomes over the life-cycle for persons who served in the

Union Army during the American Civil War. These data pertain to Whites who served in the

regular Union Army, survived the war, and who later applied for an army pension; as well as to a

similar selection of Black soldiers who served in the United States Colored Troops.



2.3 Long-Run Trends in Life Expectation at Birth by Race

       Keeping the issues of data comparability in mind, Figure 2 graphs several time series of

life expectation at birth by race compiled from available sources. The “White – PH” and “Black

– PH” series reproduce estimates from Preston and Haines (1991) and Haines (2001) for 1900

and 1910. The White PH series then picks up with vital statistics data from 1940 to the present,

whereas the Black PH series picks up continuously from 1970 to the present; 1970 is the first



                                                11
year in which vital statistics were reported separately for Blacks, as opposed to all Non-Whites.10

Given our reading of the evidence, we believe that these series represent the best known

information about trends in life expectancy by race over time.

       For comparison, we also illustrate two series based on vital statistics records from the

(shifting set of) states incorporated into the Death Registration Area. The “White – DRA” series

runs from 1900 to 1939, and thereafter is identical with the national “White – PH” series. The

“Non-White” series pertains to selected DRA states before 1940, and thereafter reports the

standard national series for Non-Whites. These series has been used widely by economic

historians and demographers in the past.

       The dominant feature of Figure 2 for both races is the strong upward trend in life

expectation at birth. There has been a very substantial gain in life expectation at birth from 1900

to the present for Whites, whether using the DRA or the Preston-Haines 1900 estimate for the

base year. Between 1900 and 1950, life expectation at birth for Whites increased by 19.5 years,

before increasing by another 10 years between 1950 and 2011. Approximately two thirds of the

rise in White life expectancy since 1900 occurred during the first half of the twentieth century.

       Blacks also experienced notable improvements in life expectation but the extent of this

improvement depends on the data series in question. According to the Preston-Haines series,

Black life expectancy increased by 18 years from 1900 to 1950, and then again by around 16

years from 1950 to 2011, suggesting that the increase in Black life expectation occurred in equal

measure in the first half and second half of the twentieth century.11 The DRA series, which likely



10
   98 percent of the non-white population was African-American in 1900. This share had fallen
to 90 percent by 1970.
11
   We do not have a separate estimate for Black life expectancy in 1950. If we assume that the
ratio of Black to Non-White life expectation is constant between 1950 and 1970, we can compute
that Black life expectation was 59.7 years in 1950 (ratio of Black to Non-White = 0.98).
                                                12
understates Black life expectancy in 1900 and 1910, instead suggests much larger improvements

for Blacks between 1900 and 1950 (28 years). Choice of data series also influences our

understanding of racial convergence in life expectancy. According to the DRA series, the

absolute gap in life expectation declined from 15 years in 1900 to four years in 2011, whereas

the Preston-Haines series shows a much more muted decline (from nine years to four years).

       The pace of improvement in life expectancy varied substantially across time periods for

both races. The first panel of Table 3 calculates the average annual additions to life expectancy

by race over five key periods of the twentieth century. 12 For Whites, the largest improvements in

life expectancy occurred between 1900 and 1940, a period associated with improvements in

sanitation and public health in urban areas. For Blacks, instead, the largest improvement in life

expectancy occurred between 1940 and 1960, an era of rapid racial convergence in both earnings

and education. We discuss these and other potential causes for improvements in life expectancy

in the next section. Both races also experienced large increases in life expectancy between 1970

and 1980, a decade characterized by rapid advancement in the treatments for both cancer and

heart disease (Mukherjee, 2010; Jones, 2012).13 Figure 2 also suggests that the annual

fluctuations in mortality were much larger before 1940 for both races. While some of these

fluctuations reflect biases due to changing coverage of the DRA states and other sources of

incomplete data, others are real events. The most obvious example is the 1918 flu epidemic

which greatly lowered life expectation at birth in the immediate short run.



2.4 Long-Run Trends in Infant Mortality by Race

12
   Periods were selected to correspond to particular eras in African American economic history,
but also to reflect noticeable differences in the pace of improvement in life expectancy over time.
13
   Modern chemotherapy, which involves a “cocktail” of drugs, was discovered in 1965. The first
heart bypass surgery using modern methods was performed in 1968.
                                                13
       Infant mortality is another important indicator of health status. Figure 3 presents long-run

trends in infant mortality by race from 1920 to 2011. In absolute terms, there have been

enormous declines in infant mortality for both races since 1920. White infant mortality rates fell

from 82 per 1,000 live births in 1920 to 5 per 1,000 live births in 2011. Over the same period,

Black infant mortality rates fell from 135 per 1,000 live births to 12 per 1,000 live births. As

with overall life expectancy, there were steeper improvements in infant mortality before 1950

than afterwards.

       Interpreting the evolution of Black-White differences in infant mortality over time is

sensitive to choice of measure. In absolute terms, the racial gap in infant mortality declined from

53 deaths per 1,000 live births in 1920 to 7 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2011. Yet, in relative

terms, the racial gap in infant mortality rates has worsened over time. In 1920, the Black infant

mortality rate was 64 percent higher than the White rate, while today the Black infant mortality

rate is now 140 percent higher than the White rate. The discrepancy between these two

approaches is due to the dramatic (and widely shared) reduction in infant mortality rates over

time; Black infant mortality rates are now twice as high as White rates, but this racial gap is now

judged relative to a low overall base rate of infant mortality.

       The second panel of Table 3 presents average annual reductions in infant deaths per

1,000 live births by race over certain periods. For both races, the largest declines in infant

mortality occurred between 1925 and 1945. For Whites, the pace of improvement in infant

mortality then declines monotonically over the century. In contrast, there is a noticeable uptick in

improvements in Black infant mortality rates from 1965 to 1980, a period directly after the

passage of Civil Rights legislation that resulted in, among other things, the desegregation of

southern hospitals. These patterns are consistent with Collins and Thomasson (2004) who



                                                 14
analyze state-level infant mortality rates by race between 1920 and 1970. Even after controlling

for race-specific income and education levels, they find that infant mortality declined most

sharply between 1920 and 1950 and that the pace of improvement leveled off thereafter.

       Another common measure of health early in life is birth weight. Costa (2004b) examines

nearly 2,000 births that took place to predominately working-class mothers at the Johns Hopkins

hospital in Baltimore, MD in the first three decades of the twentieth century. In comparing this

sample to modern data from the National Maternal and Infant Health Survey (from 1988), she

finds that the birth weights of both Black and White babies have remained remarkably constant

over the century.14 However, in each period, Black infants were around 10 percent lighter than

White infants. Lower Black birth weights can be explained, in part, by higher Black rates of

prematurity. Premature infants tend to be lighter than infants who are born at full term, and Black

babies were more than twice as likely as White babies to be born pre-term (13 versus 7 percent in

the Johns Hopkins sample). Costa argues that a large portion of the racial gap in prematurity in

the early twentieth century can be explained by high rates of untreated syphilis in the Black

population. The high rates of Black prematurity today are harder to explain.



2.5 Causes of Death and Chronic Conditions

       Understanding the roots of improvement in life expectancy is aided by examining long-

run trends in causes of death and the prevalence of chronic conditions. A useful source of

historical information on these patterns is the ongoing study of the health status of Union Army

veterans at the Center for Population Economics at the University of Chicago. Extensive health



14
  The infants born at Johns Hopkins may have been lighter than the national average circa 1910,
given the health penalty likely present in a big city like Baltimore and the selection of more
complicated births into hospitals at the time.
                                                15
information on Civil War veterans was collected in the late nineteenth and early twentieth

centuries as part of their process of applying for a federal pension. This information has been

retrieved by the CPE and augmented by linking individuals to census data. Samples have been

produced for both White (the Union Army, or UA sample) and Black soldiers (the United States

Colored Troops or USCT sample).

       Data on chronic conditions is based on a surgeon’s examination conducted as part of the

pension application process. Cause of death is typically gleaned from death certificates sent to

the pension office by deceased relatives (e.g., widows) seeking to prove eligibility for further

benefits. Figure 4 shows racial differences in causes of death for men ages 60-74 in the UA and

USCT samples circa 1910. As in the most recent data (Figure 1), the causes of death by race

were relatively similar in the early twentieth century. The two largest categories – diseases of the

heart and other causes – account for 56 percent of deaths for both groups, although Whites are

five percentage points more likely to die from heart disease and Blacks are five percentage points

more likely to be in the ‘other’ category. Among the less common conditions, Blacks were more

likely than Whites to die of infectious and respiratory diseases or of genitourinary disease

(including syphilis), and were less likely to die of cerebrovascular disease (strokes) or cancer (on

this point, see also Costa, 2005).

       The UA and USCT samples also provide evidence on the prevalence of chronic

conditions in the early twentieth century. Figure 5 compares the relative prevalence of each

condition by race in 1910 and in the 1990s. In 1910, doctors examining Union Army veterans are

more likely to report that Black patients have five of the eight chronic conditions: joint and back

pains (“musculoskeletal problems” associated with manual labor); irregular pulse and

arteriosclerosis (signs of heart disease) and decreased breath sounds (sign of respiratory



                                                16
problems). Whites were more likely to have “adventitious sounds” – “added” sounds such as

crackles and wheezes when breathing. Blacks and Whites had similar rates of heart murmurs and

valvular heart disease.

       By the 1990s, the prevalence of chronic conditions had declined for both Blacks and

Whites but the Black-White prevalence ratios were again at or above one for all conditions,

indicating higher rates of disease in the Black population.15 Furthermore, for five conditions, the

racial gap in prevalence rose over time. The most notable case is arteriosclerosis, for which the

Black-White ratio increased from 1.7 in 1910 to 2.6 in the 1990s. The one exception to this

pattern is back problems, the prevalence of which declined over time for both groups but at a

slower rate in the White population, leading to slightly higher rates of back problems among

Whites by the 1990s.

       Costa (2004a) compares soldiers in the Union Army by race on a series of anthropometric

measures, including height and Body Mass Index (BMI). In general, height is positively

correlated with health and BMI is negatively associated with health, at least at higher levels. For

men in their late twenties, Black soldiers were 1.5 centimeters shorter than White soldiers; were

slightly heavier than White soldiers; but also exhibited less central body fat. On net, this

anthropometric evidence does not provide particularly strong evidence of ill health for Blacks in

the mid-nineteenth century. Military data from 1988 attests to general growth in BMI over the

twentieth century; a similar racial gap in BMI is also apparent in the modern data.



3.0 Historical explanations for improvements in Black life expectancy

15
   Costa (2000) studies the potential causes of the decline in chronic conditions for White men
over the twentieth century. She documents that around 30 percent of the decline can be attributed
to a shift from manual to white collar occupations. Another 20 percent is due to a reduction in
exposure to infectious disease.
                                                17
       The previous section reviewed facts about racial disparities in health over the twentieth

century. Black health is worse than White health in the contemporary data, as reflected in higher

levels of mortality at all ages as well as higher rates of chronic conditios and higher mortality

conditional on a given diagnosis. For the most part, causes of death are similar by race. As

important as these disparities are today, it is critical to keep in mind that racial gaps in health

were much worse a century ago. Not only has the health of African Americans improved

substantially and steadily over time, the pace of change has been quicker than among Whites,

and thus the racial gaps have narrowed.

       In this section, we consider a number of potential causes for the improvements in Black

life expectancy over the twentieth century, including investments in public health and sanitation

in cities; improvements in disease environment in the South; migration from the South to the

North; improvements in Black income and education; and the desegregation of hospitals during

the Civil Rights Era. We organize these explanations into three time periods: 1900-1940; 1940-

60 and 1965-1985. After 1985, the pace of improvements in Black life expectancy slowed,

although notable improvements in Black life expectation did occur in the 2000s.

       From 1900 to 1940, the best estimates suggest that Black life expectancy increased from

42 to 55 years (Figure 2). White life expectancy also increased over this period, but at a faster

rate, leading to an expansion in the racial mortality gap. This pattern is consistent with a lack of

racial convergence in earnings before 1940 (see, for example, Smith, 1984). Yet, the absolute

increase in Black life expectation over this period is notable and in need of explanation. This

absolute increase in life expectancy can be attributed to an improvement in the disease

environment in both urban areas (due to investments in clean water and sewerage infrastructure)

and in the rural South (due to treatment and eradication programs for a range of diseases). Given



                                                18
that around 75 percent of the Black population lived in the rural South in 1900, we believe that

efforts to combat disease in the rural South were the more significant of these two trends.

       In 1900, there was a substantial urban mortality penalty, due in large part to higher rates

of infectious and water-borne disease in cities (Condran and Crimmins, 1980; Haines, 2001).16

Municipal investments in clean water and sewerage infrastructure resulted in a large decline in

urban mortality rates in the early twentieth century (Cutler and Miller, 2005; Alsan and Goldin,

2014). Troesken (2004) convincingly demonstrates that Black residents benefitted from these

public health investments, both because the networked structure of sewer pipes made it difficult

to exclude Black neighborhoods and because Black urban dwellers lived in (relatively)

unsegregated neighborhoods circa 1910.

       Yet, over this period, the majority of the Black population lived in the rural South and

thus did not benefit from investments in urban infrastructure. Therefore, we suspect that

investments in disease eradication in the South were likely more important in explaining overall

increases in Black life expectancy. Given its climate and high rates of poverty, the South was

beset by a series of tropical diseases in the early twentieth century, including yellow fever,

malaria, pellagra, and hookworm.17 Aided by private philanthropy, southern areas reduced

disease rates from 1900 to 1940. Bleakley (2007) studies the efforts of the Rockefeller Sanitary

Commission to eradicate hookworm in southern counties. Surveys conducted by the Rockefeller

Commission discovered that, in 1910, 40 percent of southern children were infected by

hookworm. The Commission combined immediate treatment for infected individuals with a



16
   Costa (2005) documents that the urban penalty was substantially larger for Blacks than for
Whites in the late nineteenth century, perhaps because Black households did not have the income
necessary to protect themselves against disease (e.g., through adequate nutrition).
17
   Humphreys (2009) discusses the campaigns to investigate and eliminate each disease in the
South.
                                                19
public health campaign emphasizing the importance of hygiene and prevention. As a result,

infection rates were cut in half over the next 10 years. Bleakley shows that children in treated

cohorts enjoyed improved literacy rates and adult earnings. Adult health outcomes also likely

improved.

       The Rockefeller Foundation was also involved with malaria control in South

(Humphreys, 2001; Stapleton, 2004). Reduction in malaria transmission was primarily achieved

by draining wetlands to eliminate mosquitos and their breeding grounds. Malaria became rare in

southern cities by 1900, but was still prevalent in the countryside. Therefore, migration from

rural areas to southern cities and particularly to the North contributed to declines in malaria rates.

Barreca, Fishback and Kantor (2012) demonstrate that migration over the 1930s in response to

the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 tended to shift population from high-malaria to low-

malaria environments. Kitchens (2013) describes a counter-trend, whereby the Tennessee Valley

Authority dams built in the 1930s created pools of standing water, thereby increasing malaria

prevalence. Yet, despite the TVA-driven rise in malaria, overall malaria rates in the US South

had fallen substantially by 1940.

       Over 40 percent of the southern Black population migrated out of the South between

1915 and 1970, typically to large industrial cities. These migrants left behind the poor disease

environment of the South and moved to cities with new public investments in clean water and

sewerage. Yet, despite reductions in the urban health penalty in the early twentieth century, it is

not clear that moving to a city generated a net improvement in health. Black migrants lived in

dense, segregated neighborhoods close to industrial sites, which may have contributed to deaths

from heart disease, cancer, and other causes.




                                                 20
       Two recent papers suggest that Black migration to urban areas worsened health

conditions. Black, Sanders, Taylor, and Taylor (2014) use Medicare records to assess the effect

of migration on Black mortality rates. The Medicare system keeps detailed records on recipient’s

place of birth, allowing the authors to instrument for migration using proximity to a train line

during childhood. They find that moving to the North reduced longevity – for example,

increasing the likelihood of dying between the ages of 65 and 70 by around five percentage

points. They suspect that a portion of this Northern health penalty was due to increased

prevalence of drinking and smoking. Consistent with this pattern, Eriksson and Niemesh (2014)

document higher infant mortality rates in Black migrant households compared to households that

remained in the South, even after controlling for a series of family background characteristics.

       Taken together, Blacks benefited from improvements in health conditions in both the

rural South (due to disease eradication) and the urban North (due to public health

improvements). Yet there was also a substantial net migration to urban areas, which continued to

be associated with a health penalty. We conclude that reductions in place-specific mortality from

1900 to 1940 were partially offset by migration to a less-healthy environment.

       The pace of improvement in Black health increased over the next twenty years, with

Black life expectancy increasing by 10 years from 1940 to 1960. This period corresponds to an

era of rapid racial convergence in earnings (Smith and Welch, 1989; Donohue and Heckman,

1991). Black-White earnings convergence was due, in part, to relative increases in Black

educational attainment. Relative increases in black educational attainment began in earnest in the

birth cohort of 1910, members of which would have entered the labor market circa 1930

(Aaronson and Mazumder, 2011; Margo, 1990; Collins and Margo, 2006).




                                                21
       A large literature in epidemiology documents a negative gradient between income (or

education) and mortality (Backlund, Sorlie and Johnson, 1996, 1999; Sorlie, Rogot, Anderson,

Johnson and Backlund, 1992). On this topic, economists have conducted a series of well-

identified studies studying the relationship between education and mortality by exploiting

variation in compulsory schooling laws across states and over time (Lleras-Muney, 2005;

Oreopoulos and Page, 2006; Almond and Mazumder, 2006). We use estimates from this

literature to gauge the share of improvement in Black health outcomes from 1940 to 1960 that

can be explained by growth in Black incomes and education.

       Existing estimates suggest that increases in black earnings and educational attainment can

explain a large portion of the reduction in Black mortality rates from 1940 to 1960. Age-adjusted

death rates per 100,000 in the Black population fell from 1,500 to 1,000 over this period, a

decline of 33 percent (Haines, 2006). At the same time, median black earnings increased by

around $8,000 (in 2000 dollars). According to Backlund, Sorlie and Johnson (1999, Figure 3), an

earnings increase of this magnitude would be associated with a 10 percent reduction in the

relative risk of mortality, which can account for around one third of the decline in Black

mortality over this period. Furthermore, black educational attainment also increased

substantially, rising from a median of six years of schooling for prime-age adults (18-65) in 1940

to a median of eight years of schooling by 1960. Lleras-Muney (2005) estimates that an

additional year of schooling is associated with a 1.7 to 3.7 percentage point reduction in the

probability of dying over the next ten years, on a base of around 10 percent (or, a 17 to 37

percent decline). Even her lower bound implies that improvements in black education can

explain all of the improvements in Black mortality over this period.




                                               22
       Blacks entering the labor market circa 1940 can be characterized not only by their

relative increases in years of educational attainment, but also by improvements in the average

quality of the school that they attended, as measured by pupil-teacher ratios, the length of the

school term, or per-pupil expenditures (Margo, 1990; Card and Krueger, 1992). Frisvold and

Golberstein (2011) find modest evidence that improvements in school quality contributed further

to Black health improvements, particularly in self-rated health.

       Black infant mortality rates experienced a notable decline from 1965 to 1980. These

years coincided with key Civil Rights legislation ending the segregation of hospitals in the

South. Almond, Chay and Greenstone (2006) document that, before this period, 40 percent of

Black births in the rural South occurred outside of hospitals, compared to four percent of White

births. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 forbade institutions receiving federal funding from

discriminating on the basis of race. The establishment of Medicare in 1965 provided a large

potential stream of federal dollars, which encouraged hospitals in the South to desegregate.

Almond and co-authors demonstrate that the rapid desegregation of hospitals in 1965 encouraged

black births to take place in hospitals, thereby contributing to reductions in Black infant

mortality.

       In theory, the Medicare program, which provided health insurance to elderly, may have

contributed to general improvements in Black life expectancy (beyond reductions in infant

mortality) in the 1970s. Yet, Finkelstein and McKnight (2008) find no effect of this program,

either on overall mortality or on mortality of non-Whites; they speculate that hospitals could do

little to treat chronic conditions at the time, which are the principal cause of elderly mortality.



4.0 Concluding Remarks and Suggestions for Further Research



                                                  23
       This chapter has examined long-run trends in racial differences in health. Our discussion

concentrated heavily on mortality trends, which have the most complete historical records, and

therefore have received the most attention from social scientists, but we have also surveyed the

available evidence on chronic conditions and disabilities.

       Our most basic conclusion is that racial disparities in health have narrowed substantially

over the course of the twentieth century. At the same time, there remain in the United States

today medically and economically significant gaps in health outcomes by race – Black health

status continues to lag behind White health status. These racial disparities are the subject of

extensive and ongoing research by scholars and medical practitioners today, and for good reason.

       It is easier to list the factors behind the long-term narrowing of racial differences in

health than to conclusively measure and rank their relative importance. Blacks benefited from

public health improvements in the early twentieth century, and later from policy interventions in

the 1960s that expanded health care for the poor Americans in general and Blacks in particular,

through hospital desegregation. Yet much of the improvement in Black health outcomes, in our

view, should probably be ascribed to increases in household incomes and education – particular

the latter, since some pathways to higher incomes, such as migration from the rural South to the

North appear to be associated with worsening health outcomes.

       Although the historical trend in Black mortality rates is clear, as is the basic contours of

an historical explanation for the trend, much research remains to be done. In particular, the exact

timing and location of changes in Black mortality from the late nineteenth century to World War

Two requires further illumination. Further work is also needed to clarify the mechanisms behind

the long-term decline in Black mortality and other health outcomes.




                                                24
                                          References

Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumdar. 2006. “How Did Schooling Laws Improve Health

       and Lower Mortality,” Working Paper Series 06-023, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and Michael Greenstone. 2006. “Civil Rights, the War on

       Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South and

       Mississippi,” Working Paper 07-04, Department of Economics, Massachusetts Institute

       of Technology.

Alsan, Marcella and Claudia Goldin. 2014. “Watersheds and Infant Mortality: Massachusetts,

       1880-1915,” Manuscript.

Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “The Impact of the Rosenwald Schools on

       Black Achievement,” Journal of Political Economy 119: 821-888.

Bach, P., Cramer, L., Warren, J., Begg, C., 1999. “Racial Differences in the Treatment of Early-

       Stage Lung Cancer. The New England Journal of Medicine 341 (16), 1198–1205.

Backlund Eric, Paul D. Sorlie and Norman J. Johnson. 1996. “The Shape of the Relationship

       between Income and Mortality in the United States: Evidence from the National

       Longitudinal Mortality Survey,” Annals of Epidemiology 6: 12-20.

Backlund, Eric, Paul D. Sorlie, and Norman J. Johnson. 1999. “A Comparison of the

       Relationships of Education and Income with Mortality: The National Longitudinal

       Mortality Study.” Social Science & Medicine 49.10: 1373-1384.

Barker, David J, C. Osmond, Jean Golding, Di Kuh, and M. E. Wadsworth. 1989. “Growth In

       Utero, Blood Pressure in Childhood and Adult Life, and Mortality from Cardiovascular

       Disease.” BMJ: British Medical Journal 298, no. 6673: 564.

Barker, David JP, C. Osmond, P. D. Winter, B. Margetts, and S. J. Simmonds. 1989. “Weight in



                                               25
       Infancy and Death from Ischaemic Heart Disease.” The Lancet 334, no. 8663: 577-580.

Barnato, Amber E., F. Lee Lucas, Douglas Staiger, David E. Wennberg, and Amitabh Chandra.

       2005. “Hospital-level Racial Disparities in Acute Myocardial Infarction Treatment and

       Outcomes.” Medical Care 43, no. 4: 308.

Barreca, Alan; Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2012. “Agricultural Policy, Migration, and

       Malaria in the 1930s United States,” Explorations in Economic History 49: 381-98.

Black, Dan A.; Seth G. Sanders; Evan J. Taylor; and Lowell J. Taylor. 2014. “The Impact of the

       Great Migration on the Mortality of African-Americans: Evidence from the Deep South,”

       Manuscript.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the

       American South,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 73-117.

Bleakley, Hoyt, Dora Costa, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2014. “Health, Education, and

       Income in the United States, 1820-2000,” in L. Boustan, C. Frydman, and R. A.

       Margo, eds. Human Capital in History: The American Record, pp. 121-60. Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press.

Card, David and Alan Krueger, 1992. “School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A

       Direct Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 1007: 151-200.

Collins, William and Robert A. Margo. 2006. “Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in

       Schooling in the United States,” in E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds. Handbook on the

       Economics of Education, Volume 1, pp. 107-154. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Collins, William and Robert A. Margo. 2011. “Race and Home Ownership from the End of the

       Civil War to the Present,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 101:

       355-359.



                                              26
Condran, Gretchen A. and Eileen Cummins. 1980. Mortality Differential Between Rural and

       Urban States in the Northern United States, 1890-1900,” Journal of Historical Geography

       6: 174-202.

Costa, Dora L. 2000. “Understanding the Twentieth-Century Decline in Chronic Conditions

       Among Older Men.” Demography, 37.1: 53-72.

Costa, Dora L. 2004. “The Measure of Man and Older Age Mortality: Evidence from the Gould

       Sample.” Journal of Economic History, 64.1: 1-23.

Costa, Dora L. 2004. “Race and Pregnancy Outcomes in the Twentieth Century: A Long-Term

       Comparison.” Journal of Economic History, 64.4: 1056-1086.

Costa, Dora L. 2005. “Race and Older-Age Mortality: Evidence from Union Army Veterans.”

       Manuscript.

Costa, Dora L; Lorens A. Helmchen; and Sven Wilson. 2007. “Race, Infection, and

       Arteriosclerorosis in the Past,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the

       United States 104: 13219-13224.

Currie, Janet. 2009. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in

       Childhood, and Human Capital Development,” Journal of Economic Literature 47: 87-

       122.

Cutler, David M. and Grant Miller, 2005. “The Role of Public Health Improvements in Health

       Advances: The Twentieth Century United States,” Demography 42: 1-22.

Deaton, Angus. 2003. “Health, Inequality, and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic

       Literature 41: 113-158.

Demeny, Paul and Paul Gingrich. 1967. “A Reconsideration of Negro-White Mortality

       Differentials in the United States,” Demography 4: 820-837.



                                              27
Donohue, John J. and James Heckman. 1991. “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact

       of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,” Journal of Economic Literature

        29: 1603-1643,

Eriksson Katherine and Gregory Niemesh. 2014. “The Impact of Migration in Infant Health:

       Evidence from the Great Migration,” Manuscript.

Finkelstein, Amy and Robin McKnight. 2008. “What Did Medicare Do? The Initial Impact of

       Medicare on Mortality and Out-of-Pocket Medical Spending,” Journal of Public

       Economics 92: 1644-1668.

Frisvold, David and Ezra Golberstein. 2011. “School Quality and the Education-Health

       Relationship: Evidence from Blacks in Segregated Schools,” Journal of Health

       Economics 30: 1232-1245.

Glover JW. 1921. United States Life Tables, 1890, 1901, 1910, and 1901–1910. Washington,

       D.C.: GPO.

Haines, Michael R. 2001. “The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940,”

       NBER Historical Working Paper No. 134, Cambridge MA.

Haines, Michael R. 2006. “Vital Statistics.” In Historical Statistics of the United States:

       Millennial Edition. Eds. Susan B. Carter, Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines,

       Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, Gavin Wright. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University

       Press.

Higgs, Robert. 1982. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I,”

       American Economic Review 72: 725-737.

Humphreys. 2001. Malaria: Poverty, Race, and Public Health in the United States. Baltimore

       MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.



                                                 28
Humphreys. 2009. “How Four Once Common Diseases Were Eliminated from the American

       South,” Health Affairs 28: 1734-1744.

Jones, David S. 2013. Broken Hearts: The Tangled History of Cardiac Care. Baltimore, MD: The

       Johns Hopkins University Press.

Kitchens, Carl. 2013. The Effects of the Works Progress Administration's Anti-Malaria

       Programs in Georgia 1932-1947 Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2278419

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the

       United States,” Review of Economic Studies 72: 189-221.

Margo, Robert A. 1984. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I:

       Comment and Further Evidence,” American Economic Review 74: 768-76.

Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Meeker, Edward. 1976. “Mortality Trends of Southern Blacks, 1850-1910, Some Preliminary

       Findings,” Explorations in Economic History 13: 13-42.

Mukherjee, Siddhartha. 2011. The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer. New York:

       Simon and Schuster.

Oreopoulos, Philip and Marianne E. Page. 2006. “The Intergenerational Effects of Compulsory

       Schooling,” Journal of Labor Economics 24: 729-760.

Peterson, E.D., Shaw, L., DeLong, E., Pryor, D., Califf, R., Mark, D., 1997. “Racial Variation in

       the Use of Coronary-Revascularization Procedures — Are the Differences Real? Do they

       Matter? New England Journal of Medicine 336, 480–486.

Preston, Samuel H. and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late

       Nineteenth Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.



                                               29
Preston, Samuel H., Mark E. Hill and Greg L. Drevenstedt. 1998 “Childhood Conditions that

       Predict Survival to Advanced Ages among African Americans.” Social Science and

       Medicine. 47.9: 231-46.

Smedley, Brian D., Adrienne Y. Stith, and Alan R. Nelson, eds. Unequal Treatment: Confronting

       Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. National Academies Press, 2009.

Smith, James. 1984. “Race and Human Capital,” American Economic Review 74: 685-98.

Smith, James, and Finis Welch. 1989. “Black Economic Progress after Myrdal,” Journal of

       Economic Literature 27: 519-564.

Sorlie, P, E. Rogot, R. Anderson, N.J. Johnson, and E. Backlund, 1992. “Black-White

       Differences by Family Income,” The Lancet 340: 346-50.

Stapleton, Darwin H. 2004. “Lessons of History? Anti-malaria strategies of the International

       Health Board and the Rockefeller Foundation from the 1920s to the Era of DDT,”

       Public Health Reports 119(2): 206-215.

Troesken, Werner. 2004. Water, Race, and Disease. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1918. Negro Population, 1790-1918. Washington DC: GPO.




                                                30
Figure 1: Causes of Death by Race, 2011

                               Non-Hispanic Whites   Non-Hispanic Blacks   Hispanics

                         0.3

                        0.25
  Share of all deaths




                         0.2

                        0.15

                         0.1

                        0.05

                          0




Source: CDC National Center for Health Statistics
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/2011_Final_Mortality_Data_Release.pdf)




                                                      31
Figure 2: Life expectancy by race, 1900-2011

                      White - PH      White - DRA            Black - PH          Non-white

 85



 75



 65



 55



 45



 35



 25
      1900   1910   1920   1930    1940   1950        1960     1970       1980     1990      2000   2010

Sources: “White - PH” and “Black - PH” values in 1900 and 1910 from Preston and Haines
(1991, Table 2.5). All other values are from Historical Statistics (1900-1997) and CDC National
Center for Health Statistics (1998-2011).
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/2011_Final_Mortality_Data_Release.pdf).




                                                 32
Figure 3: Infant mortality rates per 1,000 live births by race, 1920-2011


                                        White          Black
 160


 140


 120


 100


  80


  60


  40


  20


   0
       1920   1930    1940     1950     1960        1970       1980   1990   1999   2009

Sources: 1920-1997 from Historical Statistics; 1998-2011 from CDC National Center for Health
Statistics (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/2011_Final_Mortality_Data_Release.pdf).




                                               33
Figure 4: Causes of death, Union Army sample, Men aged 60-74 in 1910


                           Whites, Age 60-74 in 1910        Blacks, Age 60-74 in 1910
                    0.35

                     0.3
  Share of deaths




                    0.25

                     0.2

                    0.15

                     0.1

                    0.05

                      0




Source: Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson, PNAS 2007, Table 3. Data include whites and blacks in
the Union Army data in the birth cohorts of 1836-1850.




                                                       34
Figure 5: Black-White ratios of chronic condition prevalence over time, Men aged 60-74,
circa 1910 and circa 1990


                                            Black/white, 1910        Black/white, 1990s
                                       3
   Ratios - Black relative to white




                                      2.5


                                       2


                                      1.5


                                       1


                                      0.5


                                       0




Source: Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson, PNAS 2007, Table 2. 1910 data include Whites and
Blacks in the Union Army data in the birth cohorts of 1836-1850. 1990s data from the National
Health and Nutritional Examination Surveys. We report data from 1999-2004 when available; in
other years, we report data from 1988-94. These prevalence rates are physician-reported, with the
exception of heart murmurs and valvular heart disease.




                                                                35
Table 1: Life expectancy at various ages by race, 2011

Age                             White                    Black                Racial gap

0                                79                      75.3                     3.7

1                                78.4                    75.2                     3.2

10                               69.5                    66.4                     3.1

20                               59.7                    56.6                     3.1

40                               40.7                    38.1                     2.6

60                               23.2                    21.5                     1.7

70                               15.5                    14.7                     0.8

80                                9                       9.1                    -0.1

90                               4.5                      5.1                    -0.6

Source: Table 7, National Vital Statistics Report (NVSR) “Deaths: Final Data for 2011.”




                                              36
Table 2: Survival rates conditional on cancer diagnosis by race

                      1974-1976         1980-1982         1989-1994          2004-2010

White                 50                52                62                 66.7

Black                 39                40                47                 59.7

Black-White           0.78              0.77              0.76               0.90

Source: 1974-1994 values: Landis, Murray, Bolden and Wingo. “Cancer Statistics, 1999.” CA –
A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 1999, 49, 8-31. 2004-2010 values: National Cancer Institute;
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Result Institute
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011/results_merged/topic_survival.pdf




                                               37
Figure 3: Improvements in life expectancy and infant mortality by period and race

                           Average annual additions to life expectancy (in years)
                             White                                  Black
1900-40                      0.39                                    0.28
1940-60                      0.28                                    0.50
1960-70                      0.09                                    0.11
1970-80                      0.29                                    0.44
1980-2010                    0.14                                    0.22

                        Average annual reductions in infant deaths per 1,000 live births
                               White                                  Black
1920-45                         1.65                                   2.58
1945-65                         0.68                                   0.73
1965-80                         0.69                                   1.36
1980-2010                       0.18                                   0.25
Notes: Calculated from three-year moving averages of data series presented in Figures 2 and 3.
Life expectancy calculations are based on the Preston and Haines series.




                                             38
