                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              COMPETITION AND BANK OPACITY

                                           Liangliang Jiang
                                             Ross Levine
                                              Chen Lin

                                         Working Paper 20760
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20760


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank Patricia Dechow, David De Meza, Yaniv Konchitchki, Xu Li, Chul Park, Yona Rubinstein,
John Sutton, Richard Sloan, Feng Tian, John Van Reenen, Xin Wang and seminar participants at the
Federal Reserve Bank at Saint Louis, the London School of Economics, University of California, Berkeley
and University of Hong Kong for helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Liangliang Jiang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition and Bank Opacity
Liangliang Jiang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 20760
December 2014
JEL No. D22,D4,G21,G28,G38

                                              ABSTRACT

Did regulatory reforms that lowered barriers to competition among U.S. banks increase or decrease
the quality of information that banks disclose to the public and regulators? We find that an intensification
of competition reduced abnormal accruals of loan loss provisions and the frequency with which banks
restate financial statements. The results indicate that competition reduces bank opacity, enhancing
the ability of markets and regulators to monitor banks.


Liangliang Jiang                                     Chen Lin
Lingnan University                                   Faculty of Business and Economics
Hong Kong                                            University of Hong Kong
liangliangjiang@ln.edu.hk                            chenlin1@hku.hk

Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                             1


1. Introduction
       When banks manipulate their financial statements, this can increase bank opacity and

interfere with the private governance and official regulation of banks. In particular, banks

manage their financial statements to smooth earnings, circumvent capital requirements, and

reduce taxes, as shown by Ahmed et al. (1999) and Beatty et al. (2002). Related research

suggests that such manipulations reduce bank stability, the market’s valuation of banks, and

loan quality, e.g., Beatty and Liao (2011), Bushman and Williams (2012), and Huizinga and

Laeven (2012). More generally, the findings by King and Levine (1993), Jayaratne and

Strahan (1996) and Beck et al (2000) imply that any factor—including bank opacity—that

interferes with the governance of banks can distort capital allocation and slow growth.

       Nonetheless, little is known about the impact of bank regulations and competition on

bank opacity. While Campbell and Kracaw (1980), Berlin and Loeys (1988), Morgan (2002),

and Flannery et al. (2004) examine the comparative opacity of banks and nonfinancial firms,

they do not examine the determinants of bank opacity. Barth et al. (2004, 2006, 2009) and

Beck et al. (2006) find that banks allocate capital more efficiently in countries that penalize

bank executives more for disclosing erroneous information. But, this work does not consider

the potential role of competition on bank opacity and unobserved country traits might

account for their findings. Given the importance of banks for economic growth, the scarcity
of research on the market and regulatory determinants of bank opacity is surprising and

potentially consequential.

       In this paper, we provide the first assessment of the impact of bank regulatory reforms

that spurred competition among banks on bank opacity. Theory offers conflicting

perspectives on the effect of competition on information disclosure. Scharfstein (1988) and

Darrough and Stoughton (1990) argue that competition can induce incumbent firms to

manipulate information to hinder the entry of rivals. Shleifer (2004) maintains that greater

competition spurs executives to engage in unethical behavior, including more aggressive

accounting practices. Stein (1989) and Kedia and Philippon (2009) show that competition can

spur executives to manage financial accounts to extract short-term rents. Other models (e.g.,
                                                                                                          2


Hart, 1983; Schmidt, 1997), however, stress that competition enhances the governance of

firms, potentially compelling managers to disclose more reliable information to investors.1

        To evaluate the impact of competition on measures of bank opacity, we begin by

exploiting three sources of variation in the removal of regulatory impediments to bank

competition among U.S. banks during the last quarter of the 20th century. First, individual

states eliminated restrictions on intrastate branching. For much of the twentieth century,

states limited the ability of banks to compete with each other by imposing restrictions on

banks establishing branch networks within states. States removed these barriers to

competition in different years. Second, interstate bank deregulation eased regulatory

impediments to bank holding companies (BHCs) headquartered in one state establishing

subsidiaries in other states. As emphasized by Goetz et al. (2013), not only did individual

states begin interstate deregulation in different years, these reforms progressed in a

state-specific process of bilateral and multilateral agreements over two decades. Thus, we use

several time-varying measures of the exposure of a state’s banking market to competition

from BHCs headquartered in other states. Third, while the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994

eliminated intrastate branch and interstate bank restrictions, states had leeway in the timing of

interstate branch deregulation, which is when BHCs in one state can establish branches in

other states. Since the costs of establishing branches are lower than those of establishing
subsidiaries, interstate branch deregulation further lowered barriers to competition. Jayaratne

and Strahan (1998), Stiroh and Strahan (2003), and Johnson and Rice (2008) show that these

regulatory reforms spurred competition among banks.

        There is, however, an important limitation to these state-time measures of

deregulation-induced competition. They are not computed at the bank subsidiary or even the

BHC level. Although research finds that these regulatory reforms spurred competition among

banks within a state, this does not necessarily imply that they influenced bank opacity by

intensifying competition. Perhaps, deregulation produced other changes in a state that


1
  Dichev et al. (2013) find that cross-firm comparisons help investors detect earnings management. If
competition facilitates such comparisons, this is an additional mechanism through which competition can
enhance transparency.
                                                                                               3


influenced the quality of bank financial statements, and it is these other changes—not

increased competition—that influences bank opacity.

       Consequently, we offer a new approach for constructing time-varying, bank-specific

measures of competition. Our approach is based on the “gravity model” view that distance

matters for investment and hence for the degree of competition faced by bank subsidiaries

and BHCs. For example, after state j allows BHCs in state i to enter and establish subsidiaries

in state j, two subsidiaries in state j may face different competitive pressures from state i,

depending on their distance to state i. That is, when California deregulates with Arizona, the

banks in southern California may face greater competitive pressures from Arizona than banks

in northern California. Indeed, Goetz et al. (2013, 2014) show that BHCs are more likely to

enter geographically close banking markets following deregulation. By integrating the

gravity model with interstate bank deregulation, we build time-varying, bank-specific

measures of deregulation-induced competition.

       To do this, we first construct measures of the competitive environment facing each

subsidiary. For each subsidiary in each period, we identify those states whose BHCs can enter

the subsidiary’s state. We then weight each of those states by the inverse of its distance to the

subsidiary. This yields an inverse-distance measure of the regulatory-induced competitive

environment facing each subsidiary. Second, we calculate the competitive environment
facing a consolidated BHC by weighting these subsidiary level measures of competition by

the proportion of each subsidiary’s assets in the BHC. We examine the BHC-specific

measures, in addition to the subsidiary-level measures, because parent companies may shape

the financial disclosure policies of subsidiaries. Our approach also accounts for the fact that a

BHC’s competitive-environment will change as the states in which it has subsidiaries change

their policies. For example, a BHC headquartered in state j with subsidiaries in other states

will experience changes in competition as those other states deregulate, subjecting the BHC

to greater competition even if state j does not open-up to additional states. We also examine

other BHC-specific measures of regulatory-induced competition that incorporate information

on the economic sizes of different states.
                                                                                                              4


        We then assess the relationships between various measures of bank opacity and these

BHC-specific and subsidiary-specific measures of competition while controlling for

state-time fixed effects. In this way, we control for all time-varying state characteristics,

including the state-time indicators of bank regulatory reforms. By integrating the gravity

model into the process of deregulation, we differentiate the competitive pressures facing

banks in the same state and assess whether changes in these competitive pressures influence

the quality of their financial statements.

        As proxies for bank opacity, we use two strategies for measuring the quality of

financial statements. First, we use the frequency with which banks restate their earnings with

the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Restatements imply that banks misstated

their financial statements. Though imperfect, more frequent restatements provide a negative

signal about disclosure quality. Due to data limitations, we can only use financial

restatements for a subset of our analyses.

        The second strategy focuses on loan loss provisions (LLPs), which are the most

important bank accrual through which banks manage earnings and regulatory capital (Beatty

and Liao, 2014).2 As reviewed by Dechow et al. (2010), an extensive literature constructs

proxies of the quality of financial statements by estimating a model of LLPs and using the

absolute values of the residuals as indicators of the “abnormal” accrual of LLPs, which are
also called discretionary LLPs. Interpreting such abnormal accruals as reflecting disclosure

quality, relies on the efficacy of the underlying LLP model. Since Beatty and Liao (2014)

assess the effectiveness of bank LLP models in predicting bank earnings restatements and

comment letters from the SEC, we begin our analyses with their preferred model. We then

extend this model to address potential concerns arising from our study of bank regulatory

reforms. Specifically, if bank deregulation improves the accuracy of the underlying LLP

model and we do not account for this, then we may inappropriately interpret the reduction in

the estimated errors as a reduction in the manipulation of bank financial accounts. To reduce

this concern, we (1) include measures of deregulation in the preferred LLP model to allow for
2
  Provision for loan losses is an expense on a bank’s income statement. In contrast, allowances for loan losses
enter as an asset on the bank’s balance sheet, where these allowances equal the accumulated loan loss provisions
from income statements minus write offs from recognized losses on loans.
                                                                                              5


the possibility that bank deregulation shifts the LLP model, (2) fully interact the bank

deregulation indicators with the LLP model regressors to allow for a change in the entire

model after deregulation, and (3) use several alternative LLP models. The results are robust

across all of these LLP models.

       We use a difference-in-differences estimation strategy. The dependent variable is

either a measure of discretionary LLPs for each BHC in each period or, for a subset of the

analyses, a measure of financial restatements. In our initial assessments, the core independent

variables are measures of intrastate branch, interstate bank, and interstate branch deregulation

that vary by state and year. In these analyses, we condition on BHC and time fixed effects, as

well as an array of time-varying BHC traits. We then examine the BHC-specific and

subsidiary-specific, measures of deregulation-induced competition. In these analyses, we not

only condition on BHC fixed effects and subsidiary fixed effects, respectively, we also

condition on state-time fixed effects. Past research and our assessments support our treatment

of these three regulatory reforms as exogenous to disclosure quality. Several studies show

that the timing of deregulation does not reflect bank performance (Jayaratne and Strahan,

1998; Goetz et al., 2013) or state economic performance (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996;

Morgan et al., 2004; Demyanyk et al., 2007; Beck et al., 2010). We demonstrate below that

discretionary LLPs do not predict the timing of bank deregulation and there are no trends in
LLPs prior to deregulation. Given data availability, we conduct the analyses over the period

from 1986 through 2006 using quarterly data.

       Our initial assessments indicate that regulatory reforms that lowered barriers to bank

competition enhanced disclosure quality and reduced the frequency of financial restatements

with the SEC. For each of the three different types of regulatory reforms, we find a negative,

statistically significant, and economically large impact on discretionary LLPs. For example,

consider the traditional measure of the timing of interstate bank deregulation as the year

when a state first deregulated with any other state. After this event, discretionary LLPs are

half as large as they were before deregulation.

       Moreover, we discover that both the BHC-specific and the subsidiary-level measures
of regulatory-induced competition are strongly and negatively associated with discretionary
                                                                                                6


LLPs. In these analyses, identification comes from differentiating between BHCs and

subsidiaries within the same state that differ in terms of their distance to other states. These

results hold when controlling for state-time fixed effects, as well as an assortment of

time-varying BHC and subsidiary traits. Thus, the results are not driven by changes in

regulatory policies at the state-time level; rather, they are driven by the differential impact of

interstate banking reforms on BHCs and subsidiaries within a state that arise because of their

differential distance to competitors. The findings suggest that interstate bank deregulation

reduced discretionary LLPs by intensifying competition.

       Our work contributes to the debate on the impact of competition on disclosure quality

and earnings management, which has focused on nonfinancial firms. Ali et al., (2009) stress

that difficulties in finding sound proxies for competition and exogenous sources of variation

in competition have hindered research. For example, much of this literature uses

cross-industry concentration indicators to proxy for competition differences. But,

cross-industry concentrations differences might not reflect differences in competition,

confounding the interpretation of such studies. In this paper, we focus on one industry and

offer a new strategy for measuring exogenous variation in competition at the BHC and

subsidiary levels, so that we can better identify the impact of competition-enhancing reforms

on disclosure quality.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the data and empirical methods.

Section 3 presents the main results. Section 4 discusses robustness tests. Section 5 concludes.
                                                                                             7


2. Data, Methodology, and the Validity of the Identification Strategy
       2.1     Data on BHCs and states

       The Federal Reserve provides consolidated balance sheets and income statements for

BHCs on a quarterly basis starting in June 1986. We examine the ultimate parent BHC that

owns, but is not owned by, other banking institutions, where we define ownership as 50% or

more of the financial institutions equity. More specifically, we follow Goetz et al. (2013) and

use code RSSD9364 in the Y-9C reports to link bank subsidiaries to the parent BHCs and

code RSSD9365 to assign a subsidiary bank to the parent BHC if the latter owns at least 50%

of the subsidiary’s equity stake. In robustness tests, we examine individual commercial banks,

rather than parent BHCs, using data from the Reports of Condition and Income (“Call

Reports”), and obtain qualitatively similar results. We focus on the parent BHC results both

because many commercial banks are not public listed and hence do not have stock price data

and because diversification during our sample period occurred primarily through BHC

subsidiaries, not through the branch networks of commercial banks.

       Our sample contains 27,137 BHC-quarter observations on 911 BHCs headquartered

in one of 48 states or the District of Columbia. Consistent with the literature on US bank

deregulation, we exclude the states of Delaware and South Dakota from our sample because

they changed their laws to encourage the entry and formation of credit card banks.
       For stock prices, financial restatements, and state characteristics, we use several

additional datasets. Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP) has information on stock

prices and outstanding shares. We construct a dataset on financial restatement information

manually from 10-K, 10Q, and 8-K files from EDGAR, which gathers information from the

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings of public firms. The Bureau of Economic

Analysis provides state-level data on social and economic demographics.



       2.2     The dates of bank deregulation

       We use the timing of three types of bank deregulation as exogenous sources of

variation in the competitiveness of the banking market in each U.S. state. During the last
quarter of the twentieth century, federal and state authorities reduced restrictions on (1)
                                                                                               8


intrastate bank branching—the ability of banks to establish branches within a state, (2)

interstate banking—the ability of banks to establish subsidiary banks across states, and (3)

interstate branching—the ability of banks to establish branches across states. These policy

changes increased the contestability of banking markets, as a broader array of banks within a

state and from different states could compete to sell banking services. Reflecting this

competition, deregulation reduced interest rates on loans, increased interest rates on deposits,

and did so without boosting loan delinquency rates (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996, 1998).

Johnson and Rice (2008) summarize the history of U.S. deregulation of geographic

restrictions on banking.

       With respect to intrastate bank branching, most states restricted branching within (and

across) state borders for much of the 20th century. From the mid-1970s through the

mid-1990s, states relaxed regulatory restrictions on the ability of BHCs to form branch

networks within state. This relaxation evolved gradually, with the last states lifting

restrictions following the 1994 passage of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching

Efficiency Act. Consistent with Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) and others, we choose the date

of intrastate branch deregulation as the date on which a state first permitted banks to establish

branch networks. Thus, INTRA equals one for BHCs headquartered in a state in the periods

after that state initiates intrastate branch deregulation and zero otherwise. To be compatible
with the quarterly level BHC-characteristic data, we assume that the deregulation happens in

the last quarter of the year in which the state deregulated, so that INTRA equals one starting

from the first quarter of next year. We also make similar assumptions for the other

deregulation dummy variables.

       States also engaged in a process of interstate bank deregulation, in which a state

allowed banks from other states to acquire or establish subsidiary banks in its borders. Over

the period from 1978 through 1994, states removed restrictions on interstate banking in a

dynamic, state-specific process either by unilaterally opening their state borders and allowing

out-of-state banks to enter or by signing reciprocal bilateral and multilateral agreements with

other states. The process of interstate bank deregulation ended with the passage of the
                                                                                                9


Riegle-Neal Act of 1994 that eliminated restrictions on BHCs establishing subsidiary bank

networks across state boundaries.

       There are several ways to date interstate bank deregulation. Most researchers simply

define a state as “deregulated” after it first lowers barriers to interstate banking with at least

one other state. In our analyses, INTER equals one for BHCs headquartered in a state in the

years after that state first allows interstate banking and zero otherwise.

       More recently, Goetz et al. (2013) exploit the dynamic process of each state’s removal

of impediments to out-of-state banks to date interstate bank deregulation. Based on this work,

we construct three measures of interstate bank deregulation. Ln(# of States)jt equals the

natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose banks can enter state j in year t.

This measure evolves in a state-specific manner as some states unilaterally open their borders

and others proceed with a process of bilateral and multilateral reciprocal arrangements. Ln(#

of States-Distance Weighted)jt equals the natural logarithm of one plus the number of other

states whose banks can enter state j in year t, where each of these other states is weighted by

the inverse of their distance from the state. We construct and use Ln(# of States-Distance

Weighted)jt because BHCs might find it more beneficial and less costly to enter close states

rather than distant ones, with corresponding ramifications on the competitiveness of banking

markets. The third measure is Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)jt, and it equals the natural
logarithm of one plus the number of BHCs in states that can enter state j in year t. This

measure allows for the possibility that a state’s BHCs will face more competition when there

is an increase in the number of BHCs from other states that can enter its market.

       States also relaxed restrictions on interstate bank branching. While the Riegle-Neal

Act of 1994 effectively removed restrictions on interstate banking, it allowed states some

discretion on the timing of the lowering of barriers to the establishment of branch networks

by BHCs in other states. So, BHCs from state j were able to establish a subsidiary in state i

after 1994, but they were not necessarily able to establish branches in state i. The year in

which states allowed interstate branching varies between 1994 and 1997. In the analyses

below, INTER-BRANCH equals one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that allows the
                                                                                         10


BHCs from other states to establish branch networks and zero otherwise. Appendix Table 3

provides the dates of INTRA, INTER, and INTER-BRANCH for each state.



       2.3     Estimating disclosure quality

       We use two approaches for measuring the quality of bank financial statements. One

approach measures the frequency with which banks restate their financial statements with the

SEC. Due to limitation on the time-series availability of financial restatements we can only

conduct these for a subset of the data. We define financial restatements more fully and

implement this approach below

       The second approach examines LLPs, which are the major mechanism through which

banks manage both earnings and regulatory capital. This approach measures disclosure

quality by estimating a model of LLPs and using the absolute values of the residuals to

construct indicators of the “abnormal” accrual of LLPs. Interpreting such abnormal accruals

as “disclosure quality” relies on the efficacy of the underlying model of LLPs. Beatty and

Liao (2014) assess nine different LLP models proposed by the banking literature. They find

that one model performs particularly well in predicting earning restatements and comment

letters from the Securities and Exchange Commission. We begin our analyses with Beatty

and Liao’s (2014) “preferred” model. We then extend this model and use alternative LLP
models to assess the robustness of our results.

        More specifically, we construct measures of disclosure quality for each BHC in each

period using the following two-step procedure. We first run a regression using Beatty and

Liao’s (2014) preferred LLP model to separate the systemic component of LLPs, i.e., the

component of LLPs accounted for by BHC and state determinants, from that part of LLPs

unaccounted for by these fundamentals. To account for the impact of deregulation on LLPs,

we also include the deregulation measures in this first step. The results are robust to

excluding the deregulation measures, as we show in an online annex.

       The first-step regression is as follows:
                                                                                                            11




                                                                                                           (1)

        In this model,         represents the bank deregulation measures that we defined above.

       bjt   represents the change in non-performing assets between quarter t and t-1 divided by

total loans in quarter t-1 for BHC b in state j. Following Bushman and Williams (2012), this

model includes current period dNPAbjt and next period dNPAb,j,t+1 because banks might use

current and forward-looking information on non-performing assets in selecting LLPs. The

model includes dNPAb,j,t-1 since banks might use historical changes in non-performing assets

in setting LLPs.3 SIZEb,j,t-1 is the natural logarithm of total assets in quarter t-1 and is

included because official supervisory oversight and private sector monitoring might vary with

banks size. dLOANbjt is the change in total loans over the quarter divided by lagged total

loans. This is included to allow for the possibility that an increase in loans is associated with

a decrease in loan quality. The model includes measures of three state characteristics that

might influence LLP: CSRETjt, dGSPjt, and dUNEMPjt represent the return on the

Case-Shiller Real Estate Index, the change in GSP, and the change in the state’s
unemployment rate, respectively. We also include state fixed effects,                 j,   to account for any

time-invariant state characteristics that shape loan loss provisioning.

        In the second step, we construct a proxy for the discretionary LLPs of each BHC in

each quarter as the logarithm of the absolute values of the errors from estimating equation (1).

The errors represent the “abnormal” accrual of LLPs—the component of LLPs unexplained

by the regression’s fundamental determinants. We use the absolute value of the residuals

because both positive and negative residuals may reflect discretionary manipulation of LLPs

above and beyond that accounted for by the regressors in equation (1). An extensive literature

uses errors from such models to proxy for earnings management, as discussed in                    Beatty and

Liao (2014), Dechow et al. (2010), Yu, (2008), and Jiang et al. (2010). We interpret the results
3
  We do not include the two period lag of dNPA as in Beatty and Liao (2014) in the reported analyses because it
eliminates many observations. However, including the two period lag of dNPA does not affect the results.
                                                                                             12


reported below under the maintained hypothesis that this proxy reflects the discretionary

management of LLPs. As a robustness check, we also conduct the analyses by first averaging

the residuals from the quarterly frequency to an annual frequency before taking the logarithm

of the absolute value of the residuals and find the results highly robust. For brevity, the

results are not presented but are available on request. Appendix Table 1 provides definitions

of the variables used in the paper.

       To address potential concerns with this approach for constructing measures of the

quality of financial statements that are particular to the study of bank deregulation, we extend

Beatty and Liao’s (2014) preferred model. The concern is as follows: if bank deregulation

improves the accuracy of the underlying LLP model, reducing the estimated errors after

deregulation, then this might lead us to inappropriately infer that deregulation lowers the

manipulation of bank financial accounts. We address this concern in two ways. First, as

mentioned above, we include the corresponding indicator of bank deregulation in the

first-step LLP model to allow for the possibility that the banking reforms directly shape LLPs.

Second, we also conduct the analyses, and report the results below, while fully interacting the

bank deregulation indicators with all of the regressors in equation (1) (the LLP model). That

is, we modify equation (1) as follows:




                                                                                           (1a)

       By fully interacting bank deregulation with the explanatory variables in the LLP

model, we allow for bank deregulation to change the entire LLP model after deregulation.
                                                                                               13


This reduces the possibility that we are simply measuring a change in the accuracy of the

LLP model, rather than a change in discretionary LLPs.

        Appendix Table 2 reports summary statistics for the sample obtained after dropping

observations in which the core explanatory variables have missing values. In our sample, the

median BHC has $1.1 billion in total assets (SIZE), while the average BHC has $11.0 billion

of assets. Given the skewed distribution of bank size, we take the logarithm of total assets

(logSIZE) in the regression analyses. Both the mean and the median of non-performing assets

(NPA) in our sample is $10,000 per quarter. The median and mean of total loans (LOAN)) are

$680 million and $5.9 billion, respectively. In terms of the change in loans scaled by total

loans (dLOAN), the mean and median are 0.03 and 0.02, respectively.



        2.4    Empirical methodology

        We examine the relationship between disclosure quality and bank deregulation using a

difference-in-differences methodology. This strategy controls for all time-invariant BHC and

state characteristics as well as all time effects. Furthermore, we condition on a wide array of

time-varying BHC characteristics. Our difference-in-differences methodology employs

quarterly data on BHCs, and we confirm the findings when aggregating to an annual

frequency. Thus, we evaluate the effect of deregulation on disclosure quality by estimating
the following model:

                                                                                               (2)

where                              is the measure of the manipulation of loan loss provisions by

BHC b, headquartered in state j, in quarter t, and equals the logarithm of the absolute value of
the residuals from equation (1).        is bank deregulation in state j and in quarter t. For bank

deregulation, we use the measures of intrastate, interstate bank, and interstate branch

deregulation defined above. To emphasize, the deregulation measures used in each version of

equation (2), are also used in the equation (1) estimation of LLPs. We also include time fixed
effects ( ), BHC fixed effects (       ), and a vector,       , of time-varying BHC traits that
                                                                                                                 14


might explain the management of LLPs.4 Specifically, following the literature on the quality
of banks earnings statements (e.g., Kanagaretnam et al., 2010),                         includes the logarithm

of bank assets (logSIZE), one year lag of loan loss provision scaled by beginning total loans

(LLP_lag), negative net income indicator variable (LOSS), and bank capital ratio (CAP). The
results hold when including all of these                 variables in the equation (1) model for LLPs. In

robustness tests, we control for earnings before tax and provisions (EBTP) and obtain the

same results. We provide the estimates without EBTP since competition may influence

discretionary LLPs through its effect on earnings. Similarly, the results are robust to

controlling for the particular features of each BHC’s loan portfolio, such as the proportion of

real estate, commercial and industrial, agriculture, individual, and foreign loans. Including

these loan types does not alter the findings.



           2.5 On the validity of our approach

           Drawing valid inferences from these regressions requires that the change in

discretionary LLPs in deregulated and regulated states would have been the same in the

absence of deregulation. If the trend in abnormal accruals of LLPs differed in deregulating

versus non-deregulating states—if the treatment group had a different trend in outcomes from

the control group, then our estimation strategy could yield erroneous inferences.
          To assess the validity of our identification strategy, we conducted two types of

analyses. First, we present graphs regarding the relationship between disclosure quality and

the timing of interstate bank deregulation that illustrate (1) abnormal accruals of LLPs do not

predict the timing of deregulation and (2) the reduction in abnormal accruals occurs

immediately after a state started the process of interstate bank deregulation.

          Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of disclosure quality before and after interstate bank

deregulation. We start by making year zero the year when a state started interstate bank

deregulation. Then, time for each state is centered at year zero, such that one quarter before




4
    The term “time” refers to year-quarter effects, so that there is a separate dummy variable for each time period.
                                                                                                                15


deregulation is -1 and one quarter after deregulation is +1. We then run the following

regression:

                                                                                                                (3)

where the deregulation dummy variable                     equals one for banks in the nth quarter after

deregulation, and the deregulation dummy variable                        equals one for banks in the nth

quarter before deregulation, and              and       are time and BHC fixed effects, respectively.

We consider a 20-quarter window, spanning from ten quarters before until ten quarters after

deregulation. We then plot the estimated coefficients on the deregulation dummies and

provide 5% confidence intervals.

         Figure 1 indicates that there is a distinct break in the time-series of abnormal accruals

of LLPs when states start interstate bank deregulation.5 There is no evidence of trends in

discretionary LLPs before interstate bank deregulation. While this figure does not control for

time-varying state and BHC specific information, the sharp break in discretionary LLPs is

consistent with deregulation changing disclosure quality.

         Furthermore, we plot the trend of the median value of disclosure quality scaled by

EBTP (D-LLP/EBTP) of each BHC in a state during the period of interstate deregulation,

where EBTP equals income before taxes and provisions in million U.S. dollars. Disclosure
quality is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of discretionary LLPs

estimated from equation (1) multiplied by the value of the lag of total loans, which is also

measured in million U.S. dollars. Similarly, we still consider a 20-quarter window, spanning

from ten quarters before until ten quarters after deregulation. The median EBTP of our

sample BHCs is $3.02 million, and the median of discretionary LLPs is $0.43 million. In

Figure 2, we find similar trend for the D-LLP/EBTP that it has large fluctuations during the

pre-deregulation period, with the mean ratio around 30%. In contrast, during the

post-deregulation period, this ratio quickly reduced to about 13%, and became much more

stable than before. In the meantime, we do not find statistical significant increases in EBTP

5
 We find that many BHCs established out-of-state subsidiaries in the first year that it was legally feasible,
which is consistent with our finding that the reform impact on disclosure quality occurs quickly.
                                                                                              16


during the post deregulation period. This is because there is no increase in the overall credit

demand, and the reduced costs in banking after deregulation have been passed along to bank

customers in the form of lower loan rates (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; Rice and Strahan,

2010). This result not only reinforces the findings from Figure 1 that there is a statistically

significant drop in abnormal LLPs after interstate deregulation, but also shows that this drop

is economically large relative to a BHC’s earnings.

       For the second type of test of the validity of our approach, we tested whether LLPs in

a state predict the timing of bank regulatory reforms. Although we control for BHC, and

hence state fixed effects, the management of LLPs by a state’s banks might influence the

timing of intrastate branch, interstate bank, and interstate branch deregulation. Thus,

following the method developed in Kroszner and Strahan (1999), we examine whether the

degree of information disclosure by a state’s BHCs predicts the timing of each type of bank

regulatory reform. For each state and year, we aggregate discretionary LLPs by BHCs

operating in the state. Specifically, to compute an index of discretionary LLPs in state j

during year t, we weight each BHC’s discretionary LLPs by its proportion of assets in state

j’s banking system during year t. We then incorporate lagged values of this index into the

Kroszner and Strahan (1999) econometric model for predicting bank regulatory reforms and

assess if discretionary LLPs account for the timing of bank regulatory reforms. The Kroszner
and Strahan (1999) framework includes the following control variables: GSP per capita, state

level unemployment rate, small bank share of all banking assets, capital ratio of small banks

relative to large ones, relative size of insurance in states where banks may sell insurance

(zero otherwise), relative size of insurance in states where banks may not sell insurance (zero

otherwise), an indicator variable that equal to one if banks may sell insurance (zero

otherwise), the small firm (fewer than 20 employees) share of the number of firms in the state,

an indicator variable that equals one if the state has a unit banking law (zero otherwise), share

of state government controlled by Democrats, and an indicator that takes a value of one if the

state is controlled by one party (zero otherwise).
                                                                                                    17


        Table 1 presents the results of the determinants of banking deregulations using OLS

regressions.6 The sample consists of state-year observations from 1986 to 2006, and we

therefore exclude states that deregulated before 1986. While all states deregulated interstate

branching restrictions after 1986, only 22 and 20 states started removing restrictions on

interstate banking and intrastate branching in or after 1986, respectively. The dependent

variables used in Table 1 are INTER, Ln(# of Out-Of-States), Ln(# of Out-Of-States –

Distance Weighted), Ln(# of BHCs from Out-Of-States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH.

        As shown, disclosure quality does not predict the timing of any of the regulatory

reforms. There is no evidence that the degree to which BHCs manipulate the information that

they disclose to the public or regulators altered the decision of officials to eliminate

restrictions on intrastate branching, eased regulatory impediments to interstate banking, or

lowered barriers to interstate branching.



3.   Main Results
        3.1     Bank regulatory reforms and disclosure quality - basic

        Table 2 presents regression results on the relationship between disclosure quality and

bank regulatory reforms that lowered barriers to competition. In these baseline regressions,

we study the different bank regulatory reform indicators one-at-a-time. That is, we first
examine INTRA, which measures the relaxation of regulatory impediments to intrastate

branching. We then consider the four measures of interstate bank deregulation—INTER, Ln(#

States), Ln(#States—Distance Weighted), and Ln(# BHCs from Other States). Finally, we

examine INTER-BRANCH, which measures the removal of barriers to BHCs establishing

bank branches across state lines. All six regressions control for time-varying BHC

characteristics (logSIZE, LLP_lag, LOSS, and CAP), time fixed effects, and BHC fixed

effects. In parentheses, we report heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (as defined in

MacKinnon and White (1985)) that are clustered at the state-quarter level. These regressions



6
  We obtain quantitatively similar results when using a probit model. However, due to the zero-variance
problem, many observations are automatically dropped with the probit estimator.
                                                                                               18


assess the impact of bank deregulation on disclosure quality. Appendix Table 4 presents the

results from the equation (1) estimation of disclosure quality.

       The second stage results presenting the relationship between bank regulatory reforms

and disclosure quality indicate that these regulatory reforms reduced bank opacity. Each of

the six indicators of regulatory reform enters negatively and statistically significantly at the

one percent level. Thus, disclosure quality rose after states eased restrictions on the ability of

its banks to establish branch networks across the state (INTRA). Similarly, after a state started

allowing BHCs from other states to enter its borders and establish subsidiaries (INTER),

disclosure quality improve (column 1). Furthermore, as reported in columns 2-4 of Table 2,

each of three dynamic measures of the evolution of interstate bank deregulation enters

negatively and significantly: as states allowed BHCs from more states to enter, discretionary

LLPs fell. Finally, as indicated by the results on INTER-BRANCH, after states allowed BHCs

from other states to enter via the establishment of branches (not just via separately capitalized

subsidiaries), the quality of information disclosure improved, too.

       The estimated coefficients reported in Table 2 suggest that the economic impact of

bank deregulation on the management of LLPs is large. For example, the point estimate for

the effect of the start of interstate bank deregulation (INTER) on discretionary LLPs is -0.47

(column 1), which implies a 47% decrease in abnormal LLPs after a state starts to remove
barriers to interstate banking. Similarly, after a state eliminated restrictions on intrastate

branching, discretionary LLPs fell by 83%, as reported in column 5. The results suggest an

economically large, negative relationship between removing barriers to competition and the

management of LLPs.

       With respect to the control variables, Table 2 indicates the following. Large BHCs

tend to engage in more LLP management. This is consistent with the findings in Huizinga

and Laeven (2012) who showed that larger banks have more discretion over asset valuation

because they tend to have a larger fraction of hard-to-value assets; therefore, these banks tend

to benefit more from the enhanced capability to do asset revaluation. We also find that

discretionary LLPs are positively related to LOSS (i.e. an indicator variable takes the value of
one if net income is negative and zero otherwise). These results suggest that when the bank
                                                                                                   19


makes a loss, there is an uptick in the management of LLPs. This result is consistent with

findings in the earnings smoothing literature that banks manage income by either delaying or

accelerating provisions for losses (Liu and Ryan, 2006).



           3.2    Bank regulatory reforms and disclosure quality – fully interacted model

           Table 3 presents results using fully interacted deregulation terms to predict the LLPs
in equation (1). In other words,       in equation (1) represents one of the six deregulation measures

(INTER, Ln (# of States), Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States),

INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH) corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns

1-6 of this table plus each corresponding deregulation measures fully interacted with all the other

independent variables used in equation (1). The first stage results using equation (1) on estimating

disclosure quality are presented in Appendix Table 5.

           The second stage results presenting the relationship between bank regulatory reforms

and bank opacity are similar both in terms of coefficient estimates and in terms of statistical

significance disregarding whether we use fully interacted deregulation terms to estimate

disclosure quality.



           3.3 BHC-specific regulatory environment and disclosure quality
           There is a potentially important limitation to these state-time regulatory reform

measures: They are not computed at the BHC-time level. Although considerable research

finds that these regulatory reforms spurred competition among banks, this does not

necessarily imply that these reforms improved disclosure quality by intensifying competition.

Perhaps, deregulation produced other changes that reduced bank opacity, and it is these other

changes—not increased competition—that accounts for the improvement in disclosure

quality.

           In light of this concern, we develop a new strategy for more precisely identifying the

impact of competition on bank behavior. This strategy builds on the “gravity model,” which

predicts that the costs to a business of opening a new site are positively associated with the
distance between the business’s headquarters and the site. For example, after state j allows
                                                                                                20


BHCs in state i to enter and establish subsidiaries in state j, two subsidiaries in state j may

face different competitive pressures from state i, depending on their distance to state i. More

concretely, when California deregulates with Arizona, the banks in southern California may

face greater competitive pressures from BHCs in Arizona than banks in northern California.

A large body of evidence validates the “gravity model” by showing that distance influences

such investment decisions, including the decision of BHCs to open subsidiaries in other states

(Goetz et al., 2013, 2014). We build a BHC-specific-time measure of deregulation-induced

competition by integrating this gravity model into the process of interstate bank deregulation.

          More formally, we first construct measures of the competitive environment associated

with interstate banking facing each subsidiary. For each subsidiary in each period, we

identify those states whose BHCs can enter the subsidiary’s state. We then weight each of

those states by the inverse of its distance to the subsidiary. That is, we calculate the interstate

bank competitive pressures facing a subsidiary, s, located in state j in period t as:


                                                                                               (4)

where Ij,i,t equals one if BHCs from state i are allowed to establish subsidiaries in state j in

period t, and zero otherwise; and, DISs,i equals the distance between subsidiary s and state i.

          Second, we aggregate this to the BHC level and calculate the interstate bank
competitive pressures facing BHC, b, located in state k in period t. We do this by identifying

all of the subsidiaries in each BHC, i.e., all s within each b, and performing the following

calculation:




                                                                                               (5)


where Ps,b,t is the proportion of assets of each subsidiary, s, within BHC, b, in period t,

relative to the total assets of all of BHC b’s subsidiaries.7 Thus, for each BHC in each period:




7
    In those cases where   = 0, we include the value as 0.000001.
                                                                                              21



                                                                                             (6)

        We also create two additional BHC-specific-time measures where we also weight by

the economic sizes of different states (Gross State Product) and the number of BHCs in states.

We call these BHC_DIS_GSP and BHC_DIS_NUM, respectively. To illustrate the

construction we BHC_DIS_GSP, we modify the computation of the regulatory-induced

competitive pressures facing each subsidiary in each period:


                                                                                             (7)

We then proceed as above to construct BHC_DIS_GSP.

        A novel component of this approach is that it measures the changing competitive

environment facing a BHC as the BHC’s subsidiaries in other states facing different

competitive pressures. For example, a BHC headquartered in state i with subsidiaries in other

states will experience changes in competition as those other states deregulate, subjecting the

BHC to greater competition. In computing these BHC-specific-time competition measures

based on regulations and distance, we also calculate and examine other measures that

incorporate information on the economic sizes of different states.

        With these BHC specific measures, we reexamine the regulatory determinants of bank
opacity. In particular, we modify equation (2), so that it now includes these new

BHC-specific-time measures of the competitive environment facing BHCs and state-time

fixed effects:

                                                                                             (8)

where       and     represents state-time and BHC fixed effects, respectively. If (a) the earlier

results were driven by competition and (b) the distance of a potential competitor to a market

influences the competitiveness of that market, then             should enter negatively and

significantly. If, however, the earlier results were driven by a change in some state-time

factor occurring when two states lower barriers to interstate banking, then the
                                                                                             22


BHC-specific-time measure of competition should not provide additional explanatory power

in the discretionary LLP analyses.

        The results reported in Table 4 indicate that interstate bank deregulation reduced

discretionary LLP by intensifying the competitive pressures facing BHCs. In columns 1-3 of

Table 4, we first include three BHC-specific deregulation measures (BHC_DIS,

BHC_DIS_GSP, and BHC_DIS_NUM) separately into the regression. As shown, they each

enter negatively and significantly. In columns 4-6, we use fully interacted deregulation terms

to predict disclosure. Consistent with the competition channel, we still find that each of the

three BHC-specific deregulation measures enters negatively and significantly. The evidence

is consistent with the view that regulatory reforms that intensify the competition faced by a

BHC tend to reduce bank opacity.



        3.4     Bank regulatory reforms and disclosure quality at the subsidiary level

        We also examined disclosure quality at the subsidiary bank level. There are material

disadvantages to conducting the analyses at the subsidiary level. First, a BHC’s subsidiaries

are probably subject to the same accounting policies as the parent organization. Second,

subsidiaries are typically not publicly listed, so that market capitalization and other data are

typically unavailable for subsidiary banks. However, an advantage of conducting the analyses
at the subsidiary level is that we can identify exactly which bank subsidiary is influenced by

the interstate banking deregulation.

        With these subsidiary specific measures, we reexamine the regulatory determinants of

bank opacity. In particular, we modify equation (2), so that it now simultaneously includes (a)

the original state-time indicators of interstate banking reforms and (b) these new

subsidiary-specific-time measures of the competitive environment facing each subsidiary.




                                                                                             (9)

where         and   represents state-time and subsidiary bank fixed effects, respectively.
                                                                                            23


       To do the subsidiary-level analyses, we use the commercial bank dataset published on

the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago website to merge these subsidiary banks with BHCs in

our main sample. We exclude those stand-alone banks or banks that do not belong to any

BHCs. We end up with a sample of 68,320 bank-quarter observations. However, because

some of the banks are lack of capitalization information, our final subsidiary bank data

contains 55,015 observations, with 2,879 subsidiary banks spanning from the third quarter of

1986 until 2006. Again, we have excluded the state of Delaware and South Dakota from the

sample. These subsidiary banks belong to 881 BHCs (out of 911 BHCs) in our main sample.

The results using the BHC subsidiaries are presented in Table 5, and are virtually identical to

those using the consolidated BHC.



4. Extensions and Robustness Tests
       4.1     Alternative measures of discretionary loan loss provisions

       We considered alternative measures of the degree to which banks manipulate

information disclosed to the public and regulators. In this subsection, we use different models

of loan loss provisioning, collect the residuals from these models, and compute the logarithm

of the absolute value of the residuals as alternative proxies of discretionary LLPs.

Specifically, we use four additional models described in Beatty and Liao (2014). The first
two models are simple modifications of their preferred model of LLPs:

       Model (a) in Beatty and Liao (2014):




                                                                                          (10)

       Model (b) in Beatty and Liao (2014):
                                                                                                              24




                                                                                                            (11)

         The next model is from Kanagaretnam et al. (2010):




                                                                                                           (12)

and, the final model is from Bushman and Williams et al. (2012):




                                                                                                           (13)

         All of these models also include deregulation measures and state fixed effects in

predicting abnormal LLPs. As shown in Appendix Table 6, these alternative measures of

discretionary LLPs yield the same conclusions: Regulatory reforms that spurred competition

among banks tended to reduce the management of LLPs.8 Our main results in general still
hold. Using various model specifications, we find that the point estimate for the effect of

interstate bank deregulation ranges from -0.2013 to -0.3613 (columns 1-4), which implies

about 20-36% decrease in abnormal accrual compared to its sample average for treated BHCs

relative to their control group. Thus, the economic sizes of the relationship between

regulatory reforms and the reduction in discretionary LLPs are comparable to our main

results based on the preferred measure of abnormal accruals of LLPs.




8
   For brevity, we only include the analyses with two measures of interstate bank deregulation, INTER and Ln(#
of states). The results are similarly robust to using the other two measures. Also, the number of observations is
slightly lower in Appendix Table 6 relative to Tables 2 because one of the new models uses             .With the
two-period lag, there is a loss of observations and we keep the number of observations constant across the
Appendix Table 6 specifications.
                                                                                                              25


         4.2 A different measure of information manipulation

         Rather than inferring the degree to which banks manipulate information disclosed to

the public by using the residuals of an empirical model of LLPs, we also examined the

frequency with which banks restate their earnings. When a bank restates earnings, it means

that the bank either intentionally or unintentionally misstated earnings in the past. Such

restatements could simply reflect a change in accounting standards or a mistake, and few

restatements are criminally fraudulent. Nevertheless, restatements do represent a violation of

appropriate accounting practices by managers and represent an alternative proxy of the

management of information disclosed to the public.

         Following Beatty and Liao (2014), we manually search restatement information in

8-K, 10-K, and 10-Q files from EDGAR directly. 9 We create an indicator variable

(RESTATEMENT) that equals one if a BHC restated its earnings in a year and zero otherwise.

Consequently, we conduct these analyses using annual data. Even though EDGAR’s

electronic files start in year 1996, our search through EDGAR’s paper records go back to

1988. However, the comprehensiveness and quality of the data increased markedly since

1993. We therefore start our sample period from 1993 through 2006 in conducting the

restatement analysis, though the results are robust to choosing alternative sample periods.

These data limitations prevent us from conducting the analyses on intrastate branch or
interstate deregulation. In this section, we therefore only examine the relationship between

interstate branch deregulation and bank restatements. Given the binary distribution of the



9
  We primarily follow Audit Analytics in classifying both fraud and some technical and nonsubstantive
restatements as financial restatement cases in our hand-collection procedure. These technical or nonsubstantive
restatements are related to company reorganizations and restructurings. In addition, we also consider issues
related to accounting rules change or reclassification as earnings restatement. More specifically, we count the
following non-fraud cases as financial restatement reported in EDGAR: adjustment due to mergers and
acquisitions; adjustment due to new accounting principles; adjustment in income statement, balance sheet, or
cash flow statement; adjustment due to reclassification or characterization; adjustment due to internal
management policies, methodology change, segment revision, allocation between lines of business,
measurement change; adjustment due to tax impacts; Adjustment due to error / correction; adjustment due to
operation combination / operation closed / operation sales; adjustment due to loans, assets, credit changes,
investment; adjustment due to warrants, securities, equity changes; adjustment in cash dividends; adjustment in
share outstanding, stock value, stock dividends, or stock distribution; earnings per share or dividends adjustment
because of stock split; earnings per share adjustment or other adjustment because of dividends payment.
                                                                                               26


dependent variable, we use a probit regression model and report the marginal effects. We

confirm the results using OLS. In the analyses, we control for year and BHC fixed effects.

       As reported in Table 6, interstate branch deregulation reduced the odds of banks

restating their earnings. The coefficient estimates in columns 1 indicate that the passage of

the IBBEA deregulation reduces the odds of banks’ earnings restatement by 10%, holding

everything else constant. A drawback of using the probit model with fixed effects is the

potential incidental parameters problem (Neyman and Scott, 1948). The fixed effects model

draws inferences about common parameters and places very little structure on the distribution

of unobserved heterogeneity. However, using a nonlinear model, such as probit model, noise

in the estimation of individual level effects will contaminate estimates of the common

parameters when the time dimension is short. In addition, in our case, many observations are

automatically dropped from the regression due to the zero within-variance problem. We

therefore also run a set of OLS regressions using similar specifications to check the

robustness of our results and report the OLS estimates in column 2 of Table 6. We find that

the marginal effects of interstate branch deregulation on reducing the odds of earnings

restatement is about 6%. These results are not only statistically significant, but also similar in

terms of magnitude compared to those estimates from the probit model.

       In columns 3-4 of Table 6, we also present the dynamic effects of the interstate branch
deregulation on the odds of financial restatement, where financial restatement is modeled by

leads and lags from two years before to eight years or more after the interstate branch

deregulation. The reference group is the interstate branch deregulation year.

       These analyses show that (1) changes in financial restatements do not occur before

deregulation, (2) deregulation triggers a reduction in financial restatements, and (3) the

impact of deregulation on restatement grows over time. The post-deregulation coefficients

starting from the second year are negative and statistically significant at the 5% level.
                                                                                               27




        4.3 Other robustness tests

        Besides the robustness tests discussed above, we conducted a series of sensitivity

analyses. To save space, we describe these robustness tests but do not present the regression

results, which are available upon request.

        First, we were concerned that the management of information might have changed

after the 2004 Basel II Accord because it required more stringent risk-based capital

requirements. Thus, we re-did the analyses restricting the sample to before 2004. The results

hold for this restricted sample period and the coefficient estimates are very similar.

        Second, the ability of banks to manage earnings might vary with the particular

mixture of loans. Consequently, we include additional loan type control variables, such as

loans secured by real estate, commercial and industrial loans, loans to finance agricultural

production, individual loans, and loans to foreign governments, where all of the loan type

variables are scaled by the size of total loans. Controlling for the nature of the different loans

yields very similar results, both in terms of significance and in terms of the economic sizes of

the coefficient estimates.

        Third, there is considerable exit and entry over this period of active merger and

acquisition activity this deregulatory period. To assess whether selection on particular traits
drives our findings, we conduct the analyses only for BHCs that exist for the entire period.

All of the results hold.

        Fourth, we examined whether the intensification of competition reduced actual loan

charge-offs. If the regulatory-induced intensification of competition only influenced the

manipulation of BHC financial accounts but did not alter the actual quality of loan portfolios,

then we should find no relationship between bank deregulation and subsequent charge-offs.

This is what we find. When we conduct a similar analysis using net loan charge-offs as the

dependent variable and controlling for standard control variables in the literature on loan

charge-offs (e.g. Kanagaretnam, Lim, Lobo, 2014), we find that deregulation does not have a

significant effect on charge-offs.
                                                                                              28


5.   Conclusion
       In this paper, we find that bank regulatory reforms that eased impediments to

competition among U.S. BHCs reduced bank opacity. This paper contributes to our

understanding of how regulations influence the private governance and regulatory oversight

of banks. Theory provides conflicting predictions about the impact of regulatory reforms that

intensify competition on bank opacity. Some models predict that competition will induce the

executives of banks to manipulate information either to hinder the entry of potential

competitors or to extract as many private rents as possible in the short-run because

competition makes the long-run viability of the bank uncertain. Other models stress that

competition will enhance efficiency, reduce managerial slack, and force banks to disclose

more accurate information. We provide the first evaluation of the net impact of competition

on disclosure quality.

       The evidence suggests that bank deregulations that removed barriers to the

geographic expansion of banks boosted disclosure quality by intensifying competition among

banks. There is no evidence that intensifying competition makes it more difficult for private

investors to discipline banks or regulators to supervise them. The findings are consistent with

the view that exposing BHCs to greater competition will facilitate the monitoring of banks,

with potentially beneficial repercussion on the governance and regulation of banks.
                                                                                             29


References

Ahmed, A., Takeda, C., Thomas, S., 1999. Bank loan loss provisions: A reexamination of
   capital management and signaling effects. Journal of Accounting and Economics 28:
   1-25.

Ali, A., Klasa, S., Yeung, E., 2009. The limitations of industry concentration measures
     constructed with Compustat data: Implications for finance research. Review of Financial
     Studies 22: 3839-3871.

Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., Levine, R., 2004. Bank regulation and supervision: What works best?
     Journal of Financial Intermediation 13: 205-248.

Barth, J.R., Caprio, G., Levine, R., 2006. Rethinking bank regulation: Till angels govern.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Barth, J.R., Lin C., Lin P., Song F., 2009. Corruption in bank lending to firms: Cross-country
     micro evidence on the beneficial role of competition and information sharing. Journal of
     Financial Economics 91: 361-388.

Beatty, A., Ke, B., Petroni, K.R. 2002. Earnings management to avoid earnings declines
     across public and privately held banks. The Accounting Review 77: 547-570.

Beatty, A., Liao, S., 2011. Do delays in expected loss recognition affect banks’ willingness to
     lend? Journal of Accounting and Economics 52: 1-20.

Beatty, A., Liao, S.. 2014. Financial accounting in the banking industry: A review of the
     empirical literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics 58: 339–383.

Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A. Levine, R., 2006. Bank Supervision and Corruption in Lending.
    Journal of Monetary Economics 53: 2131-2163.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Levkov, A., 2010. Big bad banks? The winners and losers from bank
    deregulation in the United States. Journal of Finance 65: 1637-1667.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and sources of growth. Journal of Financial
    Economics 58: 261-300.

Berlin, M., Loeys, J., 1988. Bond covenants and delegated monitoring. Journal of Finance 43:
     397-412.

Bushman, R. M., Williams, C. D., 2012. Accounting discretion, loan loss provisioning, and
    discipline of banks’ risk-taking. Journal of Accounting and Economics 54: 1-18.
                                                                                              30

Campbell, T.S., Kracaw, W.A., 1980. Information production, market signaling, and the
   theory of intermediation. Journal of Finance 35: 863-882.

Cohen, L.J., Cornett, M.M., Marcus, A.J., Tehranian, H., 2014. Bank earnings management
    and tail risk during the financial crisis. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46:
    171-197.

Collins, J., Shackelford, D., Wahlen, J., 1995. Bank differences in the coordination of
     regulatory capital, earnings, and taxes. Journal of Accounting Research 33: 263-291.

Darrough, M., Stoughton, N., 1990. Financial disclosure policy in an entry game. Journal of
            Accounting and Economics 12: 219-243.

Dechow, P.W., Ge, W., Schrand, C., 2010. Understanding earnings quality: A review of the
    proxies, their determinants and their consequences. Journal of Accounting and
    Economics 50: 344-401.

Demyanyk, Y., Ostergaard, C., Sørensen, B. E., 2007. U.S. banking deregulation, small
   businesses, and interstate insurance of personal income. Journal of Finance 62:
   2763–2801.

Dichev, I., Graham, J., Harvey, C., Rajgopal, S., 2013. Earnings quality: Evidence from the
     field. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56: 1-33.

Flannery, M. J., Kwan, S. H., Nimalendran, M., 2004. Market evidence on the opaqueness of

     banking firms’ assets. Journal of Financial Economics 71: 419–460.

Goetz, M. R., Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2013. Identifying the valuation effects and agency costs
    of corporate diversification: Evidence from the geographic diversification of U.S. banks.
    Review of Financial Studies 26: 1787-1823.

Goetz, M.R., Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2014. Does the geographic expansion of bank assets
    reduce risk? University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.

Hart, O.D., 1983. The market mechanism as an incentive scheme. Bell Journal of Economics
     14: 366-382.

Huizanga, H., Laeven, L., 2012. Bank valuation and accounting discretion of banks during a
    financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 106: 614-634.

Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P.E. 1996. The finance-growth nexus: Evidence from bank branch
     deregulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 639-670.
                                                                                               31

Jayaratne, J., Strahan, P.E., 1998. Entry restrictions, industry evolution, and dynamic
     efficiency: Evidence from commercial banking. Journal of Law and Economics 41:
     239-273.

Jiang, J., Petroni, K., Wang, I., 2010. CFOs and CEOs: who have the most influence on
     earnings management? Journal of Financial Economics 96: 513-526.

Johnson, C., Rice, T., 2008. Assessing a decade of interstate bank branching. The Washington
    and Lee Law Review 65: 73-127.

Kanagaretnam, K., Krishnan, G.V., Lobo, G.J., 2010. An empirical analysis of auditor
     independence in the banking industry. The Accounting Review 85: 2011-2046.

Kedia, S., Philippon, T., 2009. The economics of fraudulent accounting. Review of Financial
    Studies 22: 169-199.

King, R.G., Levine, R., 1993. Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 108: 717-738.

Kroszner, R. S., Strahan, P. E., 1999. What drives deregulation? Economics and politics of
    the relaxation of bank branching restrictions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114:
    1437-1467.

MacKinnon, J. G., White, H., 1985. Some heteroskedastic-consistent covariance matrix
   estimators with improved finite sample properties. Journal of Econometrics 29:
   305–325.

Morgan, D. P., 2002. Rating banks: risk and uncertainty in an opaque industry. The American
    Economic Review 92: 874-888.

Morgan, D. P., Rime, B., Strahan, P. E., 2004. Bank integration and state business cycles.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 119: 1555–1585.

Neyman, J., Scott, E.L., 1948. Consistent estimates based on partially consistent observations.
   Econometrica 16: 1-32.

Rice, T., Strahan, P.E., 2010. Does credit competition affect small-firm finance. Journal of
     Finance 65: 861-889.

Scharfstein, D., 1988. The disciplinary role of takeovers. Review of Economic Studies 55:
    185-199.

Schmidt, K.M., 1997. Managerial incentives and product market competition. Review of
    Economic Studies 64: 191-213.
                                                                                             32

Shleifer, A., 2004. Does competition destroy ethical behavior? American Economic Review
     94: 414-418.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance 52:
     737-783.


Stein, J., 1989. Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
     behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 655-669.


Stiroh, K.J., Strahan, P.E., 2003. Competitive dynamics of deregulation: Evidence from U.S.
     banking. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35: 801-828.

Wagenhofer, A., 1990. Voluntary disclosure with a strategic opponent. Journal of Accounting
   and Economics 12: 341-363.

Yu, F., 2008. Analyst coverage and earnings management. Journal of Financial Economics 88:
     245-271.
                                                                                                                              33

                          Figure 1: Evolution of Disclosure Quality around Interstate Bank Deregulation



                                 .5




                                 0
Disclosure Quality




                                -.5




                                 -1



                                        -10     -8     -6    -4       -2         0         2       4       6   8   10
                                                            Quarters relative to interstate deregulation




                     Note: This figure plots the impact of interstate bank deregulation on disclosure quality by banks in a
                     state. Disclosure quality is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals
                     predicted from equation (1). The deregulation term              represents the interstate deregulation INTER
                     in the equation, which is defined as a dummy variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered in a
                     state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and zero otherwise. For the definitions of the
                     other variables in the equation, please see Appendix Table 1.
                          For each state, year zero is the year the state started interstate bank deregulation, such that one
                     quarter before deregulation is -1 and one quarter after deregulation is +1. We consider a 20-quarter
                     window, spanning from ten quarters before until ten quarters after deregulation. The figure reports
                     estimated coefficients from the following regression:
                                                                                                                        ,
                     where the deregulation dummy variable                  equals one for banks in the nth quarter after
                     deregulation, and the deregulation dummy variable                  equals one for banks in the nth quarter
                     before deregulation, and        and    are time and BHC fixed effects, respectively. The solid line
                     denotes the estimated coefficients ( ,       , …), while the dashed lines represent 95% confidence
                     intervals. The graph is normalized by the pre-deregulation (period -10 through -1) mean.
                                                                                                                   34

     Figure 2: Disclosure Quality over EBTP around Interstate Bank Deregulation



           .4




           .3




           .2




           .1

                  -10 -9   -8   -7   -6   -5    -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5                       6   7   8   9   10
                                               Quarters relative to interstate deregulation



Note: This figure plots the impact of interstate bank deregulation on disclosure quality (scaled by
EBTP) by BHCs in a state. For each state, year zero is the year the state started interstate bank
deregulation, such that one quarter before deregulation is -1 and one quarter after deregulation is +1.
We consider a 20-quarter window, spanning from ten quarters before until ten quarters after
deregulation. The figure reports the median of the absolute value of disclosure quality measures
divided by EBTP. EBTP is defined as income before taxes, provisions recognized in income (in
million $), and disclosure quality is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of
residuals predicted from equation (1) (with                  represents the interstate deregulation dummy INTER
in the equation) multiplied by the value of the lag of total loans (in million $).
                                                                                                        35

               Table 1. Banking Deregulations and Lagged Disclosure Quality
This table presents OLS regressions of bank regulatory reforms on lagged values of disclosure quality
and other potential predictors of regulatory reforms. Panel A presents five regressions, where the
dependent variables are as follows. INTER is a dummy variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered
in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and zero otherwise. Ln (# of States) is the
natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can enter into the home state in period
t. Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of other states
whose can enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted by the inverse
of its distance to the home state. Ln (# of BHCs from Other States) is the natural logarithm of one plus
the number of BHCs from other states that can enter the home state in period t. In the first two
columns of Panel B, the dependent variable is INTRA, which is a dummy variable that equals one if a
BHC is headquartered in a state that has removed restrictions on intrastate branching through mergers
and acquisitions, and zero otherwise. In columns 3 and 4 of Panel B, the dependent variable is
INTER-BRANCH, which is a dummy variable that equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a state
that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from establishing bank branches. Since the sample
consists of state-year observations from 1986 to 2006 and these analyses assess whether discretionary
loan loss provisions predict future deregulations, this table only includes states that deregulated
after1986: 22 states started interstate bank deregulation, 20 states deregulated intrastate branching, and
all states completed interstate branch deregulation after 1986. The variable state weighted residuals is
calculated by the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals predicted from equation (1),
aggregated to the state level and weighted by the proportion of the BHC’s total assets held by its
subsidiaries and branches in that state. Following Kroszner and Strahan (1999), the following controls
variables are included: GSP per capita, state level unemployment rate, small bank share of all banking
assets, and capital ratio of small banks relative to large ones, relative size of insurance in states where
banks may sell insurance (zero otherwise), relative size of insurance in states where banks may not sell
insurance (zero otherwise), an indicator variable that equal to one if banks may sell insurance (zero
otherwise), small firm (fewer than 20 employees) share of the number of firms in the state, unit
banking law, share of state government controlled by Democrats, and an indicator that takes a value of
one if the state is controlled by one party. We also include state dummy variables. Standard errors are
adjusted for state-level clustering and appear in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significant at 1%,
5%, and 10%.
                                  Panel A. Interstate Deregulation
                                        (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)              (5)
                                                                                     Ln(# of
                                                                                                  Ln(# of BHCs
                                                                      Ln(# of        States –
Dep Var                                       INTER                                                from Other
                                                                      States)       Distance
                                                                                                     States)
                                                                                    Weighted)
State Weighted Residuals one
year before interstate                0.0094        0.0105             0.0820         0.0734          0.0955
deregulation
                                     (0.0081)      (0.0104)           (0.0580)       (0.0507)        (0.0675)
State Weighted Residuals two
years before interstate                             0.0022             0.0976         0.0848          0.1163
deregulation
                                                   (0.0077)           (0.0773)       (0.0658)        (0.0914)
State Weighted Residuals three
years before interstate                             0.0020             0.0365         0.0346          0.0423
deregulation
                                                   (0.0072)           (0.0256)       (0.0235)        (0.0298)
Controls                                Yes          Yes                Yes            Yes             Yes
                                             36

N. of observations   310   275   275   275   275
                                                                                         37

                     Panel B. Intrastate and Interstate Branch Deregulation
                                (1)           (2)                               (3)       (4)
Dep Var                               INTRA          Dep Var                    INTER-BRANCH
                                                     State Weighted
State Weighted Residuals      0.0145      0.0153                              -0.0049    -0.0030
                                                     Residuals one year
one year before Intrastate
                              (0.0118)    (0.0097)   before Branching         (0.0087)   (0.0094)
deregulation
                                                     deregulation
                                          0.0069     State Weighted
State Weighted Residuals                                                                 -0.0119
                                                     Residuals two years
two years before Intrastate
                                                     before Branching                    (0.0109)
deregulation
                                         (0.0048)    deregulation

                                          -0.0006    State Weighted
State Weighted Residuals                                                                 -0.0066
                                                     Residuals three years
three years before
                                                     before Branching                    (0.0075)
Intrastate deregulation
                                         (0.0055)    deregulation

Controls                        Yes           Yes    Controls                   Yes           Yes
N. of observations              328           291    N. of observations         773           682
                                                                                                                 38

                        Table 2. Disclosure Quality and Deregulation: Basic
This table presents results of the effects of banking deregulations on disclosure quality. The sample consists of
BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 through 2006. The dependent variable, disclosure
quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals from equation (1). The
deregulation term        represents one of the six deregulation measures (INTER, Ln (# of States), Ln (# of
States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH) corresponding to
each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table. INTER is a dummy variable equal to one
if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and zero otherwise. Ln (#
of States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can enter into the home state
in period t. Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of other states
whose can enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted by the inverse of its
distance to the home state. Ln (# of BHCs from Other States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of
BHCs from other states that can enter the home state in period t. INTRA is a dummy variable that equals one if
a BHC is headquartered in a state that has removed restrictions on intrastate branching through mergers and
acquisitions, and zero otherwise. INTER-BRANCH is a dummy variable that equals one if the BHC is
headquartered in a state that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from establishing bank branches.
Appendix Table 1 defines the other regressors, where other BHC traits include Loss and LLP_lag. Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
INTER                                  -0.4716***
                                         (0.0796)
Ln(# of States)                                     -0.0418***
                                                      (0.0056)
Ln(# of States – Distance Weighted)                              -0.0509***
                                                                   (0.0074)
Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)                                               -0.0374***
                                                                                (0.0046)
INTRA                                                                                      -0.8341***
                                                                                             (0.0589)
INTER-BRANCH                                                                                            -0.6271***
                                                                                                          (0.0517)
logSIZE                                 0.0719***    0.0589**    0.0587**      0.0575**    0.0791***      0.0534*
                                         (0.0269)    (0.0259)     (0.0261)     (0.0261)     (0.0261)      (0.0281)
CAP                                     2.1018***   1.9032***    1.9942***    1.9287***    1.8303***     1.6243***
                                         (0.4914)    (0.4884)     (0.4940)     (0.4874)     (0.4907)      (0.5144)
Other BHC traits                            yes         yes          yes          yes          yes           yes
Quarter fixed effects                       yes         yes          yes          yes          yes           yes
BHC fixed effects                           yes         yes          yes          yes          yes           yes
N                                         27137       27137        27137        27137        27137         27137
R-sq                                      0.3079      0.3121       0.3110       0.3128       0.3123        0.3162
                                                                                                              39

                 Table 3. Disclosure Quality and Deregulation: Fully Interacted
This table presents results of the effects of banking deregulations on disclosure quality. The sample consists of
BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 through 2006. The dependent variable, disclosure
quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals predicted from equation (1a).
The deregulation term        is one of the six deregulation measures (INTER, Ln (# of States), Ln (# of
States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH) corresponding to
each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table plus each corresponding deregulation
measures fully interacted with all the other independent variables used in equation (1a). INTER is a dummy
variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and
zero otherwise. Ln (# of States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can
enter into the home state in period t. Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted) is the natural logarithm of one plus the
number of other states whose can enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted
by the inverse of its distance to the home state. Ln (# of BHCs from Other States) is the natural logarithm of
one plus the number of BHCs from other states that can enter the home state in period t. INTRA is a dummy
variable that equals one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has removed restrictions on intrastate
branching through mergers and acquisitions, and zero otherwise. INTER-BRANCH is a dummy variable that
equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a state that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from
establishing bank branches. We take the natural logarithm of the sum of the weighted distance measures.
Appendix Table 1 defines the other regressors, where other BHC traits include Loss and LLP_lag. Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
INTER                                     -0.5123***
                                            (0.0833)
Ln(# of States)                                        -0.0452***
                                                         (0.0055)
Ln(# of States – Distance Weighted)                                -0.0532***
                                                                     (0.0067)
Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)                                                  -0.0368***
                                                                                   (0.0048)
INTRA                                                                                         -0.7954***
                                                                                                (0.0639)
INTER-BRANCH                                                                                               -0.5604***
                                                                                                             (0.0532)
logSIZE                                     0.0554** 0.0649** 0.0602** 0.0665** 0.0770***                     0.0278
                                            (0.0260)     (0.0260)    (0.0260)      (0.0263)     (0.0260)     (0.0265)
CAP                                        1.7315*** 1.6491*** 1.6274*** 1.5950*** 1.6794*** 1.3900***
                                            (0.4832)     (0.4925)    (0.4989)      (0.4913)     (0.4841)     (0.4886)
Other BHC traits                               yes          yes         yes           yes          yes          yes
Quarter fixed effects                          yes          yes         yes           yes          yes          yes
BHC fixed effects                              yes          yes         yes           yes          yes          yes
N                                             27137       27137       27137         27137        27137        27137
R-sq                                         0.3078       0.3112      0.3116        0.3116       0.3094       0.3233
                                                                                                                  40

               Table 4. Disclosure Quality and BHC-Specific Deregulation Measures
This table presents results of the effects of interstate bank deregulation on disclosure quality, where the
interstate bank deregulation measures include information on the regulatory environment facing each
subsidiary in a BHC. The sample consists of BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 through
2006. The dependent variable, disclosure quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of
residuals predicted from equation (8). For columns 1-3, the deregulation term                       used in equation
(1a) is one of the deregulation measures (BHC_DIS, BHC_DIS_NUM, BHC_DIS_GDP) corresponding to the
deregulation measures used in columns 1-3 of this table. For columns 4-6, the deregulation term             includes
one of the deregulation measures corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns 4-6 of
this table plus each corresponding deregulation measures fully interacted with all the other independent
variables used in equation (8). BHC_DIS is computed as follows: For each BHC in each period, weight its
assets across all subsidiaries by the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary (including the subsidiaries
in the state of the BHC’s headquarters). To calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each
year, we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of every other state, and for each
subsidiary in a state k (k = j if headquarter state), weight the interstate deregulation between state k and every
other state in period t by that subsidiary’s distance to the other state. We use BHC_DIS to represent this
bank-specific regulatory environment index. We further weight this regulatory environment index by (a) the
number of BHCs in the other state (BHC_DIS_NUM) or (b) the economic size (GSP per capita in $10,000) of
the other state (BHC_DIS_GSP). We take the natural logarithm of the sum of the weighted distance measures.
Appendix Table 1 defines all the other regressors, where other BHC traits include Loss and LLP_lag. Standard
errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state- quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
BHC_DIS                               -0.0499***                              -0.0524***
                                        (0.0117)                                (0.0116)
BHC_DIS_NUM                                        -0.0419***                              -0.0470***
                                                     (0.0093)                                (0.0086)
BHC_DIS_GSP                                                     -0.0513***                              -0.0540***
                                                                  (0.0100)                                (0.0100)
logSIZE                                  0.0058       0.0003       0.0030        0.0108       0.0096       0.0072
                                        (0.0333)     (0.0332)     (0.0329)      (0.0339)     (0.0337)     (0.0335)
CAP                                    2.1866*** 2.2468*** 2.1771*** 1.9631*** 1.9796*** 1.9897***
                                        (0.5903)     (0.5957)     (0.5878)      (0.6082)     (0.6014)     (0.5936)
Other BHC traits                           yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
BHC fixed effects                          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
State-quarter fixed effects                yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
First-stage using deregulation
                                           no           no           no            yes          yes          yes
interactive terms
N                                      25803         25803        25803        25803        25803        25803
R-sq                                   0.2856        0.2862       0.2847       0.2848       0.2864       0.2856
                                                                                                         41

           Table 5. Disclosure Quality and Subsidiary-Level Deregulation Measures
This table presents results of the effects of interstate banking deregulations on disclosure quality at the
subsidiary bank level. The sample consists of subsidiary-bank-quarter observations from the third quarter
of 1986 to 2006. These banks are subsidiary commercial banks of BHCs examined in our main regression.
The dependent variable, disclosure quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of
residuals predicted from equation (9). The deregulation term               includes one of the deregulation
measures corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table plus each
corresponding deregulation measures fully interacted with all the other independent variables used in
equation (1). To calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each year, we first compute
SUBSIDIARY_DIS by measuring the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of every other state,
and for each subsidiary in a state k (k = j if headquarter state), weight the interstate deregulation between
state k and every other state in period t by that subsidiary’s distance to the other state. We further weight
this regulatory environment index by (a) the number of banks in the other state (SUBSIDIARY_DIS_NUM)
or (b) the economic size (GSP per capita in $10,000) of the other state (SUBSIDIARY_DIS_GSP). We take
the natural logarithm of the sum of the weighted distance measures. Appendix Table 1 defines all the other
regressors, where other subsidiary bank traits include Loss and LLP_lag. Standard errors are
heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
SUBSIDIARY_DIS                       -0.0569***                             -0.0562***
                                       (0.0102)                               (0.0051)
SUBSIDIARY _DIS_NUM                               -0.0585***                             -0.0540***
                                                    (0.0082)                               (0.0042)
SUBSIDIARY _DIS_GSP                                            -0.0692***                            -0.0644***
                                                                 (0.0092)                              (0.0050)
logSIZE                                 0.0307       0.0335       0.0245 -0.0767*** -0.0759*** -0.0773***
                                       (0.0235)     (0.0234)     (0.0236)     (0.0064)     (0.0065)    (0.0064)
CAP                                    -0.2825      -0.2491      -0.2723 0.5421*** 0.5695*** 0.5501***
                                       (0.2679)     (0.2667)     (0.2671)     (0.1769)     (0.1770)    (0.1834)
Other subsidiary bank traits              yes          yes          yes          yes          yes         yes
Sate-quarter fixed effects                yes          yes          yes          yes          yes         yes
Subsidiary bank fixed effects             yes          yes          yes          no           no          no
BHC fixed effects                         no           no           no           yes          yes         yes
First stage using deregulation
                                          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes         yes
interactive terms
N                                       55015        55015        55015        55015        55015       55015
R-sq                                    0.1466       0.1479       0.1472       0.1646       0.1662      0.1655
                                                                                                     42

              Table 6. Financial Restatement After the Banking Deregulation
This table presents regression results of the (dynamic) effects of interstate branching deregulation on
the incidence of financial restatements. The sample consists of BHC-year observations from year
1993 through 2006.The dependent variable, the incidence of financial restatement (RESTATEMENT),
equals one if the BHC restates its financial restatements in year t and zero otherwise INTER-BRANCH
is defined as a dummy variable takes the value of one if the BHC is headquartered in a state that has
the State Interstate Branching Laws takes effective by the beginning of year t, and zero otherwise.
Columns 1 and 3 use probit regression models, and present estimated marginal effects (dy/dx). The
marginal effect of a dummy variable is calculated as the discrete change in the expected value of the
dependent variable from 0 to 1. Columns 2 and 4 use OLS. INTER-BRANCH is a dummy variable that
equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a state that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others
from establishing bank branches. Columns 3-4 present results of the dynamic effects, where financial
restatement is modeled by leads and lags from one year before to five years or more after the
interstate branch deregulation. The reference group is the interstate branch deregulation year.
Appendix Table 1 defines the other regressors, where other BHC traits include Loss and LLP_lag.
Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-year level, and reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                  (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)
MODEL                                           Probit         OLS            Probit        OLS
INTER-BRANCH                                 -0.0951*      -0.0571*
                                             (0.0522)      (0.0329)
Years 1 before INTER-BRANCH                                                 0.0084         0.0053
                                                                           (0.0477)       (0.0269)
Year 1 after INTER-BRANCH                                                  -0.0727        -0.0489
                                                                            (0.454)       (0.0375)
Year 2 after INTER-BRANCH                                                -0.1450***     -0.1087***
                                                                           (0.0339)       (0.0397)
Year 3 after INTER-BRANCH                                                -0.1550***      -0.1176**
                                                                           (0.0438)       (0.0534)
Year 4 after INTER-BRANCH                                                -0.2050***     -0.1749***
                                                                           (0.0324)       (0.0581)
Year 5+ after INTER-BRANCH                                                -0.2550**      -0.1578**
                                                                           (0.0909)       (0.0667)
logSIZE                                      -0.0014         0.0037        -0.0057         0.0030
                                            (0.0337)        (0.0225)       (0.0333)       (0.0223)
CAP                                         1.2270**         0.4452        1.2350*         0.4488
                                            (0.5860)        (0.3063)       (0.5860)       (0.3082)
Other BHC traits                                yes            yes            yes            yes
Year fixed effects                              yes            yes            yes            yes
BHC fixed effects                               yes            yes            yes            yes
N                                              2875           5520           2875           5520
R-sq                                          0.1587         0.3050         0.1620         0.3065
                                                                                                          43

                               Appendix Table 1. Variable Definition
             Panel A. Definitions of Variables Used in Disclosure Quality Regressions
Variable Name                 Definition
Deregulation Measures
INTER                         A dummy variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has
                              passed an interstate bank deregulation, and zero otherwise.
INTRA                         A dummy variable that equals one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that
                              has removed restrictions on intrastate branching through mergers and
                              acquisitions, and zero otherwise.
INTER-BRANCH                  A dummy variable that equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a state
                              that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from establishing bank
                              branches.
Ln(# of States)               The natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can
                              enter into the home state in period t.
Ln(# of States – Distance     The natural logarithm of one plus the number of other states whose can
Weighted)                     enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted
                              by the inverse of its distance to the home state.
Ln(# of BHCs from Other       The natural logarithm of one plus the number of BHCs from other states
States)                       that can enter the home state in period t.
BHC_DIS                       Computed as follows: For each BHC in each period, weight its assets across
                              all subsidiaries by the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary
                              (including the subsidiaries in the state of the BHC’s headquarters). To
                              calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each year,
                              we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of every
                              other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k, weight the interstate
                              deregulation between state k and every other state in period t by that
                              subsidiary’s distance to the other state. As before, we take the natural
                              logarithm of the sum of the weighted distance.
BHC _DIS_NUM                  Computed as follows: For each BHC in each period, weight its assets across
                              all subsidiaries by the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary
                              (including the subsidiaries in the state of the BHC’s headquarters). To
                              calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each year,
                              we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of every
                              other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k, weight the interstate
                              deregulation between state k and every other state in period t by that
                              subsidiary’s distance to the other state, and further weight by the number of
                              BHCs in the other state. As before, we take the natural logarithm of the sum
                              of the BHC-weighted distance.
BHC_DIS_GSP                   Computed as follows: For each BHC in each period, weight its assets across
                              all subsidiaries by the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary
                              (including the subsidiaries in the state of the BHC’s headquarters). To
                              calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each year,
                              we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of every
                              other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k, weight the interstate
                              deregulation between state k and every other state in period t by that
                              subsidiary’s distance to the other state, and further weight by the economic
                              size (GSP per capita in $10,000) of each of the other state. As before, we
                              take the natural logarithm of the sum of the GSP-weighted distance.
                                                                                                           44

       Panel A. Definitions of Variables Used in Disclosure Quality Regressions (cont’d)
Variable Name                Definition
SUBSIDIARY _DIS              To calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each
                             period, we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of
                             every other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k (k = j if headquarter
                             state), weight the interstate deregulation between state k and every other
                             state in period t by that subsidiary’s distance to the other state. We take the
                             natural logarithm of the sum of the weighted distance measures.


SUBSIDIARY _DIS_NUM          To calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each
                             period, we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of
                             every other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k (k = j if headquarter
                             state), weight the interstate deregulation between state k and every other
                             state in period t by that subsidiary’s distance to the other state. We further
                             weight this regulatory environment index by the number of banks in the
                             other state. We take the natural logarithm of the sum of the weighted
                             distance measures.
SUBSIDIARY _DIS_GSP          To calculate the regulatory environment facing each subsidiary in each
                             period, we measure the distance from each subsidiary bank to the capital of
                             every other state, and for each subsidiary in a state k (k = j if headquarter
                             state), weight the interstate deregulation between state k and every other
                             state in period t by that subsidiary’s distance to the other state. We further
                             weight this regulatory environment index by the economic size (GSP per
                             capita in $10,000) of the other state. We take the natural logarithm of the
                             sum of the weighted distance measures.

Firm Level Variables
logSIZE                      The natural logarithm of total assets in million $
LLP_lag                      One year lag of loan loss provision scaled by beginning total loans
LOSS                         A dummy variable that equals one if net income is negative, and zero
CAP                          otherwise.
                             Book  value of equity over total assets
EBTP                         Income before taxes, provisions recognized in income in million U.S.
                             dollars.
              Panel B. Definitions of Variables Used to Estimate Disclosure Quality
Variable Name                 Definition
LLP                          Loan loss provision over the quarter scaled by beginning total loans
NPA                          Non-performing assets over the quarter scaled by beginning total loans
dNPA                         Change in NPA over the quarter divided by beginning total loans
LOAN                         Total loans over the quarter in million $
dLOAN                        Change in total loans over the quarter divided by beginning total loans
LOAN_ASSETS                  Total loans over the quarter divided by total assets
CO                           Net charge offs over the quarter divided by beginning total loans
ALW                          Loan loss allowance over the quarter divided by total loans
CSRET                        The return on the Case-Shiller Real Estate Index over the quarter
dUNEMP                       Change in unemployment rates over the quarter
dGSP                         Change in GSP (gross state product) per capita over the quarter/100
                                                                                                         45

                                 Appendix Table 2. Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics on the main variables used in the paper. The sample consists of
BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 to 2006. See Table 1 for variable definitions.
Variable                                N         Mean         Std        P25       Median       P75
INTER                                 27137       0.98        0.14          1          1          1
INTRA                                 27137       0.96        0.18         1          1           1
INTER-BRANCH                          27137       0.56        0.50         0          1           1
Ln(# of States)                       27137       3.43        1.80        3.5        3.91       3.91
Ln(# of States – Distance             27137        0.8        1.55       0.85        1.25       1.26
Weighted)
Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)       27137       6.76        2.16       6.93        7.32       7.36
BHC_DIS                               25803       0.70        1.76       0.85        1.25       1.26
BHC_DIS_NUM                           25803       4.08        2.19       4.25        4.74       4.81
BHC_DIS_GSP                           25803       1.99        1.92       2.01        2.57       2.66
SUBSIDIARY _DIS                       55015       0.61        1.79       0.65        1.23       1.26
SUBSIDIARY _DIS_NUM                   55015       3.96        2.23       3.92        4.71       4.81
SUBSIDIARY _DIS_GSP                   55015       1.87        1.95       1.82        2.53       2.65
SIZE                                  27137      11,014      64318       477        1,067       3,569
logSIZE                               27137       7.34        1.59       6.17        6.97       8.18
LLP_lag (%)                           27137       0.14        0.27       0.04        0.08       0.15
LOSS                                  27137       0.04        0.21         0          0           0
CAP                                   27137       0.09        0.04       0.07        0.08        0.1
LLP (%)                               27137       0.14        0.27       0.04        0.08       0.15
NPA                                   27137       0.01        0.02         0         0.01       0.02
dNPA (%)                              27137       -0.01       1.18       -0.15      -0.02       0.11
LOAN                                  27137       5880      28,660       300         680        2180
dLOAN                                 27137       0.03        0.09         0         0.02       0.05
LOAN_ASSETS                           27137       0.64        0.12       0.58        0.65       0.72
CO (%)                                27137       0.15        0.24       0.03        0.08       0.16
ALW                                   27137       0.02        0.01       0.01        0.01       0.02
CSRET                                 27137       0.01        0.01       0.01        0.02       0.02
dUNEMP                                27137       -0.02       0.03       -0.2        -0.1        0.1
dGSP                                  27137       1.72        2.00       0.57        1.63       2.78
EBTP                                  27137      31.89      171.54       1.18        3.02       9.89
                                                                             46

        Appendix Table 3. Years of Deregulation By State
        Interstate banking   Intrastate branching   Interstate Banking and
State                                                Branching Efficiency
            permitted           through M&A
                                                               Act
AL            1987                 1981                       1997
AK            1982              before 1970                   1994
AZ            1986              before 1970                   1996
AR            1989                 1994                       1997
CA            1987              before 1970                   1995
CO            1988                 1991                       1997
CT            1983                 1980                       1995
DE            1988              before 1970                   1995
DC            1985              before 1970                   1996
FL            1985                 1988                       1997
GA            1985                 1983                       1997
HI              -                  1986                       1997
ID            1985              before 1970                   1995
IL            1986                 1988                       1997
IN            1986                 1989                       1996
IA            1991                   -                        1996
KS            1992                 1987                       1997
KY            1984                 1990                       1997
LA            1987                 1988                       1997
ME            1978                 1975                       1997
MD            1985              before 1970                   1995
MA            1983                 1984                       1996
MI            1986                 1987                       1995
MN            1986                 1993                       1997
MS            1988                 1986                       1997
MO            1986                 1990                       1997
MT            1993                 1990                       1997
NE            1990                 1985                       1997
NV            1985              before 1970                   1995
NH            1987                 1987                       1997
NJ            1986                 1977                       1996
NM            1989                 1991                       1996
NY            1982                 1976                       1996
NC            1985              before 1970                   1995
ND            1991                 1987                       1997
OH            1985                 1979                       1997
OK            1987                 1988                       1997
OR            1986                 1985                       1995
PA            1986                 1982                       1995
RI            1984              before 1970                   1995
SC            1986              before 1970                   1996
SD            1988              before 1970                   1996
TN            1985                 1985                       1997
TX            1987                 1988                       1995
UT            1984                 1981                       1995
VT            1988                 1970                       1996
VA            1985                 1978                       1995
                          47

WA   1987   1985   1996
WV   1988   1987   1997
WI   1987   1990   1997
WY   1987   1988   1997
                                                                                                             48

         Appendix Table 4. First Stage Estimates of the LLP Results Based On Table 2
This table presents the first-stage results using equation (1) on estimating disclosure quality. The sample
consists of BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 through 2006. The dependent variable,
disclosure quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals predicted from
equation (1). The deregulation term          represents one of the six deregulation measures (INTER, Ln (# of
States), Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH)
corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table. INTER is a dummy
variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and
zero otherwise. Ln (# of States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can
enter into the home state in period t. Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted) is the natural logarithm of one plus the
number of other states whose can enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted
by the inverse of its distance to the home state. Ln (# of BHCs from Other States) is the natural logarithm of
one plus the number of BHCs from other states that can enter the home state in period t. INTRA is a dummy
variable that equals one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has removed restrictions on intrastate
branching through mergers and acquisitions, and zero otherwise. INTER-BRANCH is a dummy variable that
equals one if the BHC is headquartered in a state that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from
establishing bank branches.        represents state dummy variables. Appendix Table 1 defines the other
regressors. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-quarter level, and reported
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)
INTER                                    -0.0012***
                                           (0.0002)
Ln(# of States)                                        -0.0001***
                                                         (0.0000)
Ln(# of States – Distance Weighted)                                 -0.0001***
                                                                      (0.0000)
Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)                                                   -0.0001***
                                                                                    (0.0000)
INTRA                                                                                           -0.0015***
                                                                                                  (0.0001)
INTER-BRANCH                                                                                                -0.0008***
                                                                                                              (0.0001)
dNPAt-1                                    0.0245**     0.0245**     0.0245**      0.0245**      0.0246**    0.0246**
                                           (0.0114)      (0.0114)     (0.0114)      (0.0114)      (0.0115)    (0.0115)
dNPA                                      0.0268*** 0.0267*** 0.0267*** 0.0267*** 0.0269*** 0.0269***
                                           (0.0088)      (0.0087)     (0.0087)      (0.0087)      (0.0088)    (0.0087)
dNPAt+1                                     0.0140*      0.0139*      0.0139*       0.0138*       0.0141*     0.0141*
                                           (0.0084)      (0.0083)     (0.0083)      (0.0083)      (0.0084)    (0.0083)
logSIZEt-1                                0.0001*** 0.0001*** 0.0001*** 0.0001*** 0.0001*** 0.0001***
                                           (0.0000)      (0.0000)     (0.0000)      (0.0000)      (0.0000)    (0.0000)
dLOAN                                        0.0001       0.0001       0.0001        0.0001        0.0002      0.0002
                                           (0.0004)      (0.0004)     (0.0004)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)    (0.0004)
dUNEMP                                    0.0003*** 0.0003*** 0.0003*** 0.0003*** 0.0003*** 0.0005***
                                           (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)    (0.0001)
                                                                 49

dGSP    -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002***
          (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)
CSRET   -0.0217*** -0.0205*** -0.0202*** -0.0205*** -0.0215*** -0.0028
          (0.0021)   (0.0021)   (0.0021)   (0.0021)   (0.0021)   (0.0023)
N          27137      27137      27137      27137      27137      27137
R-sq     0.0837     0.0851      0.0858     0.0855     0.0871     0.0944
                                                                                                                 50

           Appendix Table 5. First Stage Estimates of the LLP Results Based On Table 3
This table presents the first-stage results using equation (1) on estimating disclosure quality. The sample
consists of BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986 through 2006. The dependent variable,
disclosure quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the absolute value of residuals predicted from
equation (1a). The deregulation term         represents one of the six deregulation measures (INTER, Ln (# of
States), Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH)
corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table, plus each corresponding
deregulation measures full interacted with all the other independent variables used in equation (1). For
presentation purpose, we also use              to represent one of the six deregulation measures (INTER, Ln (# of
States), Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted), Ln (# of BHCs from Other States), INTRA, and INTER-BRANCH)
corresponding to each of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-6 of this table. INTER is a dummy
variable equal to one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and
zero otherwise. Ln (# of States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can enter
into the home state in period t. Ln (# of States-Distance Weighted) is the natural logarithm of one plus the
number of other states whose can enter the home state in period t, where each of those other states is weighted
by the inverse of its distance to the home state. Ln (# of BHCs from Other States) is the natural logarithm of one
plus the number of BHCs from other states that can enter the home state in period t. INTRA is a dummy variable
that equals one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has removed restrictions on intrastate branching
through mergers and acquisitions, and zero otherwise. INTER-BRANCH is a dummy variable that equals one if
the BHC is headquartered in a state that has liberalized restrictions on BHCs in others from establishing bank
branches.      represents state dummy variables. Appendix Table 1 defines the other regressors. Standard errors
are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the state-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)     (6)
                                                                      DEREG=       DEREG=
                                                        DEREG          Ln(# of      Ln(# of          DEREG
                                           DEREG                                             DEREG
                                                        =Ln (# of      States –    BHCs from         =INTER
                                           =INTER                                            =INTRA
                                                         States)      Distance       Other          -BRANCH
                                                                      Weighted)     States)
INTER                                      0.0038*
                                           (0.0020)
Ln(# of States)                                         0.0004***
                                                         (0.0001)
Ln(# of States – Distance Weighted)                                   0.0005***
                                                                       (0.0002)
Ln(# of BHCs from Other States)                                                     0.0004***
                                                                                     (0.0001)
INTRA                                                                                             0.0009
                                                                                                 (0.0011)
INTER-BRANCH                                                                                              -0.0004
                                                                                                          (0.0003)
DEREGit x dNPAt-1                         -0.0653**     -0.0109**     -0.0142**     -0.0102** -0.0604** -0.0586***
                                           (0.0294)      (0.0047)      (0.0058)      (0.0045) (0.0302) (0.0121)
                                                                                 51

DEREGit x dNPA            -0.0094  -0.0081** -0.0104** -0.0070** -0.0370 -0.0503***
                         (0.0356)   (0.0039)   (0.0047)   (0.0033) (0.0306) (0.0128)
DEREGit x dNPAt+1          0.0093   -0.0010    -0.0012    -0.0006 0.0709*** -0.0137
                         (0.0254)   (0.0031)   (0.0038)   (0.0026) (0.0228) (0.0093)
DEREGit x logSIZEt-1     -0.0004* -0.0001*** -0.0001*** -0.0001*** -0.0002 -0.0001***
                         (0.0003)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000) (0.0001) (0.0000)
DEREGit x dLOAN           -0.0000    0.0001     0.0001     0.0001     0.0034 0.0033***
                         (0.0022)   (0.0002)   (0.0002)   (0.0002) (0.0021) (0.0010)
DEREGit x dUNEMP         0.0017**    0.0000     0.0000     0.0000     0.0008    -0.0002
                         (0.0007)   (0.0001)   (0.0001)   (0.0001) (0.0005) (0.0002)
DEREGit x dGSP         -0.0002***   -0.0000    -0.0000    -0.0000    -0.0000 0.0003***
                         (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000) (0.0001) (0.0000)
DEREGit x CSRET        -0.0782*** -0.0050*** -0.0057*** -0.0043*** -0.0396*** -0.0071
                         (0.0170)   (0.0016)   (0.0020)   (0.0015) (0.0108) (0.0070)
dNPAt-1                 0.0891*** 0.0649*** 0.0394*** 0.0962*** 0.0843*** 0.0662***
                         (0.0272)   (0.0168)   (0.0099)   (0.0311) (0.0279) (0.0111)
dNPA                       0.0360  0.0563*** 0.0371*** 0.0759*** 0.0634** 0.0593***
                         (0.0345)   (0.0150)   (0.0086)   (0.0233) (0.0293) (0.0119)
dNPAt+1                    0.0047   0.0169*   0.0145**     0.0176 -0.0564*** 0.0189**
                         (0.0240)   (0.0101)   (0.0066)   (0.0159) (0.0211) (0.0082)
logSIZEt-1               0.0006** 0.0004*** 0.0002*** 0.0005*** 0.0004** 0.0002***
                         (0.0003)   (0.0001)   (0.0000)   (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0000)
dLOAN                      0.0001   -0.0002    -0.0000    -0.0004    -0.0032   -0.0018*
                         (0.0022)   (0.0008)   (0.0005)   (0.0012) (0.0020) (0.0009)
dUNEMP                  -0.0014**    0.0002   0.0003**     0.0000    -0.0005 0.0005***
                         (0.0007)   (0.0003)   (0.0001)   (0.0004) (0.0005) (0.0002)
dGSP                      -0.0000 -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0002*** -0.0003***
                         (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000)   (0.0000) (0.0001) (0.0000)
CSRET                   0.0557***   -0.0020  -0.0143***    0.0099     0.0170     0.0065
                         (0.0169)   (0.0064)   (0.0030)   (0.0109) (0.0106) (0.0067)
N                          27137     27137      27137      27137      27137      27137
R-sq                       0.0872    0.0887     0.0901     0.0903     0.0901     0.1197
                                                                                                             52

          Appendix Table 6. Robustness Checks - Using Alternative Disclosure Quality Measures
          This table presents results of the effects of banking deregulations on alternative measures of
          disclosure quality. The sample consists of BHC-quarter observations from the third quarter of 1986
          through 2006. The dependent variable, disclosure quality, is measured as the natural logarithm of the
          absolute value of residuals predicted from model (10)-(13), respectively. The deregulation term
              represents one of the two deregulation measures (INTER or Ln (# of States) corresponding to each
          of the deregulation measures used in columns 1-8 of this table. INTER is a dummy variable equal to
          one if a BHC is headquartered in a state that has passed an interstate bank deregulation, and zero
          otherwise. Ln (# of States) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of states whose BHCs can
          enter into the home state in period t. Appendix Table 1 defines the other regressors, where other BHC
          traits include Loss and LLP_lag. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-consistent, clustered at the
          state-quarter level, and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significant at 10%, 5%, and
          1%, respectively.
                             (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)
INTER                   -0.2716*** -0.2381** -0.2013** -0.3613***
                          (0.0945)  (0.0946)  (0.0802)   (0.0914)
Ln(# of States)                                                           -0.0369*** -0.0380*** -0.0131** -0.0516***
                                                                            (0.0057)   (0.0063)  (0.0063)   (0.0065)
logSIZE                   0.0059 -0.0963*** -0.0824***          0.0097       0.0388 -0.0796*** -0.0626** 0.0496*
                         (0.0283)  (0.0288)   (0.0302)         (0.0273)     (0.0278)   (0.0304)  (0.0310)   (0.0273)
CAP                      1.3294** 1.7347***    0.5949          0.9634*     1.5825*** 1.7816***    0.6087   1.4684***
                         (0.5314)  (0.5338)   (0.5268)         (0.5055)     (0.5186)   (0.5544)  (0.5358)   (0.5102)
Other BHC traits            yes       yes        yes              yes          yes        yes       yes        yes
Quarter fixed effects       yes       yes        yes              yes          yes        yes       yes        yes
BHC fixed effects           yes       yes        yes              yes          yes        yes       yes        yes
N. of observations         26149    26149      26149            26149        26149      26149     26149      26149
R-sq                      0.3027    0.3024     0.3189           0.2914       0.3051     0.2978    0.3173     0.2905
