NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDIUM-TERM HEALTH IMPACTS OF SHOCKS EXPERIENCED IN UTERO AND AFTER BIRTH:
EVIDENCE FROM DETAILED GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION ON WAR EXPOSURE
Richard Akresh
German Daniel Caruso
Harsha Thirumurthy
Working Paper 20763
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20763
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Richard Akresh, German Daniel Caruso, and Harsha Thirumurthy. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Medium-Term Health Impacts of Shocks Experienced In Utero and After Birth: Evidence
from Detailed Geographic Information on War Exposure
Richard Akresh, German Daniel Caruso, and Harsha Thirumurthy
NBER Working Paper No. 20763
December 2014
JEL No. I12,J13,O12,O15
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the impact of armed conflict on subsequent health outcomes using detailed geographic
information on households’ distance from conflict sites—a more accurate measure of conflict exposure—
and compares the impact on children exposed in utero versus after birth. The identification strategy
relies on exogenous variation in the conflict’s geographic extent and timing as well as the exposure
of different birth cohorts while in utero or after birth. Results show that war-exposed children subsequently
have lower height-for-age Z-scores, and impacts using GPS information are 87-188% larger than if
exposure is measured at the imprecise regional level. Effects of in utero and after birth exposure are
comparable in magnitude, and children in the war instigating and losing country (Eritrea) suffer more
than the winning nation (Ethiopia). Results are robust to including region-specific time trends, alternative
conflict exposure measures, and addressing potential bias due to selective migration.
Richard Akresh
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1407 West Gregory Drive
214 David Kinley Hall
Urbana, IL 61801
and NBER
akresh@illinois.edu
German Daniel Caruso
World Bank
Global Practices Poverty Unit
1850 I St., NW
Room 6-254 (20006)
Washington, D.C., 20433
gcaruso@worldbank.org

Harsha Thirumurthy
University of North Carolina-Chapel-Hill
Department of Health Policy and Management
CB 7411
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
harsha@unc.edu

1. Introduction
Environmental and economic shocks experienced in utero and during early childhood have been
shown to be especially harmful not only because they may affect health outcomes in the shortterm but also because they may influence health and economic outcomes in adulthood (see
reviews by Strauss and Thomas, 2008; Currie and Vogl, 2013).1 However, determining the
causal effects of early life shocks on subsequent outcomes in a convincing manner has proven to
be challenging, due partly to limitations in available data and suitable identification strategies.
The possibility that early-life growth disturbances might affect future health outcomes is
particularly relevant in sub-Saharan Africa, where armed conflict has occurred with greater
frequency than in other regions of the world. Nearly 70 percent of all countries in sub-Saharan
Africa have experienced an armed conflict since 1980 (Raleigh et al., 2010). In many cases,
particularly in Africa, the conflicts are started or exacerbated by territorial disputes.2 Despite the
casualties and destruction caused by conflicts and the potential for such shocks to affect various
indicators of well-being, the impacts of conflict on health have only recently started to receive
attention in the literature.3 One challenge in this literature has been that most datasets are
imprecise in identifying which households were exposed to conflicts.

1

Research exploring the impact of shocks has focused on different adverse events including malnutrition (Case et
al., 2005; Maluccio et al., 2009; Maccini and Yang, 2009; Almond and Mazumder, 2011), famine (Dercon and
Porter, 2010), conflict (Bundervoet et al., 2009; Akresh et al., 2011; Akresh et al., 2012; Mansour and Rees, 2012;
Akbulut-Yuksel, 2014; Valente, forthcoming), diseases and epidemics (Almond, 2006; Bleakley, 2007; Bhalotra and
Venkataramani, 2012), natural disasters and extreme weather events (Currie and Rossin-Slater, 2013; Aguero, 2014;
Caruso, 2014a, 2014b; Rosales-Rueda, 2014), and pollution (Currie et al., 2009; Nilsson, 2009).
2
The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook (2014) lists over 187 regions in the world that have disputes
over international land or sea boundaries or have resource or resident disagreements; 50 of these are in Africa.
3
Seminal work on conflict focuses on understanding the causes and spread of war and its role in reducing growth
(Collier and Hoeffler, 1998; Miguel et al., 2004; Do and Iyer, 2010; Harari and La Ferrara, 2013; Burke et al.,
2014). The magnitude of conflicts long-term negative economic consequences are debated in the literature (see
Davis and Weinstein (2002) for Japan; Brakman et al. (2004) for Germany; Bellows and Miguel (2009) for Sierra
Leone). A growing literature examines the relationship between conflict and education outcomes (Akresh and de
Walque, 2008; Miguel and Roland, 2011; Shemyakina, 2011). Research focusing only on soldiers finds negative
impacts on their earnings, and soldiers exposed to more violence face a harder time reintegrating into civilian
society (Angrist, 1990; Blattman and Annan, 2010).

2

This paper studies the effects of the 1998-2000 Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict on the future
health status of children by using survey data from both countries that contain information on the
geographic location of households and taking advantage of variation in the timing of the conflict
with respect to when children were born. By using geographic location data, the paper identifies
the effect of conflict exposure in a more accurate way than previous work. Moreover, the paper
compares the health effects of in utero versus early childhood exposure to the conflict, thereby
assessing the relative importance of growth disturbances during these two critical periods. Lastly,
the paper explores several plausible mechanisms by which the conflict may have affected child
health, focusing in particular on the role of health-seeking behaviors such as antenatal care.
The 1998-2000 Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict was based on a territorial border dispute
between the two countries.4 When Eritrea, formerly a province of Ethiopia, became independent
in 1993 following a long guerrilla conflict, sections of the new border were never properly
demarcated. Full-fledged fighting began in May 1998 over these areas, which have been
described as desolate and inconsequential. More than 300,000 troops were dug in and
deadlocked on both sides of the border. Most of the conflict’s casualties were soldiers, since
most civilians left the conflict-torn areas, leaving the armies to fight over empty villages. The
availability of Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data that were collected in both countries
in the years following the conflict (Eritrea in 2002; Ethiopia in 2000 and 2005) provides a unique
opportunity to study the effects of this conflict on subsequent health outcomes of children. The
primary outcome that we study is the height-for-age Z-score, which is likely to capture lingering
effects of any growth disturbances that may have occurred earlier in life during the conflict.
4

In the past 35 years, border wars were fought in Africa (Djibouti and Eritrea in 2008, Mauritania and Senegal
starting in 1989, Burkina Faso and Mali in 1985, Ethiopia and Somalia in 1982), Asia (Cambodia and Thailand in
2008, India and Bangladesh in 2001, Israel and Lebanon starting in 2000, India and Pakistan in 1999, Thailand and
Laos starting in 1987, India and China in 1987, Pakistan and India starting in 1984, Iran and Iraq starting in 1980,
Vietnam and China starting in 1979), and South America (Ecuador and Peru in 1995, Ecuador and Peru in 1981).

3

This paper makes two main contributions to the literature on the impacts of shocks on
children’s welfare and goes significantly beyond previous research that examined the effects of
the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict but only on child outcomes in Eritrea (Akresh et al., 2012). First, to
identify the impact of conflict-related shocks, the paper addresses the traditional difficulty in
correctly classifying a child’s exposure. Whereas a typical approach is to compare large regions
that did and did not experience fighting, in this paper we use global positioning system (GPS)
data on the distance between survey villages and conflict sites to accurately measure the likely
exposure that a child had to the conflict. With this approach, in Eritrea, 24% of households
within 100 kilometers (km) of the conflict sites had been previously coded as being in non-war
regions, while in Ethiopia, 28% of households within 100-300 km of the conflict sites had been
previously coded as being in non-war regions and 2.2% of households that were more than 300
km from the conflict sites were coded as being in a war region. We show that this approach
makes a difference in the estimated effects of conflict, with households living closer to conflict
sites having 87-188% larger impacts than if imprecise regional measures of exposure are used.5
Second, because of the fortuitous timing of the household survey data collection, we are
able to explore whether effects of the conflict differ between children who were in utero at the
time of the conflict and those who were in early childhood. Much of this research on the fetal
origins hypothesis follows seminal work by Barker (1995). There are a number of reasons why in
5

The contributions highlighted here are also the key differences between our paper and the most closely related
prior work by Akresh et al. (2012) who explore the impact of this same war on health outcomes but only for children
in Eritrea. In particular, being able to accurately locate a child’s household due to GPS data ensures that we correctly
measure the child’s war exposure and address the shortcomings in previous research. While that previous research
found that correcting for a household’s war-time migration across regions led to estimated negative impacts that are
13% larger, we find that taking into account how far the household is from the conflict leads to estimated negative
impacts of war exposure that approximately double in Eritrea and triple in Ethiopia in magnitude. Due to data
limitations, it is unfortunately not possible to correct for both the war-time migration across regions and the GPS
distance to the conflict, but it is clear that the GPS correction is significantly larger. In addition, the current paper
measures the welfare impacts for both sides involved in the conflict, thereby providing a more comprehensive and
robust understanding of how winning or losing such conflicts affects children’s well-being. We are able to examine
whether conflict-exposed individuals in Ethiopia, which won the conflict, suffer smaller health consequences than
conflict-exposed individuals in Eritrea.

4

utero exposure may be harmful to child health. These include poorer maternal nutrition due to
disruptions in food supply or income shocks, a lack of adequate antenatal care, and the
possibility that the conflict reduced the number of deliveries in the presence of trained providers.
Our paper examines the relative importance of exposure during these two critical time periods,
something that has not been done in previous research on the effects of armed conflicts. Contrary
to other recent papers that report no later-life effects of shocks experienced in utero (Endara et
al., 2009; Maccini and Yang, 2009; Fletcher, 2014), a notable result in our paper is that
Ethiopian and Eritrean children exposed to the war in utero do have significantly lower heights.
Our results indicate that several years after the conflict ended, there was a significant
reduction in the height-for-age Z-scores of children who resided in conflict-affected regions at
the time of the conflict. This effect increased with the number of months of conflict exposure; in
Eritrea, each month of exposure (in utero and after birth) resulted in a significant reduction in the
Z-score of -0.039 standard deviations while the corresponding effect in Ethiopia was -0.017
standard deviations. Based on the average number of months that children in the DHS samples
for the two countries were exposed to the conflict, these estimates translate into overall
reductions of 0.73 and 0.26 standard deviations, respectively. Classifying conflict exposure
based on GPS distance from conflict sites reveals that children nearest to the conflict sites
suffered even larger effects (1.37 and 0.76 standard deviations in Eritrea and Ethiopia,
respectively), and the negative impact diminished as distance from the conflict increased. These
results highlight the importance of measuring exposure to shocks with detailed geographic
information rather than region-based indicators. Lastly, results indicate that each month of
exposure in utero or after birth negatively impacts child height-for-age Z-scores and the
magnitude of the effects during both critical periods are comparable in size.

5

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the
history of the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict and sketches the spatial and temporal event data for the
most recent war. Section 3 describes the survey data used in the analysis and explains the key
variables. Section 4 describes the empirical identification strategy and Section 5 presents the
main results as well as robustness tests. Section 6 concludes.
2. Background on the Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict
The Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict lasted two years starting in 1998 and stemmed from a border
dispute. The two countries had a long history of conflict with each other prior to 1998. The postWorld War II period saw the former Italian colony of Eritrea become a region of Ethiopia, but
growing dissatisfaction with Ethiopian occupation led to a prolonged period of armed struggle by
the Eritrean People’s Liberation Front (EPLF) against the Ethiopian Marxist government. The
conflict against Ethiopia ended in 1991 and coincided with the end of the Ethiopian civil war in
which a coalition of rebel groups, the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front
(EPRDF), overthrew the government and came to power under the leadership of Meles Zenawi.
Following a referendum in Eritrea in May 1993, the sovereign nation of Eritrea was formed with
the EPLF leader Isaias Afwerki as President (EPLF was later renamed the People's Front for
Democracy and Justice). The immediate period following Eritrean independence saw generally
friendly relations between Eritrea and Ethiopia, in part because the governments had fought
together against the previous Marxist government that formerly controlled Ethiopia.
At the time of Eritrean independence, both countries claimed sovereignty over three
border areas: Badme, Tsorona-Zalambessa, and Bure (see Figure 1 for a regional map of Eritrea
and Ethiopia highlighting these three areas). Continued disputes in these three border areas
combined with larger conflicts over trade and other economic issues proved to be a major

6

obstacle to maintaining peace between the two countries.6 In May 1998, fighting broke out
between Eritrean and Ethiopian soldiers and security police in the Badme area, which was under
Ethiopian control.7 Within a week, the Ethiopian Parliament declared war on Eritrea. Both
countries devoted substantial resources to growing their armies, augmenting their military
equipment, and fortifying their borders, which included digging extensive trenches. After the
initial period of intense conflict, heavy fighting resumed in February 1999 as Ethiopia
succeeded, despite high casualties, in retaking the border town of Badme, but the battles around
Tsorona-Zalambessa were not conclusive. Both sides initially rejected efforts by regional groups
to mediate an end to the conflict, but eventually a Cessation of Hostilities agreement was
brokered on June 18, 2000 and a 25-kilometer-wide demilitarized Temporary Security Zone was
established along the 1,000 kilometer Eritrea-Ethiopia border and patrolled by United Nations
peacekeeping forces. A final comprehensive peace agreement was signed December 12, 2000.8
The exact timing and location of the conflict plays a key role in our empirical strategy for
identifying the effects of the conflict on child health. The conflict intensity varied across areas
within Ethiopia and Eritrea. Distance from the conflict sites was an important determinant of
conflict intensity. Areas far from the border zones experienced little or no fighting; whereas the
most intense clashes took place in the border areas near Badme, Tsorona-Zalambessa, and Bure.
While exact figures of the number of casualties due to the conflict are difficult to ascertain, most
estimates of the total number of fatalities, mainly among soldiers, range from 70,000-100,000
(Human Rights Watch, 2003).
6

Eritrea’s independence in 1993 meant Ethiopia became a landlocked country, with implications for its trade and
economic organization.
7
The Eritrea-Ethiopia Claims Commission (2005) states, “The areas initially invaded by Eritrean forces…were all
either within undisputed Ethiopian territory or within territory that was peacefully administered by Ethiopia and that
later would be on the Ethiopian side of the line to which Ethiopian armed forces were obligated to withdraw in 2000
under the Cease-Fire Agreement of June 18, 2000.”
8
The empirical analysis in this paper treats this as the date the war ended, but our results are consistent if we treat
June 2000, the date when the Cessation of Hostilities agreement was brokered, as the time when the war ended.

7

Even though most casualties were soldiers, thousands of civilians were displaced and this
represented a central mechanism through which conflict may have affected child health.
Displaced households suffered large reductions in food production, asset losses, and had limited
access to clean water or health infrastructure. By late 1998, estimates suggest approximately
250,000 Eritreans had been internally displaced and another 45,000 Ethiopian citizens of Eritrean
origin were deported from Ethiopia (Global IDP Project, 2004a). The Eritrean government and
other observers estimate that during the conflict nearly 1.1 million Eritreans were internally
displaced, although this number declined substantially by the conflict’s end (Global IDP Project,
2004a). The Ethiopian government estimates that by December 1998, 315,000 Ethiopians were
internally displaced, with the two regions that border Eritrea (Tigray and Afar) having the
greatest number of internally displaced persons (IDPs). The United Nations Ethiopia Country
Team estimates that by May 2000 the number of IDPs in Ethiopia had risen to 360,000 (Global
IDP Project, 2004b).9 By most accounts, households directly affected by the conflict and those
that were internally displaced tended to be located closest to the areas of the clashes.
3. Data
3.1 Demographic and Health Surveys in Eritrea (2002) and Ethiopia (2000 and 2005)
Our analyses make use of three different waves of data from the DHS conducted in Eritrea and
Ethiopia. The DHS are nationally representative cross-sectional surveys that gather information
on demographic topics such as fertility, child mortality, health service utilization, and nutritional
status of mothers and young children. The 2002 Eritrea DHS collected detailed information on

9

This level of conflict-induced displacement is typical, as currently 27.1 million individuals worldwide are IDPs
due to conflict. For example, during the last decade in Africa, the number of IDPs due to conflict reached 3.5 million
in Angola, 633,000 in Burundi, 200,000 in Central African Republic, 180,000 in Chad, 150,000 in CongoBrazzaville, 750,000 in Côte d’Ivoire, 3 million in Democratic Republic of Congo, 359,000 in Guinea, 600,000 in
Kenya, 450,000 in Liberia, 550,000 in Nigeria, 600,000 in Rwanda, 70,000 in Senegal, 1.3 million in Sierra Leone,
1.5 million in Somalia, 6.1 million in Sudan, 1.7 million in Uganda, and 1 million in Zimbabwe (IDMC, 2010).

8

the date of birth, GPS location, and height of 5,139 children under five born before, during, or
after the conflict with Ethiopia. The 2000 Ethiopia DHS collects similar information for 9,619
children under five, all of whom were born before or during the Eritrea conflict. To have a
control group of children in the conflict regions of Ethiopia who were not exposed to conflict, we
also use the 2005 Ethiopia DHS that has information for 4,217 children under five. Our analyses
rely on DHS data for information on health outcomes (described below) as well as other
individual and household characteristics of children including geographical information on their
residence at the time of the survey and in some cases during the time of the conflict.
3.2 Health outcomes
Since child height (conditional on age and gender) can be sensitive to past growth failures due to
malnutrition or illness, it is generally accepted as a good way to capture long-term health
disturbances (World Health Organization, 1995). Using anthropometric information contained in
the DHS for children 0-60 months of age, we compute Z-scores for each child’s height-for-age,
where the Z-score is defined as the difference between the child’s height and the mean height of
the same-aged international reference population, divided by the standard deviation of the
reference population. Our analysis also examines other information on health behaviors and
health outcomes to better understand mechanisms by which conflict may influence height-forage Z-scores. In particular, we examine data on hospital deliveries, maternal postpartum
amenorrhea, self-reported birth size, and vaccinations.
3.3 Measures of conflict exposure
We construct three measures of a child’s exposure to the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict. The first is a
continuous measure of the number of months of conflict exposure and is defined at the regionbirth cohort level. This allows us to exploit variation across two dimensions: spatial (variation

9

across regions in exposure to the conflict) and temporal (within a given region, the timing of
whether a child was in utero or early childhood during the conflict period). Specifically, we use
information on a child’s region of residence and date of birth to calculate the number of months
the child was exposed to the conflict in utero (defined as 9 months prior to the date of birth) and
the number of months a child was exposed to the conflict after birth. The exposure measure is set
to zero months if the child resided in a region that was not affected by the conflict. As we
discussed in Section 2, the fighting was centered on the border regions near the three towns of
Badme, Tsorona-Zalambessa, and Bure, so in Eritrea, the conflict regions are defined as Gash
Barka, Debub, and Debubawi Keyih Bahri, while in Ethiopia they are Tigray and Afar.
Since conflict-induced displacement was an important mechanism through which the
conflict impacted child health, we also incorporate direct measures of the number of IDPs in
each region to proxy for the conflict’s intensity. The IDP data come from the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA) in Eritrea and Ethiopia. All of
the IDPs are clustered in the three conflict regions in Eritrea and the two conflict regions in
Ethiopia (Global IDP Project 2004a, b). Specifically we use the number of IDPs in each region
as a proportion of the region’s pre-war population as a measure of conflict intensity.
Lastly, to address potential measurement error that would wrongly misclassify children as
conflict-exposed because they live in a region that experienced fighting even if their village was
far from the conflict sites or would wrongly misclassify children as non-conflict exposed because
they live in a non-war region but were actually close to the conflict sites, we construct a third
measure of conflict exposure using GPS information on the residence location of children at the
time of the survey. Specifically, we calculate the distance from each survey village to the nearest
conflict site and classify exposure based on different distance bands of 0-100 kilometers (km),

10

100-200 km, 200-300 km, and greater than 300 km. In creating this measure, we use distance to
the nearest conflict site even if it crosses region boundaries. The distance bands are then
interacted with the number of months of exposure to create the third conflict exposure measure.
4. Empirical Identification Strategy
Our approach to determining the effect of the Eritrean-Ethiopian conflict on child health relies on
an examination of how height-for-age Z-scores of children vary as a function of different
durations of exposure to the conflict and variation in the degree to which their area of residence
was affected by the conflict. We begin by estimating the following regression that includes
region and birth cohort fixed effects:
(1)
where HAZijt is the height-for-age Z-score for child i in region j who was born in period t, j are
region fixed effects, t are year of birth cohort fixed effects, Total Months of War Exposureijt
measures the total number of months a child was alive or in utero during the conflict period and
living in a war region (it equals zero for children in regions unaffected by the war), and ijt is a
random, idiosyncratic error term.10 The regression also includes household and individual level
controls (Xij), such as child gender and household head schooling. In addition, to address the
potential for differential time trends in height-for-age Z-scores across regions, the regressions
include region-specific time trends (

). The coefficient 1 measures the effect of an additional

month of exposure to the conflict on children’s height-for-age Z-scores. It is important to
emphasize that identification of the effect of the conflict in this model comes from variation in
the duration of exposure (conditional on adjustments for age cohort effects) rather than a simple
comparison of conflict and non-conflict regions.
10

Using pre-war poverty data for all regions in Eritrea and Ethiopia, we also confirm that the results in the paper are
similar when non-war regions are limited to those with similar pre-war poverty levels as the war regions.

11

We also examine if the conflict effect differs based on how long a child was exposed
while in utero or after birth. We estimate the following regression building on Equation (1):
(2)

where Months War Exposure In Uteroijt measures the number of months a child was in utero
during the war period and living in a war region and Months War Exposure After Birthijt
measures the number of months a child was alive during the war and living in a war region.
Residence in a conflict region alone does not capture the size of the disruptions caused by
the conflict. To address this, we consider an alternative definition of conflict exposure that
measures the number of IDPs in each region as a proportion of the region’s pre-war population.
As war-induced displacement was likely an important channel through which conflict impacted
child health, this measure will proxy for the war’s intensity in that region. The war intensity
variable is interacted with total months of war exposure described above. Identification comes
from variation across regions with different numbers of IDPs as well as variation in the duration
of exposure to the conflict. We estimate the following regression incorporating IDP data:
(3)

We also estimate modified versions of Equation (3) in which the effect of the conflict varies
based on the number of months of exposure in utero and after birth.
In defining conflict exposure based on living in one of the three regions in Eritrea or two
regions in Ethiopia where fighting took place – or even on the basis of the number of IDPs in
each region – there is a potential for wrongly classifying villages far from the conflict sites as
conflict exposed (and vice versa in the case of villages in non-conflict regions that are

12

nonetheless close to conflict sites). This can result in biased estimates as some regions extend
many kilometers from the conflict sites (see Afar in Ethiopia and Debubawi Keyih Bahri in
Eritrea). Likewise, we might be excluding households close to conflict sites that may have been
affected by conflict but were actually in a non-conflict defined region (see Semenawi Keyih
Bahri in Eritrea). To more accurately measure a child’s conflict exposure, our empirical strategy
takes advantage of information on the distance of each survey village to the conflict sites. We
test for the effect of each additional month of exposure to the conflict in three different distance
categories (with a fourth category, greater than 300 km, serving as the reference group):
0

(4)
100

100

200
200

300

where Total Months War Exposure 0-100 km measures the number of months a child was alive
or in utero during the war period and living within 0-100km from the conflict sites, with the
other exposure variables defined similarly but for different distances from the conflict sites.11
Our empirical analysis includes several extensions to the regressions above as well as
robustness checks. Since the main regression results are based on a child’s residence at the time
of the survey, there is a possibility of bias due to children having resided elsewhere during the
time of the conflict. We take two approaches to addressing this issue. First, all children from
households that reported having lived elsewhere during the war are reclassified as residing in a
war region.12 This is a conservative approach to dealing with the bias due to endogenous
migration as some of these children who moved during the war and currently reside in a non-war
11
In robustness checks discussed in Section 5.2 and Appendix Table 4, we also examine a child’s war exposure that
is based on a continuous distance measure and results are consistent.
12
This involves reclassifying 10.9% and 5.9% of children in Eritrea and Ethiopia, respectively. In Eritrea (but not
Ethiopia), we have data on the region of residence at the time of the conflict, and we can tell that only 3.9% of
children should have been reclassified instead of 10.9%.

13

region might have been living in another non-war region during the war. Second, in Eritrea, we
use actual information contained in the survey on the region of residence at the time of the
conflict and examine what happens to the results when this re-classification is done.
5. Empirical Results
5.1 Difference-in-Differences Estimation (War region and Geospatial location)
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the children in the analysis broken down by whether the
child lived close to the conflict sites (0-100 km) or farther away (more than 100 km). In Ethiopia
and Eritrea, children residing close to conflict sites have lower Z-scores than those residing
farther away, although the difference is statistically significant only in Ethiopia. Children near
the conflict sites are also worse off in other ways, as indicated by the lower schooling attainment
of household heads. Since the regions affected by the conflict tended to be worse off even prior
to the conflict, it is important to not simply compare the height-for-age Z-scores of children in
war-affected and war-unaffected regions when seeking to determine the impact of the conflict.
The results from our initial attempt to examine the impact of the conflict after including
region fixed effects and controlling for age, individual, and household characteristics are
reported in Table 2. Specifically, we present the results of estimating Equations (1) and (2) for
Ethiopia (panel A) and Eritrea (panel B).13 In the first two columns, each child's residence is
classified according to the region of residence at the time of the DHS. In columns 3 and 4, the
child's residence is classified as the potential region of residence at the time of the conflict,
whereby any child who moved during the conflict is assigned to the conflict regions. In columns

13

In all of the regressions, we include child age fixed effects, region fixed effects, region-specific time trends, DHS
round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and the following household characteristics: household head’s
gender, age, years of schooling, mother’s height, number of members in the household, number of children in the
household under age 5, and whether the household resides in an urban area. Correlation among the error terms of
children living in the same local environment and experiencing similar health shocks might bias the OLS standard
errors downward, so in all regressions we cluster the standard errors by enumeration area, which corresponds to
local clusters of villages (Moulton, 1986).

14

5 and 6, using data that is only available for Eritrea, the child's residence is classified as their
known region of residence at the time of the conflict to accurately capture conflict exposure.
Column 1 of Table 2 shows that for children exposed to the conflict in utero or after birth, each
additional month of exposure results in a significant reduction of height-for-age Z-scores (by
0.017 in Ethiopia and 0.039 in Eritrea). When children’s exposure is classified on the basis of
their potential residence at the time of the conflict (column 3), the effects on height-for-age Zscores remain similar (-0.014 in Ethiopia and -0.040 in Eritrea) and continue to be statistically
significant. This indicates our results are robust to an extremely conservative adjustment for
migration during the conflict. In Eritrea, the results based on classifying residence as the region
in which the child resided at the time of the conflict (column 5) also shows a similar effect size
to that obtained when residence is classified as the region of residence at the time of the survey.
Another important result in Table 2 pertains to the distinct effect of exposure to the
conflict in utero as opposed to early childhood. In both Ethiopia and Eritrea, we find that the
effects of exposure after birth are larger (reductions in the Z-scores of 0.019 and 0.047 for each
month of exposure in Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively), although we cannot reject equality in
Eritrea. In Ethiopia, there is no statistically significant effect on height-for-age Z-scores of in
utero exposure to conflict. In contrast, in Eritrea, in utero exposure does result in a significant
reduction of Z-scores, by 0.034 for each month of exposure. In summary, Table 2 (focusing on
exposure at the region level) provides evidence that exposure to the conflict after birth is
associated with significant negative effects on height-for-age Z scores. To interpret these results
more easily, it is helpful to consider as an example the effects of children exposed to the conflict
for 9 months in utero or 9 months after birth: a child in Eritrea exposed to the conflict for 9

15

months in utero experienced a reduction of 0.306 in their height-for-age Z-score whereas a child
exposed to the conflict for 9 months after birth experienced a reduction of 0.423 in their Z-score.
An alternative measure of conflict exposure that we discussed in Section 3 is the intensity
of the conflict in the child’s region of residence. Estimating a model based on this measure
(Equation 3) produces results in Table 3 that are largely consistent with those reported in Table
2. It is in the regions most affected by the conflict – as measured by the proportion of IDPs – that
children experience the largest setbacks to their growth. Each month of exposure reduces the
height-for-age Z-scores of children, and this impact increases as a function of conflict intensity
in the region. The main results, based on residence at the time of the survey, indicate that an
increase of 1 percent in the IDP proportion of a region’s population reduces the height-for-age Zscores by 0.0017 and 0.0015 for each month of total exposure (in utero and after birth) in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively.14 The effects are similar when residence is based on
classifying all children who migrated as having been in conflict regions. When the effects of the
conflict are allowed to differ as a function of exposure in utero and after birth (column 2), we
find statistically significant effects of exposure after birth in both countries.15
Using geospatial data on the proximity of each household to conflict sites enables a more
careful examination of the ways in which the conflict affected children’s subsequent health
outcomes. Estimating regression models that use distance from conflict sites as the measure of
conflict exposure (Equation 4), we find that an additional month of exposure in utero or after
14

These impacts are large and meaningful, especially when considering the number of IDPs in each country. In
Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively, 8.6% and 21.1 % of the population in the war regions were IDPs. In Ethiopia, the
mean number of months of exposure for children in the DHS sample was 15.5; in Eritrea it was 18.8. Thus, a child
who experienced the conflict for the mean number of months in a region experiencing the average war intensity
would have 0.23 or 0.60 standard deviations lower height-for-age Z-scores in Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively.
15
It is also possible that households experiencing negative shocks sent out children to live with other relatives (see
Akresh (2009) for evidence on the link between negative shocks and child fostering). Although we do not have any
information in the survey about this, we are unable to tell which direction, if any, this might bias the results
depending on whether the most healthy or the least healthy child was fostered, but most of the child fostering
literature finds the rate of fostering for children under five to be extremely low.

16

birth significantly reduces the height-for-age Z-scores of children nearest to conflict sites by
0.049 in Ethiopia and by 0.073 in Eritrea (Table 4a, columns 1 & 2). Table 4a shows exposure at
any distance within 300 km of the conflict sites (relative to the reference group of children living
more than 300 km from the conflict sites) is negatively related to worse child outcomes.
Importantly, it also shows that within 300 km of the conflict sites, there is a decreasing gradient
in the effect of conflict as a function of distance from the conflict sites. The gradient is most
noticeable and statistically significant in Ethiopia, a much larger country than Eritrea and one in
which distance from the conflict sites is likely to have been more relevant for whether economic
and nutritional conditions – and consequently children’s health status – would be affected. As the
p-values at the bottom of Table 4a show, in Ethiopia the effect of being within 100 km of the
conflict sites is significantly larger than the effect of being 200-300 km away. This is not the case
in Eritrea, as the effect of conflict does not appear to decline as much with distance from conflict
sites. These results showcase the importance of geographical data for further illuminating the
effects of conflicts and accurately measuring the size of these effects.16
In Table 4b, we separately examine the effect of exposure in utero and after birth and
results indicate that in the areas closest to conflict sites, both types of exposure result in negative
impacts on height-for-age Z-scores. This is true in both Ethiopia and Eritrea. Effects of in utero
and after birth exposure are roughly comparable in magnitude. While the estimates for Ethiopia
indicate smaller negative impacts in utero compared to after birth, we cannot reject equality of
the coefficients with p-values of 0.23, 0.29, and 0.81 for the three distance ranges, respectively.

16

It is important to note the migration data in the DHS surveys is only at the region level. Therefore, to estimate the
regressions in columns 3 and 4 based on potential residence at the time of the war, we make the strong assumption
that any child who moved during the war is reassigned to the closest distance to the conflict sites (0-100 km). In
Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively, 56% and 13% of the children within 0-100 km were reclassified as being close to
the war sites for columns 3 and 4 compared with columns 1 and 2. Results in Eritrea based on potential residence are
comparable as only a limited number of children were reclassified. In Ethiopia, negative impacts close to the conflict
sites are still statistically significant but are much smaller, since a larger fraction of children were reclassified.

17

While the evidence so far suggests there are large and significant reductions in heightfor-age Z-scores as a result of conflict exposure, an important public policy and intra-household
resource allocation question is whether boys and girls are affected differently. With this in mind,
the results in Table 5 are noteworthy because they show remarkably similar negative impacts of
conflict exposure in both countries for boys as well as girls. The magnitude of the impact is
slightly larger for girls in Ethiopia and slightly larger for boys in Eritrea – but in neither case are
the differences statistically significant. The distance gradient within 300 km for conflict impacts
is noticeable for boys in both countries and girls in Ethiopia.
As part of our analyses, we pool the Ethiopia and Eritrea data to directly compare the
effects of the conflict in the two countries. Specifically, we estimate a fully interacted model,
including interactions of all variables with an indicator variable for Eritrea. The results in
Appendix Table 1 indicate children from conflict regions in Eritrea – the war-instigating and
losing country – have significantly lower height-for-age Z-scores than children from conflict
regions in Ethiopia (in column 1, there is an additional impact of -0.023 in Eritrea for each
month of combined exposure in utero and after birth). This result holds even when we classify
residency based on potential residency during the conflict (column 3). When we examine the
separate effects of exposure in utero versus after birth (column 2), we again find that children in
Eritrea are more affected by the conflict. They have significantly lower height-for-age Z-scores
as a result of in utero exposure (0.043 lower for each additional month of conflict exposure) and
due to early childhood exposure (0.028 lower for each additional month of conflict exposure).
A similar pattern emerges in the pooled data when we examine the effects of the conflict
based on distance from conflict sites. Appendix Table 2a shows that for each category of
distance from conflict sites, children in Eritrea have more negative effects on height-for-age Z-

18

scores than children in Ethiopia. When we classify residency based on residence at the time of
the survey (column 1), the effect of each month of conflict exposure (in utero or after birth) on
the height-for-age Z-scores of children closest to the conflict sites in Eritrea is 0.024 larger than
in Ethiopia. Among children at intermediate or farther distances from conflict sites, the effects on
children in Eritrea are also significantly more negative.17
5.2 Robustness Checks
To determine whether the conflict effects are robust to a range of possibilities that could generate
biased results, in Appendix Tables 3-6 we present additional analyses. In Appendix Table 3, we
include mother fixed effects in the regression, which allows us to control for characteristics of
the child’s mother that do not vary across siblings. Identification is driven by comparing children
of the same mother, each of whom experienced different months of conflict exposure. In the
sample of households with multiple children under five, results indicate significant negative
effects for each month of conflict exposure for both Ethiopia and Eritrea for most distances from
the conflict, although the distance gradient is not as evident as before. Also in contrast to the
Table 4a results, the magnitude of the effects is smaller in both countries. In Appendix Table 4,
we define households’ proximity to the conflict sites on the basis of the relative distance within
the sample rather than the absolute distance.18 The results indicate that relative proximity – or
closeness –results in larger reductions in the height-for-age Z-score. The effect of relative
proximity is found for in utero exposure as well as exposure after birth.
Another concern regarding the validity of the main estimates relates to the possibility that
fertility and mortality patterns may be different in areas that were exposed to the conflict with
17
In Appendix Table 2b using pooled data, we highlight the different impacts for children exposed in utero and after
birth. Children exposed in utero experience larger negative impacts on height-for-age Z-scores in Eritrean than
Ethiopia for each of the proximity categories, but the effects of exposure after birth are similar in the two countries.
18
Specifically, proximity is defined for each country as the maximum distance from the conflict site minus the
household’s actual distance to the conflict site.

19

varying severity. We examine fertility patterns by comparing characteristics of women based on
whether they had children during the conflict and their region of residence (Appendix Table 5).
There is relatively little evidence that women who had a child during the conflict and reside in a
war region are systematically different than other women. In Ethiopia, there is evidence that
taller women were more likely to have children in war regions during the conflict (an effect that
would only bias our main results downward). In Eritrea, there is evidence of an effect on the age
of women who had children, but this effect is likely to be too minor to influence the main results.
In Appendix Table 6, we use DHS data on child mortality to examine whether conflict
exposure resulted in increased mortality. The results generally do not indicate a significant effect
on mortality, with the exception that in Ethiopia children exposed after birth and residing less
than 100 km from conflict sites had significantly higher mortality. This overall lack of
relationship between conflict exposure and mortality should be understood in the context of an
environment with already extremely high under-5 mortality (pre-war under-5 mortality rates in
Ethiopia and Eritrea are 162 and 105 deaths per 1000 live births, respectively). As deceased
children were likely those with poorer health (and possibly from poorer households), such a
result would only lead to a downward bias in the main results reported in the paper.19
5.3 Conflict Impact Mechanisms
Identifying specific reasons for the negative effects of conflicts on child health can be useful for
interpreting the main results of this paper and also developing better policies to prevent such
negative effects in the future. Displacement of households might be a key channel by which
children’s health status is affected, but the absence of detailed survey information on the
19
An additional factor that could bias our results is also worth discussing briefly. Mismeasurement of a child’s age
would likely make our estimates lower bounds of the true impact, as parents would probably underreport the age of
short children making their malnutrition seem less severe than it is. Since the household roster collects the exact
birth date of all children in a household under five and misreporting on one child would be more difficult as it would
influence the birth dates of the household’s other children, such mismeasurement may be somewhat less likely.

20

movement of households limits our ability to examine this issue thoroughly. Many families were
internally displaced in both countries due to the conflict. Due to this, households could have been
directly worse off through loss of harvests and assets, disruption of businesses, and reduced
access to medicines, health clinics, and clean water. While the DHS data lack detailed
information on some of these reasons, in Table 6 we assess the impacts of the conflict on
relevant health-seeking behaviors and outcomes that are observed in the DHS data.20
One possibility is that access to health services was reduced during the conflict. We
examine the conflict’s effects on the likelihood that children were delivered at a formal health
clinic or hospital where the risk of infections is lower and availability of personnel capable of
managing complications is higher. The results (column 1) indicate that in Ethiopia the conflict
had a negative impact on the likelihood of such delivery taking place. In Eritrea, the impacts are
negative but not statistically significant (though in regressions based on war regions, the impacts
are of the same magnitude and statistically significant). A second possibility is that prenatal
factors (including nutrition and maternal stress) were affected by the conflict and led to reduced
birth weight. Mothers were asked during the survey about the size of the child at birth, and we
examine an indicator reporting if the child was “very small.” In Ethiopia, children who were in
households close to conflict sites are more likely to have been very small at birth. In Eritrea,
however, we find no evidence of an effect on birth size. This is puzzling in light of the generally
larger impacts of the conflict on height-for-age Z-scores in Eritrea. Additional evidence that
mothers exposed to the conflict might have had worse nutrition or suffered more stress can be
seen in column 3, which shows that conflict exposure led to greater durations of postpartum
amenorrhea in mothers; these impacts were found in both Eritrea and Ethiopia (Aguirre, 1996).

20

There could also be effects on children who were not displaced by the conflict but resided in areas with many
displaced individuals (Baez, 2011).

21

Finally, there is suggestive evidence that in Eritrea, children exposed to the conflict receive
fewer vaccinations in their first year of life. Overall, disruptions in the health care environment
(reductions in deliveries at clinics and reduced vaccination coverage) combined with greater
maternal stressors (higher amenorrhea and increased low birth weight children) are potential
mechanisms that could explain negative health effects observed for conflict-exposed children.
6. Conclusion
This paper quantifies the medium-term health consequences of the Eritrea-Ethiopia conflict
using a variety of different methods and conflict exposure measures. The findings show large
negative effects of the conflict on the height-for-age Z-scores of children exposed to the conflict.
Since children and households in a number of other resource-limited settings have been exposed
to conflicts that feature internal displacement and disruptions of health services, this paper has
relevance for the larger literature on the medium- and long-term effects of armed conflicts.
The empirical methods used in this paper overcome several challenges to identifying the
causal effect of conflict exposure. We compare children exposed to the conflict for varying
durations and at different stages (in utero and after birth). We also classify children’s conflict
exposure on the basis of the geographical coordinates of their residence. We find the effects of in
utero and after birth exposure to the conflict are similar in magnitude, and children in the losing
country (Eritrea) suffer more than the winning country (Ethiopia). Focusing on the estimates of
children’s conflict exposure based on GPS distance from conflict sites indicates that the EritreaEthiopia conflict led to overall reductions of 0.76 to 1.37 standard deviations (approximately 1 to
2 inches) in Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively, and the negative impact was reduced as distance
from the conflict sites increased. These effect sizes of conflict exposure defined in terms of
distance from conflict sites are approximately three- and two-fold higher (for Ethiopia and

22

Eritrea, respectively) than the effect sizes of conflict exposure defined on the basis of politically
defined subnational units, which is the standard approach taken in much of the literature
examining impacts of conflict. As height-for-age Z-scores are considered important health
indicators of children and are associated with health and employment outcomes later in life, the
results in this paper offer insight on the likely long-term effects of the conflict. Using available
estimates of the effect of early childhood height on school attainment and wages, the results in
this paper suggest that the conflict may lead to reductions in adult wages of about 8% and 14% in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, respectively.21
Understanding the detailed mechanisms by which conflicts affect the health of children
remains a challenge that future research will need to address. By examining several healthseeking behaviors as well as indicators of maternal stressors, we found suggestive evidence that
conflict exposed children were less likely to be delivered at hospitals and received fewer
vaccinations in their first year of life, overall indicators that health service delivery might have
been compromised in the conflict areas. Furthermore, conflict exposure led to children being
more likely to be very small at birth and mothers being more likely to experience amenorrhea.
These disruptions in health care delivery and added maternal stressors are potential mechanisms
that could explain the negative height effects observed for conflict exposed children. From a
policy standpoint, these results suggest households may not have adequate coping mechanisms
for conflicts that disrupt economic conditions and lead to displacement, even if the number of
civilian casualties is limited. The results also reinforce the importance of considering mediumand longer-term health consequences when designing and implementing post-conflict services.

21

We base this rough back-of-the-envelope calculation on the estimate that a one standard deviation reduction in
height correlates with 0.678 fewer grades completed in Zimbabwe (Alderman et al., 2006) and that the return to an
extra year of school in Ethiopia is 15% (Krishnan et al., 1998).

23

References
Aguero, Jorge. 2014. “Long-Term Effect of Climate Change on Health: Evidence from Heat
Waves in Mexico.” Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper 481.
Aguirre, Guido Pinto. 1996. “The Determinants of Postpartum Amenorrhea: A Multi-State
Hazard Approach.” University of Wisconsin, Madison Center for Demography and
Ecology Working Paper 96-03.
Akbulut-Yuksel, Mevlude. 2014. “War during Childhood: The Long Run Effects of Warfare on
Health.” Dalhousie University working paper.
Akresh, Richard, and Damien de Walque. 2008. “Armed Conflict and Schooling: Evidence from
the 1994 Rwandan Genocide.” IZA Discussion Paper 3516.
Akresh, Richard, Leonardo Lucchetti, and Harsha Thirumurthy. 2012. “Wars and Child Health:
Evidence from the Eritrean-Ethiopian Conflict”. Journal of Development Economics,
99(2): 330-340.
Akresh, Richard, Philip Verwimp, and Tom Bundervoet. 2011. “Civil War, Crop Failure, and
Child Stunting in Rwanda.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 59(4): 777810.
Akresh, Richard, Sonia Bhalotra, Marinella Leone, and Una Osili. 2012. “War and Stature:
Growing Up During the Nigerian Civil War.” American Economic Review, 102(3): 273277.
Akresh, Richard. 2009. “Flexibility of Household Structure: Child Fostering Decisions in
Burkina Faso.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(4): 976-997.
Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott, and Bill Kinsey. 2006. “Long Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition.” Oxford Economic Papers, 58(3): 450-474.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. “Health Capital and the Prenatal
Environment: The Effect of Ramadan Observance During Pregnancy.” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4), 56-85.
Almond, Douglas. 2006. “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long‐term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post‐1940 US Population.” Journal of Political Economy,
114(4): 672-712.
Angrist, Joshua. 1990. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from
Social Security Administrative Records.” American Economic Review, 80(3): 313-336.
Baez, Javier. 2011. “Civil Wars Beyond Their Borders: The Human Capital and Health
Consequences of Hosting Refugees.” Journal of Development Economics, 96(2): 391-408.

24

Barker, David J.P. 1995. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease.” British Medical Journal,
311(6998): 171-174.
Bellows, John, and Miguel, Edward. 2009. “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone.”
Journal of Public Economics, 93(11-12): 1144-1157.
Bhalotra, Sonia and Atheendar Venkataramani. 2012. “Shadows of the Captain of the Men of
Death: Early Life Health Interventions, Human Capital Investments, and Institutions.”
University of Essex Manuscript.
Blattman, Christopher, and Jeannie Annan. 2010. “The Consequences of Child Soldiering.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 882-898.
Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1): 73-117.
Brakman, Steven, Harry Garretsen, and Marc Schramm. 2004. “The Strategic Bombing of
German Cities During World War II and Its Impact on City Growth.” Journal of
Economic Geography, 4(2): 201-218
Bundervoet, Tom, Philip Verwimp, and Richard Akresh. 2009. “Health and Civil War in Rural
Burundi.” Journal of Human Resources, 44(2): 536-563.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2014. “Climate and Conflict.” NBER
Working Paper 20598.
Caruso, German. 2014a. “Intergenerational Transmission of Shocks in Early Life: Evidence from
the Tanzania Great Flood of 1993.” University of Illinois, working paper.
Caruso, German. 2014b. “The Legacy of Natural Disasters: The Intergenerational Impact of 100
Years of Natural Disasters in Latin America.” University of Illinois, working paper.
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood
Health and Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics, 24(2): 365-389.
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 1998. “On the Economic Causes of Civil War.” Oxford
Economic Papers, 50(4): 563-573.
Currie, Janet and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2013. “Weathering the Storm: Hurricanes and Birth
Outcomes.” Journal of Health Economics, 32(3): 487-503.
Currie, Janet and Tom Vogl. 2013. “Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing
Countries.” Annual Review of Economics, 5(1): 1-36.
Currie, Janet, Matthew Neidell, and Johannes Schmieder. 2009. “Air Pollution and Infant Health:
Lessons from New Jersey.” Journal of Health Economics, 28(3): 688-703.

25

Davis, Donald, and David Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The Geography
of Economic Activity.” The American Economic Review, 92(5): 1269-1289.
Dercon, Stefan and Catherine Porter. 2010. “Live Aid Revisited: Long-Term Impacts of the 1984
Ethiopian Famine on Children.” Center for the Study of African Economies Working
Paper 2010-39.
Do, Quy-Toan, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2010. “Geography, Poverty and Conflict in Nepal.” Journal of
Peace Research, 47(6): 735-748.
Endara, Skye, Margaret Ryan, Carter Sevick, Ava Marie Conlin, Caroline Macera, and Tyler
Smith. 2009. “Does Acute Maternal Stress in Pregnancy Affect Infant Health Outcomes?
Examination of a Large Cohort of Infants Born After the Terrorist Attacks of September
11, 2001.” BMC Public Health, 9(252): doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-9-252.
Eritrea Ethiopia Claims Commission. 2005. “Partial Award Jus Ad Bellum Ethiopia’s Claims 1-8
between The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and The State of Eritrea.” The
Hague, December 19, 2005.
Fletcher, Jason. 2014. “Examining the Long Term Mortality Effects of Early Health Shocks.”
University of Wisconsin, Madison working paper.
Global IDP Project. 2004a. “Profile of Internal Displacement: Eritrea, Compilation of the
Information Available in the Global IDP Database of the Norwegian Refugee Council.”
Global IDP Project. 2004b. “Profile of Internal Displacement: Ethiopia, Compilation of the
Information Available in the Global IDP Database of the Norwegian Refugee Council.”
Harari, Mariaflavia and Eliana La Ferrara. 2013. “Conflict, Climate and Cells: A Disaggregated
Analysis.” CEPR Discussion Paper 9277.
Human Rights Watch. 2003. “The Horn of Africa War: Mass Expulsions and the Nationality
Issue.” Human Rights Watch, 15(3A).
Internal Displacement Monitoring Center (IDMC). 2010. “Internal Displacement: Global
Overview of Trends and Developments in 2009.”
Krishnan, Pramila, Tesfaye Selassie, and Stefan Dercon. 1998. “The Urban Labor Market During
Structural Adjustment: Ethiopia 1990-1997.” Report No. WPS 98-9. Center for the Study
of African Economies, Oxford University.
Maccini, Sharon, and Dean Yang. 2009. “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and
Socioeconomic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall.” American Economic Review,
99(3): 1006-1026.

26

Maluccio, John, John Hoddinott, Jere Behrman, Reynaldo Martorell, Agnes Quisumbing, and
Aryeh Stein. 2009. “The Impact of Improving Nutrition During Early Childhood on
Education among Guatemalan Adults.” Economic Journal, 119(537): 734-763.
Mansour, Hani and Daniel Rees. 2012. “Armed Conflict and Birth Weight: Evidence from the
Al-Aqsa Intifada.” Journal of Development Economics, 99(1): 190-199.
Miguel, Edward, and Gerard Roland. 2011. “The Long Run Impact of Bombing Vietnam.”
Journal of Development Economics, 96(1): 1-15.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. “Economic Shocks and Civil
Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(4):
725-753.
Moulton, Brent. 1986. “Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates.”
Journal of Econometrics, 32(3): 385-397.
Nilsson, J Peter. 2009. “The Long-term Effects of Early Childhood Lead Exposure: Evidence
from the Phase-out of Leaded Gasoline.” Institute for Labor Market Policy Evaluation
(IFAU) Working Paper.
Raleigh, Clionadh, Andrew Linke, Havard Hegre, and Joakim Karlsen. 2010. “Introducing
ACLED: An Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset,” Journal of Peace Research,
47(5): 651–660.
Rosales-Rueda, Maria Fernanda. 2014. “Impact of Early Life Shocks on Human Capital
Formation: Evidence from El Nino Floods in Ecuador.” University of California Irvine
working paper.
Shemyakina, Olga. 2011. “The Effect of Armed Conflict on Accumulation of Schooling: Results
from Tajikistan.” Journal of Development Economics, 95(2): 186-200.
Strauss, John, and Duncan Thomas. 2008. “Health Over the Life Course.” In Handbook of
Development Economics, vol. 4, ed. Paul Schultz and John Strauss, 3375-3474.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
United States Central Intelligence Agency. 2014. “CIA World Factbook” Downloaded from
www.cia.gov on October 28, 2014.
Valente, Christine. Forthcoming. “Civil Conflict, Gender-Specific Fetal Loss, and Selection: A
New Test of the Trivers-Willard Hypothesis.” Journal of Health Economics.
World Health Organization. 1995. “Physical Status: The Use and Interpretation of
Anthropometry. Report of a WHO Expert Committee.” World Health Organization
Technical Report Series 854:1-452.

27

Figure 1: Eritrea and Ethiopia Regional Map Indicating Conflict Sites

Notes: The main fighting between Eritrea and Ethiopia occurred around the areas of Badme,
Tsorona-Zalambessa, and Bure, which are noted on the map. Map source: Constructed by
Rafael Garduño-Rivera in ArcGIS.

28

Table 1: Child and Household Characteristics, By Proximity to War Sites
Ethiopia
Eritrea
Near
Not Near
Near to Not Near
to War
to War
Difference
War
to War
Difference
Sites
Sites
Sites
Sites
(1)
(2)
(2)-(1)=(3)
(4)
(5)
(5)-(4)=(6)
Panel A: Child Characteristics
Height-for-age Z-score
-2.043
-1.770
0.273***
-1.602
-1.551
0.052
[0.050]
[0.015]
[0.062]
[0.033]
[0.029]
[0.044]
Male
0.478
0.507
0.029
0.514
0.523
0.009
[0.018]
[0.004]
[0.018]
[0.011]
[0.009]
[0.014]
Age in Years
2.130
2.015
-0.114**
2.035
2.041
0.006
[0.049]
[0.012]
[0.515]
[0.031]
[0.027]
[0.041]
Panel B: Household Characteristics
Household Head Is Male
0.759
0.851
0.092***
0.555
0.669
0.113***
[0.015]
[0.003]
[0.013]
[0.011]
[0.009]
[0.014]
Household Head Age
42.346
39.399 -2.948***
40.689
41.538
0.849**
[0.442]
[0.100]
[0.424]
[0.300]
[0.237]
[0.377]
Household Head Years School
1.029
2.146
1.116***
1.702
1.963
0.260***
[0.084]
[0.032]
[0.134]
[0.066]
[0.065]
[0.094]
Mother Height (cm)
155.606 156.924
1.318***
156.532 156.062
-0.470***
[0.210]
[0.061]
[2.546]
[0.123]
[0.110]
[0.166]
Household Size
6.365
6.153
0.212**
6.222
6.139
-0.083
[0.020]
[0.074]
[0.085]
[0.048]
[0.040]
[0.063]
Number of Children Under 5
1.801
1.763
-0.039
1.815
1.846
0.031
[0.025]
[0.007]
[0.028]
[0.015]
[0.013]
[0.020]
Urban (percentage)
0.096
0.181
0.085***
0.211
0.315
0.105***
[0.011]
[0.003]
[0.014]
[0.009]
[0.009]
[0.012]
Observations
780
13,056
2,204
2,935
Note: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. “Near to War Sites” indicates a child living within 100 km
from any of the three conflict sites. “Not Near to War Sites” indicates a child living farther away than 100
km from any of the three conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia
Demographic and Health Surveys.

29

Table 2: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score, Using War Region
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Based on residence at
the time of the survey
(1)

Panel A: Ethiopia
Total Months of War Exposure

(2)

-0.017***
[0.005]

Based on potential
residence at the time
of the war
(3)
(4)

0.009
[0.013]

0.001
[0.010]

Months of War Exposure After
Birth

-0.019***
[0.005]

-0.015***
[0.004]

13,836

(5)

(6)

-0.014***
[0.004]

Months of War Exposure In
Utero

Observations
Panel B: Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure

Based on residence at
the time of the war

13,836

-0.039***
[0.007]

13,836

13,836

-0.040***
[0.007]

-0.042***
[0.007]

Months of War Exposure In
Utero

-0.034***
[0.004]

-0.033***
[0.008]

-0.037***
[0.008]

Months of War Exposure After
Birth

-0.047***
[0.004]

-0.050***
[0.009]

-0.049***
[0.009]

Observations
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, the child's place of residence is based on the region of
residence at the time of the survey. In columns 3 and 4, the child's place of residence is based on the
potential region of residence at the time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is
reassigned to a war region regardless of residence at the time of the survey (i.e. for every child who
moved during the war and is currently residing in a non-war region, we reassign exposure status as if the
child had been living in a war region during the war). This is a conservative approach to dealing with the
bias due to endogenous migration as some children who moved during the war and currently reside in a
non-war region might have been living in another non-war region during the war. In columns 5 and 6, the
child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the start of the war (information which is
only available in the Eritrea data). The war regions in Ethiopia are Tigray and Afar. The war regions in
Eritrea are Gash Barka, Debub, and Debubawi Keyih Bahri. “Total months of war exposure” measures
the number of months a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living in a war region.
“Months of war exposure in utero” measures the number of months a child was in utero during the war
period and living in a war region. “Months of war exposure after birth” measures the number of months a
child was alive during the war period and living in a war region. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and
2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

30

Table 3: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score, Using War Intensity
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Panel A: Ethiopia
Intensity of Total Months of
War Exposure

Based on residence
at the time of the
survey
(1)
(2)
-0.0017***
[0.0005]

Based on potential
residence at the time of
the war
(3)
(4)

-0.0014
[0.0014]

0.0001
[0.0001]

Intensity of Months of War
Exposure After Birth

-0.0020***
[0.0005]

-0.0002***
[0.0000]

13,836

(5)

(6)

-0.0002***
[0.0000]

Intensity of Months of War
Exposure In Utero

Observations
Panel B: Eritrea
Intensity of Total Months of
War Exposure

Based on residence at
the time of the war

13,836

-0.0015***
[0.0003]

13,836

13,836

-0.0015***
[0.0003]

-0.0016***
[0.0003]

Intensity of Months of War
Exposure In Utero

-0.0013***
[0.0004]

-0.0013***
[0.0004]

-0.0014***
[0.0004]

Intensity of Months of War
Exposure After Birth

-0.0018***
[0.0004]

-0.0017***
[0.0004]

-0.0018***
[0.0004]

Observations
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
5,139
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, the child's place of residence is based on the region of
residence at the time of the survey. In columns 3 and 4, the child's place of residence is based on the
potential region of residence at the time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is
reassigned to a war region regardless of residence at the time of the survey. In columns 5 and 6, the
child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the start of the war (information which is
only available in the Eritrea data). “Intensity of total months of war exposure” indicates for each region
the number of internally displaced persons (IDPs) as a proportion of the region’s pre-war population for
each month a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living in a war region. “Intensity of
months of war exposure in utero” indicates for each region the number of IDPs as a proportion of the
region’s pre-war population for each month a child was in utero during the war period and living in a war
region. “Intensity of months of war exposure after birth” indicates for each region the number of IDPs as
a proportion of the region’s pre-war population for each month a child was alive during the war period
and living in a war region. Displacement data for Ethiopia and Eritrea come from the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA). Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000
and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

31

Table 4a: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score, Using GPS Location
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Based on residence at
the time of the survey

Based on potential residence
at the time of the war

Ethiopia

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Eritrea

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.049***
[0.012]

-0.073***
[0.022]

-0.010**
[0.005]

-0.090***
[0.015]

Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km)

-0.033**
[0.016]

-0.059***
[0.008]

-0.013
[0.008]

-0.054***
[0.007]

Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km)

-0.015*
[0.009]

-0.056***
[0.008]

-0.004
[0.005]

-0.045***
[0.007]

Panel A: Total Months of War Exposure
Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)

Observations
13,836
5,139
13,836
5,139
P-value testing equality between proximity
variables:
0-100 km = 200-300 km
0.013
0.468
0.297
0.001
0-100 km = 100-200 km
0.403
0.568
0.761
0.012
100-200 km = 200-300 km
0.294
0.708
0.336
0.069
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, the child's place of residence is based on the residence at
the time of the survey. In columns 3 and 4, the child's place of residence is based on the potential
residence at the time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is reassigned to the closest
distance (0-100 km) regardless of residence at the time of the survey. “Total months of war exposure”
measures the number of months a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living within 0100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. The
reference group is children living more than 300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and
2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

32

Table 4b: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score, Using GPS Location
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Panel B: Months in utero/after birth
Months of War Exposure In Utero (0-100 km)
Months of War Exposure In Utero (100-200 km)
Months of War Exposure In Utero (200-300 km)

Months of War Exposure After Birth (0-100 km)
Months of War Exposure After Birth (100-200 km)
Months of War Exposure After Birth (200-300 km)
Observations
P-value testing equality between proximity
variables:
0-100 km (after birth) = 200-300 km (after birth)
0-100 km (after birth) = 100-200 km (after birth)
100-200 km (after birth) = 200-300 km (after birth)

Based on residence at
the time of the survey

Based on potential
residence at the time
of the war
Ethiopia
Eritrea
(3)
(4)

Ethiopia
(1)

Eritrea
(2)

-0.036**
[0.017]
-0.017
[0.024]
-0.016
[0.012]

-0.073***
[0.026]
-0.060***
[0.010]
-0.058***
[0.009]

-0.009
[0.011]
-0.001
[0.012]
0.003
[0.024]

-0.082***
[0.025]
-0.061***
[0.010]
-0.051***
[0.009]

-0.055***
[0.013]
-0.040**
[0.016]
-0.014
[0.009]

-0.072**
[0.029]
-0.059***
[0.010]
-0.053***
[0.010]

-0.011**
[0.005]
-0.014
[0.008]
-0.004
[0.005]

-0.088***
[0.017]
-0.048***
[0.009]
-0.040***
[0.009]

13,836

5,139

13,836

5,139

0.220
0.777
0.285

0.002
0.012
0.096

0.004
0.459
0.134

0.510
0.670
0.584

0-100 km (in utero) = 200-300 km (in utero)
0.293
0.575
0.611
0.212
0-100 km (in utero) = 100-200 km (in utero)
0.496
0.621
0.562
0.399
100-200 km (in utero) = 200-300 km (in utero)
0.965
0.876
0.872
0.312
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In columns 1 and 2, the child's place of residence is based on the region of
residence at the time of the survey. In columns 3 and 4, the child's place of residence is based on the
potential residence at the time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is reassigned to
the closest distance (0-100 km) regardless of residence at the time of the survey. “Months of war exposure
in utero” measures the number of months a child was in utero during the war period and living within 0100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. “Months of
war exposure after birth” measures the number of months a child was alive during the war period and
living within 0-100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict
sites. The reference group is children living more than 300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002
Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

33

Table 5: Impacts of War Exposure on Children’s Height-for-age Z-score, Using GPS Location
(By Gender)
Dependent Variable: Height-for-age Z-score

Male
Ethiopia
(1)

Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km)

-0.034**
[0.016]
-0.013
[0.027]
-0.005
[0.011]

Eritrea
(2)
-0.112***
[0.033]
-0.069***
[0.012]
-0.059***
[0.011]

Female
Ethiopia
Eritrea
(3)
(4)
-0.060***
[0.015]
-0.059***
[0.020]
-0.023**
[0.011]

-0.029
[0.029]
-0.051***
[0.011]
-0.054***
[0.010]

Observations
6,997
2,667
6,839
2,472
P-value testing equality between proximity
variables:
0-100 km = 200-300 km
0.116
0.109
0.029
0.403
0-100 km = 100-200 km
0.484
0.199
0.964
0.473
100-200 km = 200-300 km
0.781
0.442
0.098
0.792
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In all regressions, the child's place of residence is based on the region of
residence at the time of the survey. “Total months of war exposure” measures the number of months a
child was alive or in utero during the war period and living within 0-100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km,
or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. The reference group is children living more than
300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and
Health Surveys

34

Table 6: Impacts of War Exposure on Potential Mechanisms
Duration of Number of
Delivery Small
Dependent Variable:
Postpartum Vaccines
at
Birth
Amenorrhea First Year
Hospital
Size
(in months)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Ethiopia
Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)
-0.285* 0.468**
0.031
-1.291
[0.166]
[0.238]
[0.101]
[1.426]
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km) -0.279
0.539* -0.083
3.555
[0.225]
[0.298]
[0.095]
[2.862]
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km) -0.075
-0.274
0.110*
0.727
[0.155]
[0.181]
[0.058]
[1.151]
Observations
Panel B: Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)

13,722

-0.112
[0.501]
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km) -0.131
[0.194]
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km) 0.274
[0.190]

13,836

13,330

13,836

-0.404
[0.362]
-0.078
[0.124]
-0.008
[0.109]

0.092
[0.118]
0.305***
[0.041]
0.189***
[0.036]

0.114
[0.119]
-0.025**
[0.012]
0.004
[0.019]

Observations
5,132
5,139
4,926
5,139
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at
10%, ** significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed
effects, region fixed effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia),
child gender, and controls for household characteristics. “Delivery at hospital” indicates the
percentage of children who were delivered at a hospital or health clinic (means: Ethiopia=12%,
Eritrea=22%). “Duration of postpartum amenorrhea” measures the number of postpartum
months the mother experienced amenorrhea (means: Ethiopia=9.9, Eritrea=11.5). “Small birth
size” indicates the percentage of children recorded as very small at birth (means:
Ethiopia=10.0%, Eritrea=4.1%). “Number of Vaccines First Year” measures the number of
vaccinations the child received in their first year of life (means: Ethiopia=1.05, Eritrea=1.24).
The child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the time of the survey.
“Total months of war exposure” measures the number of months a child was alive or in utero
during the war period and living within 0-100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300
km respectively from the conflict sites. The reference group is children living more than 300
km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic
and Health Surveys.

35

Appendix Table 1: Impacts in Ethiopia and Eritrea of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age
Z-score, Using War Region
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Based on residence at
the time of the survey
(1)

Total Months of War Exposure * Eritrea

-0.023***
[0.005]

Months of War Exposure In Utero * Eritrea

Months of War Exposure In Utero
Months of War Exposure After Birth

-0.027***
[0.004]
-0.043***
[0.013]
-0.028***
[0.005]

Months of War Exposure After Birth * Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure

(2)

Based on potential
residence at the time of
the war
(3)
(4)

-0.017***
[0.005]

-0.046***
[0.009]
-0.035***
[0.010]
-0.014***
[0.004]

0.009
[0.013]
-0.019***
[0.005]

0.013***
[0.000]
-0.017***
[0.000]

Observations
18,975
18,975
18,975
18,975
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In addition, interactions of all of these variables with Eritrea were also included
in the regressions. In columns 1 and 2, the child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at
the time of the survey. In columns 3 and 4, the child's place of residence is based on the potential region
of residence at the time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is reassigned to a war
region regardless of residence at the time of the survey. The war regions in Ethiopia are Tigray and Afar.
The war regions in Eritrea are Gash Barka, Debub, and Debubawi Keyih Bahri. “Total months of war
exposure” measures the number of months a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living
in a war region. “Months of war exposure in utero” measures the number of months a child was in utero
during the war period and living in a war region. “Months of war exposure after birth” measures the
number of months a child was alive during the war period and living in a war region. “Eritrea” indicates a
child living in Eritrea. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health
Surveys.

36

Appendix Table 2a: Impacts in Ethiopia and Eritrea of War Exposure on Children's Height-forage Z-score, Using GPS Location
Dependent Variable: Height-for-age Z-score

Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km) * Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km) * Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km) * Eritrea
Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km)

Based on residence
at the time of the
survey
(1)

Based on potential
residence at the time
of the war
(2)

-0.024*
[0.012]
-0.027*
[0.016]
-0.041***
[0.009]
-0.049***
[0.012]
-0.033**
[0.016]
-0.015*
[0.009]

-0.080***
[0.005]
-0.041***
[0.008]
-0.041***
[0.005]
-0.010**
[0.005]
-0.013
[0.008]
-0.004
[0.005]

Observations
18,975
18,975
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In addition, interactions of all of these variables with Eritrea were also included
in the regressions. In column 1, the child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the
time of the survey. In column 2, the child's place of residence is based on the potential residence at the
time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is reassigned to the closest distance (0-100
km) regardless of residence at the time of the survey. “Total months of war exposure” measures the
number of months a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living within 0-100 km, 100200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. The reference group is
children living more than 300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005
Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

37

Appendix Table 2b: Impacts in Ethiopia and Eritrea of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age
Z-score, Using GPS Location
Dependent Variable: Height-for-age Z-score
Based on
Based on potential
residence at the
residence at the
time of the survey
time of the war
(1)
(2)
Months of War Exposure In Utero (0-100 km) * Eritrea
-0.037**
-0.073***
[0.017]
[0.011]
Months of War Exposure In Utero (100-200 km) * Eritrea
-0.043*
-0.060***
[0.024]
[0.012]
Months of War Exposure In Utero (200-300 km) * Eritrea
-0.042***
-0.054**
[0.012]
[0.024]
Months of War Exposure After Birth (0-100 km) * Eritrea
Months of War Exposure After Birth (100-200 km) * Eritrea
Months of War Exposure After Birth (200-300 km) * Eritrea

Months of War Exposure In Utero (0-100 km)
Months of War Exposure In Utero (100-200 km)
Months of War Exposure In Utero (200-300 km)

-0.017
[0.013]
-0.019
[0.016]
-0.039***
[0.009]

-0.077***
[0.005]
-0.034***
[0.008]
-0.035***
[0.005]

-0.036**
[0.017]
-0.017
[0.024]
-0.016
[0.012]

-0.009
[0.011]
-0.001
[0.012]
0.003
[0.024]

Months of War Exposure After Birth (0-100 km)

-0.055***
-0.011**
[0.013]
[0.005]
Months of War Exposure After Birth (100-200 km)
-0.040**
-0.014
[0.016]
[0.008]
Months of War Exposure After Birth (200-300 km)
-0.014
-0.004
[0.009]
[0.005]
Observations
18,975
18,975
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. In addition, interactions of all of these variables with Eritrea were also included
in the regressions. In column 1, the child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the
time of the survey. In column 2, the child's place of residence is based on the potential residence at the
time of the war, whereby any child who moved during the war is reassigned to the closest distance (0-100
km) regardless of residence at the time of the survey. “Months of war exposure in utero” measures the
number of months a child was in utero during the war period and living within 0-100 km, 100-200 km,
200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. “Months of war exposure after
birth” measures the number of months a child was alive during the war period and living within 0-100
km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. The reference
group is children living more than 300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and
2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

38

Appendix Table 3: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score,
Including Mother Fixed Effects
Dependent Variable: Height-for-age Z-score

Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km)

Observations

Based on residence at the time of the survey
Ethiopia
Eritrea
(1)
(2)
-0.037*
[0.019]
-0.003
[0.026]
-0.033**
[0.016]
10,185

-0.015
[0.014]
-0.030***
[0.007]
-0.027***
[0.007]
3,126

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include mother fixed effects, child age
fixed effects, region-specific time trends, and child gender controls. In all columns, the child's place of
residence is based on the region of residence at the time of the survey. “Total months of war exposure”
measures the number of months a child was alive or in utero during the war period and living within 0100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km respectively from the conflict sites. The
reference group is children living more than 300 km from the conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and
2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

39

Appendix Table 4: Impacts of War Exposure on Children's Height-for-age Z-score,
using GPS Location
Dependent Variable:
Height-for-age Z-score

Based on residence at the time of the survey
Ethiopia
(1)

Panel A: Total Months of exposure
Total Months of War Exposure (by
Relative Proximity)

Eritrea
(2)

-0.004***
[0.001]

(3)

(4)

-0.015***
[0.002]

Months of War Exposure In Utero (by
Relative Proximity)

-0.003**
[0.001]

-0.021***
[0.003]

Months of War Exposure After Birth (by
Relative Proximity)

-0.004***
[0.001]

-0.011***
[0.003]

Observations
13,836
13,836
5,139
5,139
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. The child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the time of
the survey. “Total months of war exposure (by relative proximity)” measures the number of months a
child was alive or in utero during the war period and living in relative proximity to the conflict sites.
Specifically, proximity is defined for each country as the maximum distance from the conflict site minus
the household’s actual distance to the conflict site. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia
Demographic and Health Surveys.

40

Appendix Table 5: Endogenous Fertility: Characteristics of Women Having a Child During War
Women’s characteristics
Dependent Variable:

Household heads’
characteristics

Years of
education
(1)

Number
of births
(2)

Height in
centimeters
(3)

Age
(4)

Age
(5)

Gender
(6)

0.001
[0.307]

-0.203
[0.194]

0.740*
[0.438]

-0.713
[0.563]

0.234
[1.005]

-0.024
[0.037]

War Region

2.644***
[0.416]

-0.339**
[0.168]

0.128
[0.413]

0.444
[0.472]

0.592
[0.934]

0.015
[0.034]

Has a Child Born During
War

-0.252**
[0.107]

0.790***
[0.101]

-0.630***
[0.229]

1.169***
[0.302]

-1.000*
[0.561]

0.017
[0.019]

Constant

1.194***
[0.124]

3.610***
[0.081]

156.518***
[0.228]

29.609***
[0.261]

6,833

6,833

6,833

6,833

6,792

6,792

-0.200
[0.232]

0.205
[0.172]

0.169
[0.393]

0.887*
[0.513]

0.320
[0.947]

-0.050
[0.033]

War Region

-0.771**
[0.322]

0.053
[0.143]

-0.067
[0.391]

-0.660
[0.438]

-1.587*
[0.877]

-0.013
[0.033]

Has a Child Born During
War

-0.312*
[0.188]

0.650***
[0.126]

-0.540*
[0.295]

0.471
[0.380]

-1.228*
[0.719]

0.036
[0.025]

2.431***
[0.264]

3.478***
[0.103]

156.594***
[0.310]

30.122***
[0.328]

Panel A: Ethiopia
War Region * Has a Child
Born During War

Observations
Panel B: Eritrea
War Region * Has a Child
Born During War

Constant

42.000*** 0.592***
[0.514]
[0.020]

43.088*** 0.603***
[0.691]
[0.023]

Observations
4,114
4,116
4,070
4,116
4,101
4,116
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. The war regions in Ethiopia are Tigray and Afar. The war
regions in Eritrea are Gash Barka, Debub, and Debubawi Keyih Bahri. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and
2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

41

Appendix Table 6: Impacts of War Exposure on Child Mortality, Using GPS Location
Dependent Variable: Child Mortality

Total Months of War Exposure (0-100 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (100-200 km)
Total Months of War Exposure (200-300 km)

Based on residence at the time of the survey
Ethiopia
Eritrea
(1)
(2)
0.002*
[0.001]
-0.001
[0.001]
0.001
[0.001]

0.006
[0.004]
0.001
[0.002]
0.002
[0.001]

Observations
16,234
5,600
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered at the enumeration level. * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, and *** significant at 1%. All specifications include child age fixed effects, region fixed
effects, region-specific time trends, DHS round fixed effects (for Ethiopia), child gender, and controls for
household characteristics. The child's place of residence is based on the region of residence at the time of
the survey. “Total months of war exposure” measures the number of months a child was alive or in utero
during the war period and living within 0-100 km, 100-200 km, 200-300 km, or more than 300 km
respectively from the conflict sites. The reference group is children living more than 300 km from the
conflict sites. Data source: 2002 Eritrea and 2000 and 2005 Ethiopia Demographic and Health Surveys.

42

