                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE RISKY CAPITAL OF EMERGING MARKETS

                                         Joel M. David
                                        Espen Henriksen
                                        Ina Simonovska

                                      Working Paper 20769
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20769


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2014




We thank Stan Zin, Juan Carlos Hatchondo and Tarek Hassan for their insightful discussions;
Luis-Gonzalo Llosa for his contributions during the initial stages of this project; Luca Macedoni
and Cynthia Yang for their research assistance; and many seminar and conference participants.
Ina Simonovska acknowledges financial support from the Hellman Fellowship and the Institute of
Social Sciences at UC Davis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joel M. David, Espen Henriksen, and Ina Simonovska. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Risky Capital of Emerging Markets
Joel M. David, Espen Henriksen, and Ina Simonovska
NBER Working Paper No. 20769
December 2014, Revised October 2016
JEL No. E22,F21,G12,O4

                                           ABSTRACT

We use macroeconomic data to build a panel of international capital returns over a long horizon
across both developed and developing countries. We document two facts: poor and emerging
markets exhibit (1) high average returns to capital and (2) high betas on US returns. We
quantitatively explore whether consumption-based risk faced by a US investor can reconcile these
patterns. Long-run risks lead to return disparities at least 55% as large as those in the data. Fact
(2), although not a sufficient statistic, is informative about the extent of long-run risk in foreign
capital, and so about fact (1).


Joel M. David                                                       Ina Simonovska
Department of Economics                                             Department of Economics
University of Southern California                                   University of California, Davis
3620 South Vermont Ave. Kaprielian Hall, 300                        One Shields Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089                                               Davis, CA 95616
joeldavi@usc.edu                                                    and NBER
                                                                    inasimonovska@ucdavis.edu
Espen Henriksen
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
1 Shields Ave
Davis CA 95616
espen@ucdavis.edu
1       Introduction
A large body of work has investigated the returns to capital across countries, in particular,
whether the cross-section of returns shows significant and systematic differences. In a seminal
paper, Lucas (1990) uses the example of India and the United Sates to point out that the data
reveal substantial dispersion in the marginal product of capital - one measure of capital returns
- despite the fact that neoclassical growth theory predicts return equalization across countries,
a fact deemed the ‘Lucas Paradox.’1 A common interpretation of this finding is that return
differentials indicate the presence of market inefficiencies, or alternatively, untapped arbitrage
opportunities, that lead to a misallocation of capital across countries. Lucas (1990) touched
off at least two extensive strands of literature: the first points to various market frictions as
hindering capital flows from low to high return countries and so preventing return equaliza-
tion. However, identifying these forces and measuring their quantitative role has been difficult.
A second branch revisits the measurement of returns. For example, in an influential study,
Caselli and Feyrer (2007) find that, after a number of adjustments to the Lucas calculation,
capital returns are approximately equalized in the year 1996, suggesting that there is in fact
no puzzle. Thus, the existence and extent of return differentials and their root causes remain
unresolved, with important implications for the efficiency of the world allocation of capital and
the associated consequences for global economic performance.
    In this paper, we make contributions to both of these strands of the literature. First,
we use macroeconomic data to build a panel of international capital returns over a 60-year
horizon (1950-2009) and across a sizable cross-section of countries (144), both developed and
developing. Our measurement approach uses country-level capital stocks, GDP and prices to
infer the marginal return to a US investor on an additional unit of capital invested abroad.
We find that there is a good deal of variation in average (expected) returns across countries
and that these disparities are systematically related to the level of income - poor and emerging
markets tend to offer higher returns than do rich. For example, the difference in expected
returns between the US and a set of the poorest countries is about 7 percentage points. These
findings are robust to a number of variants on our baseline measurement approach, including
different measures of relative prices and capital shares of national income. Further, differences
in expected returns persist among countries with open capital accounts, where barriers to
investment for international investors (e.g., capital market frictions) are presumably less of a
concern, and also manifest themselves in directly observable returns on highly tradable assets
such as stocks and sovereign bonds.
    1
     The Lucas Paradox is often framed as a puzzle regarding capital flows, rather than rates of return. However,
it is Lucas’ finding of return differentials that indicates a puzzling lack of flows to equalize returns.



                                                       1
     Do persistent differences in rates of return necessarily imply the existence of frictions or
a breach of a no arbitrage condition in international capital markets? The answer to this
question is affirmative only in the absence of investment risk. In the presence of uncertainty,
international investors may face different levels of risk from investing in different locations.
We put forward new empirical evidence that these risks are higher in emerging markets. In
particular, we document a strong positive relationship between a country’s expected return to
capital and its exposure to a single common factor, namely, the return to US capital. Countries
that offer high expected returns tend to have a high ‘beta’ on the US return. This is despite the
fact that low-income countries tend to have lower correlations with US returns than do high
income ones; the large degree of volatility in emerging markets compared to developed ones
offsets the lower correlations and leads to higher levels of comovement in a beta (or covariance)
sense. Thus, low-income countries tend to be precisely the ones that (1) offer higher expected
returns and (2) exhibit a high degree of comovement with the US.2
     Having established these empirical regularities, the second contribution of this paper is to
explore a novel explanation for persistent differences in international capital returns - namely,
the risk-return tradeoff implied by asset pricing theory. In particular, we investigate the role
of long-run risks à la Bansal and Yaron (2004), i.e., risks due to persistent fluctuations in eco-
nomic growth prospects. Our motivation for this approach is twofold: first, a recent literature,
touched off by Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), has documented the importance of shocks to trend
growth rates in accounting for the properties of business cycles in poor/emerging markets and
in reconciling differences in the behavior of macroeconomic variables between these countries
and developed ones. Second, long-run risks have been shown to have important implications for
asset prices and have been able to resolve a number of ‘puzzles’ in the asset pricing literature.
We explore the extent to which heterogeneity in risk arising from volatile and uncertain growth
prospects can reconcile international rate of return differentials.3
     Our point of departure is an international endowment economy along the lines of Colacito
and Croce (2011), Colacito and Croce (2013), Lewis and Liu (2015) and Nakamura et al.
(2012). A representative US investor is endowed with a stream of consumption and dividends,
i.e., payouts from risky capital investments in a number of regions, and a risk-free asset.4
Economic growth rates feature a small but persistent component, which manifests itself in both
consumption growth and growth in dividend payments from invested capital. In each region,
   2
     We show that both facts hold for returns on stocks and sovereign bonds.
   3
     Two other leading approaches to address the asset-pricing puzzles are habits in utility (Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999) and rare disasters (Barro, 2006; Gabaix, 2008). A model of rare disasters may be complementary
to our approach. However, disentangling ‘rare disasters’ from ‘normal’ fluctuations is not straightforward in
poor/emerging markets, which experience large amounts of volatility compared to developed ones.
   4
     Relatedly, Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) and Borri and Verdelhan (2012) study the role of US consumption-
based risk in international currency and sovereign bond markets.


                                                      2
this component contains both a common ‘global’ piece and a region-specific idiosyncratic one.
Regions differ in their exposure to the common component. With recursive preferences à la
Epstein and Zin (1989), asset values respond sharply to persistent shocks that are global in
nature. Regions that are more sensitive to these shocks represent riskier investments and so
must offer higher risk premia as compensation. Additionally, each region is exposed to both
common and idiosyncratic transitory shocks (i.e., shocks that affect growth rates for only a
single period), which may also lead to return differentials.
    Quantifying the implications of long-run risks in our model is challenging for two reasons:
first, we must disentangle common from idiosyncratic shocks. In our framework, the former
command risk premia for the US investor whereas the latter do not. Second, even having
identified common shocks, we must separate those that affect long-run growth prospects from
those that are purely transitory in nature. We design an empirical strategy to overcome these
hurdles based on the approach developed in Lewis and Liu (2015). We employ moments in
both the persistence and comovement of dividend growth rates and additionally draw on a key
prediction of the model that directly links a country’s beta on the US return to its exposure to
a common long-run shock - specifically, countries that are more sensitive to this shock will have
a more volatile response of returns and so exhibit greater comovement with the US return -
namely, a higher beta. We exploit this fact and use the comovement of returns - i.e., the betas
we found in our empirical work - relative to the comovement in dividend growth to infer the
degree of common long-run risk and quantify the implications for risk premia. Thus, although
not a sufficient statistic, it is precisely fact (2) - the high return betas we find in emerging
markets - that is informative about their exposure to shared long-run risks and so about fact
(1) - their high average level of returns.
    Applying this methodology to the cross-section of countries in our data, we find that long-
run risks can account for a significant portion of the large observed return disparities and for the
pattern of low income/high return vs high income/low return. In our benchmark specification,
which features the US as well as three income-sorted portfolios of countries, the parameterized
model accounts for 64% of the spread in the expected return to capital between the US and
a portfolio of the poorest countries. We further disaggregate countries into bundles of five
and ten portfolios, in which case the model implies return spreads between the US and the
lowest income portfolio that are about 60% of their values in the data. At the finest level of
granularity, we parameterize the model at the individual country level for a set of 96 countries
for which sufficient time-series data are available. The correlation between the model’s predicted
returns and the actual is about 0.6, confirming the key role of long-run risk in driving return
differentials. Moreover, at the country level, the model predicts a negative and statistically
significant relationship between returns and income, where the slope of the regression line of


                                                 3
the former on the latter amounts to 55% of that observed in the data.
    Finally, to gain additional insights behind the risk-return relationship, we decompose pre-
dicted returns into their short- and long-run risk components. Our findings here are striking:
risk premia stemming solely from short-run risk are actually higher in rich countries than poor
and indeed are generally negative in the latter. Because period-by-period growth rates in for-
eign countries exhibit low comovement with US consumption growth, particularly so in poor
countries, investments there actually serve as good hedges for short-run consumption growth
risks - put another way, most of international diversification opportunities are with respect to
short-run idiosyncratic risks. Hence, long-run risks seem critical to reconciling the high re-
turns from capital investments in poor countries: these risks are systematically higher in poor
countries and imply variation in returns across the income spectrum on par with the data.
Thus, our findings suggest that long-run risks due to uncertain economic growth prospects are
a promising avenue to account for what would appear to be puzzling return differentials and
that the persistence of these disparities may not necessarily indicate a ‘misallocation’ of world
capital.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our data sources and docu-
ment the key stylized facts. In Section 3, we lay out our quantitative analysis of a risk-based
explanation of these facts. In Section 4, we conclude and discuss directions for future research.
Details of data work, derivations and additional exercises are in the Appendix.

Related literature. Our paper relates to several branches of literature. The first focuses on
measuring the returns to capital across countries using macroeconomic data, for example, Lucas
(1990), Caselli and Feyrer (2007) and Hsieh and Klenow (2007).5 We build on the empirical
approaches suggested in these papers to compile a broad database of returns over a long horizon
and large cross-section of countries, both developed and developing.
    A related strand investigates the failure of return equalization and the implied lack of capital
flows from low to high return countries (see Obstfeld and Taylor (2003), Prasad et al. (2007)
and Reinhart and Reinhart (2008) for historical and recent patterns of capital flows across
rich and poor countries). In a comprehensive empirical study, Alfaro et al. (2008) find that
differences in institutional quality play an important role in hindering these flows. Ohanian
and Wright (2007) evaluate a number of potential explanations with a focus on capital market
frictions, but find the explanatory power of each to be limited, as none reverses the standard
forces pushing for return equalization. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) document a lack of
capital flows towards countries with higher productivity growth and investment and discuss
   5
     The development literature also finds high rates of return to investment in low-income countries. See, for
example, the comprehensive review in Banerjee and Duflo (2005).



                                                      4
a number of explanations, including domestic financial sector frictions, a mechanism explored
in detail in Buera and Shin (2009). Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) point to the effects of serial
default in developing countries and Kraay et al. (2005) to sovereign risk. Gourio et al. (2014)
link capital flows to expropriation risk. Gourinchas and Rey (2013) offer a comprehensive
survey of the theoretical and empirical literatures that examine cross-border capital flows. We
depart from this line of work by focusing on the return differentials that are at the heart of the
Lucas Paradox and through our quantitative investigation of consumption-based risk as one
potentially important factor.
    Our modeling of international long-run risks is closely related to Colacito and Croce (2011),
Colacito and Croce (2013), Lewis and Liu (2015) and Nakamura et al. (2012). All of these
papers find a significant role for shared long-run risk across countries. A key innovation in our
analysis is to exploit our constructed dataset to analyze the implications for required returns
to capital investments in both developed and emerging markets for a single US-based investor,
with a particular emphasis on the implications of heterogenous exposure to common shocks.
Our finding of more severe exposure to growth shocks in emerging markets relates our paper
to Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), who demonstrate the important role of TFP growth rate
volatility in driving observed aggregate dynamics in these countries. Relatedly, Naoussi and
Tripier (2013) find that growth shocks play an even more important role in accounting for the
behavior of macroeconomic variables in developing and Sub-Saharan African countries.
    A broader literature demonstrates the importance of global shocks in driving asset prices
and macroeconomic variables. Recent examples include Rey (2015) and Miranda-Agrippino
and Rey (2014), who document a ‘global financial cycle’ in stock and corporate bond returns.
Borri and Verdelhan (2012) relate excess returns on foreign sovereign bonds to their comove-
ment with US bonds and Longstaff et al. (2011) find that global factors can account for the
majority of sovereign credit spreads. Brusa et al. (2014) find that global currency factors are
priced in international stock markets. Colacito et al. (2014) and Lustig et al. (2011) show
that heterogenous exposure to global shocks is key in reconciling the cross-section of currency
returns. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) link currency risk premia to US consumption-based risk.
Hassan (2013) provides an endogenous mechanism for heterogeneous exposures to global risk,
namely, that currencies of large economies are good hedges against consumption risk and so
offer lower returns. Closer to our own study, Hassan et al. (2016) link this mechanism to capital
returns in a model with endogenous capital accumulation; large countries have lower required
rates of return because they have ‘safer’ currencies. The authors find that country size variation
can explain a good portion of cross-country return variation, but that the magnitudes of return
differences fall short of those observed in the data.
    Papers that focus on quantity dynamics include Kose et al. (2003), who provide evidence of


                                                5
a ‘world business cycle.’ Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006) argue that US
interest-rate shocks are of first-order importance in driving emerging market business cycles as
they affect domestic variables mostly through their effects on country spreads. Burnside and
Tabova (2009) find that about 70% of the cross-sectional variation in the volatility of GDP
growth can be explained by countries’ differing degrees of sensitivity to global factors and that
low-income countries exhibit greater exposure to these factors.


2     The Returns to Capital: Stylized Facts
In this section, we describe our measure of the returns to capital and establish a number of
empirical properties of returns - namely, systematic relationships between average returns and
level of income across countries and between average returns and the beta on the US return.


2.1    Measuring Returns
We construct a broad panel of returns using macroeconomic data on capital, GDP and relative
prices. Our measure builds on Caselli and Feyrer (2007) (CF), Hsieh and Klenow (2007), and
Gomme et al. (2011), extended to include an explicit international dimension. This approach
allows us to study a large set of countries, both developing and developed, over an extended
period of time, which is not possible using data on directly observable asset returns. Addition-
ally, the Lucas Paradox has typically been framed as a puzzle regarding the aggregate return
to capital and we view tackling this particular measure as the main contribution of our work.
For robustness, however, and to demonstrate the more general nature of our findings, we show
below that the key stylized facts regarding the cross-section of returns hold true using data on
stocks and sovereign bonds as well.
    The world economy consists of the US and J regions, where regions will correspond to
countries or bundles of countries in our empirical analysis. The economy consists of both con-
sumption goods and investment goods. We consider a US-based investor who decides whether
to pursue an additional capital investment, either at home or abroad. He would purchase a unit
of the investment good domestically and invest it either in the US or in some other region. The
additional unit of capital represents a claim on some portion of the local income it generates.
The payment received by the investor is the rental rate on capital, which represents the period
payoff, or ‘dividend’ from this investment. A portion of the capital depreciates and so the
investor is left with only a fraction of the unit at the end of the period, which would continue




                                               6
to hold some value. The (gross) return from this transaction in region j is:

                                                  Dj,t               PI,t+1
                                         Rj,t =        + (1 − δj,t )
                                                  PI,t                PI,t

where Dj,t denotes the period payoff to a unit of capital, or dividends, PI,t the price of the
investment good (in terms of the US consumption good, which serves as numeraire), and δj,t
the time t rate of depreciation in region j.6 We assume that investment goods are freely
tradable across regions while consumption goods are at least in part not. The law of one price
then implies a common price for investment goods (hence, no region subscript). Because the
                                                                 PI,t
price of consumption goods need not equate, the relative price PC,j,t may differ across regions.
Although the assumption of freely traded capital goods is a clear simplification, it is motivated
by the observation that relative price differences that are systematically related to income
are largely driven by differences in the price of consumption goods, which tends to be higher
in richer countries, whereas the price of investment goods shows no systematic relationship
with income.7 Our focus on a US-based investor stems in large part from the fact that many
countries import a large share of their capital goods and that this is particularly the case in
poor countries.8 Moreover, the question we seek to answer is whether rate of return differentials
necessarily point to an untapped arbitrage opportunity on the part of a single investor, and it
seems a reasonable first pass to take the perspective of one based in the US.
    As shown, for example, in CF, under the assumptions of constant returns to scale and
competitive capital markets, the payout to a unit of capital is equal to the (price-adjusted)
marginal product of capital:
                                                 PY,j,t Yj,t
                                        Dj,t = α                                              (1)
                                                   Kj,t
where α is the share of total income paid to capital and PY,j,t Yj,t is region j total income in
terms of the numeraire good (US consumption). Putting the pieces together, the return on
   6
     We will use country-time specific values of δ in our empirical implementation.
   7
     Similar assumptions have been made in the literature, see, for example, the setup in Section I.A. in Hsieh and
Klenow (2007). The authors point out that this fact is inconsistent with higher trade frictions in poor countries,
but rather may stem from lower productivity of producing investment goods there. We will empirically explore
variants of this approach that (1) take into account different levels of PI across countries and (2) limit our analysis
to countries classified as ‘open’ according to a number of measures so that trade frictions are presumably lower
there. We show that our results do not depend on this assumption.
   8
     For example, Burstein et al. (2013) document that 80% of the world’s capital equipment was produced in
just 8 countries in the year 2000; that the median import share of equipment in that year was about 0.75; and
that the poorest countries in the world tend to import almost all their equipment. Mutreja et al. (2012) find
similarly, and report a correlation between the import to production ratio for capital goods and income of -0.34
(they report, for example, that Malawi imports 39 times as much capital as it produces, and Argentina 19 times
as much). Related facts are also in Eaton and Kortum (2001) and Kose (2002), who follow a similar approach
in using US investment good prices to measure prices of imported capital goods in developing economies.



                                                          7
capital from region j in period t is given by,

                                             PY,j,t Yj,t               PI,t+1
                                  Rj,t = α               + (1 − δj,t )                                   (2)
                                             PI,t Kj,t                  PI,t

which measures the marginal return to an additional unit of investment as the number of
consumption goods received compared to the number given up.
    To measure the quantities in equation (2) we use data from Version 8.0 of the Penn World
Tables (PWT),9 and to measure the relevant prices we rely on data from the US National
Income and Product Accounts as reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Our
final sample consists of 144 countries over the period 1950-2009 (so returns are from 1950-
2008).10 For each country, the PWT directly reports real GDP valued at 2005 US dollars, which
we will denote PY,U S,2005 Yj,t , an estimate of the real-valued capital stock Kj,t and country-time
specific depreciation rates δj,t . Recall that all prices in (2) are relative to US consumption, as
that is the relevant tradeoff being made, and that relative prices may (and do) vary through
time. To make this adjustment, we multiply the reported value of GDP by the relative price
                                                              PU S,Y,t
                                              PU S,Y,t       PU S,Y,2005
of output to consumption in the US,             = PU S,C,t in each year t, where PY,U S,2005 is
                                              PU S,C,t
normalized to 1. The result gives the value of year t GDP in region j in current units of US
consumption, which is the object needed to measure Dj,t . The price index of US output PU S,Y,t
is constructed as nominal GDP divided by real GDP, with 2005 serving as the base year as
noted. To construct the price index of consumption PU S,C,t , we divide nominal spending on
non-durables and services by the corresponding real values. The ratio of these two series is
then the relative price of interest. Data for these latter two computations are obtained from
the BEA. It remains to specify a value for α, which we set to 0.3 across all regions following
Gollin (2002), although with recent work by Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) in mind, we
explore the effects of using time-country specific α’s below.
    Finally, to compute returns, we need the relative price of investment goods in the US.
We compute this price as nominal private spending on investment in equipment and structures
divided by the corresponding real values, again with data obtained from the BEA. Our approach
to measuring the relevant relative prices follows closely that of Gomme et al. (2011). From an
empirical point of view, a beneficial by-product of our focus on a US investor is the ability to
measure the relevant prices using a widely used data source thought to be highly reliable.
   9
   See Feenstra et al. (2013) for detailed documentation.
  10
   Countries need not be present for the entire period to be included. We describe the sample construction in
Appendix A.




                                                         8
2.2                        Stylized Facts
Figure 1 illustrates the main stylized facts across the full set of 144 countries in our sample. The
left hand panel plots the mean (net) return to capital for each country over all available years
for that country, denoted by rj , where returns are computed year by year using expression
(2), against the mean level of income over the same period, measured as (log) income per
worker and denoted by yj . The left-hand panel shows the first key fact: capital returns differ
significantly around the world and despite a good deal of noise, there is a systematic relationship
between returns and income - specifically, returns are generally higher in poorer countries. The
relationship between returns and income is negative and highly significant, both in a statistical
sense and an economic one: each 10% reduction in income is associated on average with a 1.8
percentage point increase in mean returns.
                                     ETH                                                                                                                                         ETH
                                               MLI                                                                                                                                                               MLI
                                                                               LCA                                                                                                             LCA
                                                                                                  BRB
                                                                                                  TTO                                                                                  BRB                                 TTO
                    0.25                                                                                                                          0.25
                                                     NPL
                                                       BEN                   VCT                                                                                                VCT                                BEN                           NPL
                                                                                   BLZ                                                                                           BLZ
                                             UGA                                               ***          ***                                                                                      UGA
                                                                                     rj=0.269        − 0.018 log yj
                                                 TCD                                                                                                                  TCD
                     0.2                                        COG                       (0.042)     (0.004)                                      0.2                                                      COG
Return to Capital




                                                                                                                              Return to Capital

                                                             BGD                                                                                                                                     BGD
                                                                CIV           GRD                                                                                                      GRD                 CIV
                                                                                   MUS TWNBHS                                                                      BHS                  MUS               TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BFA
                                     BFA
                                                        NGA              MAR
                                                                         PRY      CRI                                                                                                    CRI            NGA MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        PRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SLV
                    0.15                      SLV                          GTM JOR                                                                0.15                        GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                              CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JOR
                                                     GMB CHN                                                                                                                       GMB
                                   BDI                        1 IDNPAK                                                                                         UZB
                                                                                                                                                                           PAK BDI
                                                                                                                                                                         IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                      ATG DOM      CHL
                                                          GIN           UZB DOM          CHLATG                                                                                     GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  LKA
                             MOZ
                                                         KEN
                                                        ZMB
                                                                       LKA
                                                                      HND
                                                                      SYR
                                                                             TUN   2
                                                                                 PAN          HKG                                                                SYR
                                                                                                                                                                      KEN
                                                                                                                                                                            PAN
                                                                                                                                                                           MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                            OMN HND HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                       2  TUN ZMB
                                                                            FJI    GAB OMN
                                                                                  URY                                                                                        FJI               GABURY
                     0.1                 COD TZA
                                                  LSO                          ZAF          BHR                                                    0.1               AZE
                                                                                                                                                                       BOLMEX
                                                                                                                                                                                  BHRZAFCOD      LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                 TZA         rj=0.026***   + 0.056***β(rj,rUS)
                                                      IND    BOL
                                                               KGZ
                                                                   AZE
                                                                  PHL PER BWA TURMEXLTU     IRL       3           QAT                                         LTU BWA
                                                                                                                                                                  KGZ IND
                                                                                                                                                                   SEN
                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                           PHL
                                                                                                                                                                             QAT
                                                                                                                                                                               TURIRL    PER
                                           MWI          SEN      THA BRA
                                                                       NAM        KOR      AUTMAC                                                              BRN   MAC      KOR
                                                                                                                                                                               BRA  MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                  THANAM
                                                                                                                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                         PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT                (0.007)      (0.005)
                                                                         ARG
                                                                          BGR IRNPRT SGP ESP                       BRN                                                   BGR
                                                                                                                                                                          SWZ  TGO SGP    IRN
                                               TGO
                                                             MNG
                                                                  DJI   SWZ
                                                                   ARM JAM        SUR     GBR
                                                                                    EST NZL
                                                                                          SWEISR
                                                                                                CAN         US                                           MKD
                                                                                                                                                            ESTARM GBRDJI   US
                                                                                                                                                                           JAM
                                                                                                                                                                           MNG
                                                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                                                                                              SWE
                                                                                                                                                                            SUR
                                                                                                                                                                             ISR                             R2=0.45
                                                                       ECU        MKD
                                                                                POL          FRA USA                                                                       ECU
                                                                                                                                                                         POLFRA  MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                SAU
                                                                                                                                                            LVA COL
                                                                                                                                                          MNE         HUN
                                                                                                                                                                      STP
                                                                                                                                                                        NLD DNK  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                      STP MRT                     HUN
                                                                            COL LVAVEN JPNMNE
                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                             NLDCHE SAU                                           0.05                  NOR        CHE
                    0.05                  CAF
                                            LBR        COM
                                                         AGO
                                                                    GEO    ROU
                                                                             MYS
                                                                                      GRC ITA  NOR
                                                                                              ISL
                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                               BEL
                                                                                                  LUX
                                                                                                                                                           ROU
                                                                                                                                                          HRV
                                                                                                                                                             GEO
                                                                                                                                                           SVKBLR AUS
                                                                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                                                                                                                       CAF
                                                                                                                                                                       DEU
                                                                                                                                                                       BELAGO
                                                                                                                                                                         ALB
                                                                                                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                                                                                            ISL
                                                                                                                                                                            LUX
                                                                                                                                                                              LBR
                                                                                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                 COM
                                                                                                                                                                               MYS
                                                                         ALB BLR         HRV
                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                        SVK SVNAUS                                                         CZE
                                                                                          CZE                                                                   KAZ CYPBTN
                                                               BTN          KAZ         CYP                                                                 SRBTJK             CPV
                                                          CPV TJK
                                                                MDA           SRB                                                                           MDA
                                                  NER                                                                                                                NER
                                                                           TKM                                                                               TKM
                                                                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                                                                                             UKR
                                                                       UKR                                                                          0
                       6            7                  8       9       10                                 11             12                          0                      1                    2          3                           4              5
                                                       Log GDP per Worker                                                                                                                      Beta on US Return


                                                                              Figure 1: The Returns to Capital

    Next, we compute each country’s return beta by regressing the time-series of its returns
on those in the US. The right-hand panel of Figure 1 plots mean returns against the resulting
betas. The figure illustrates the second fact: there is a strong connection between a country’s
beta and its mean return - countries that exhibit a greater exposure to shocks that move US
returns tend to be the same that offer high levels of average returns.
    The puzzle we are after is why systematic return differences may persist between low re-
turn/rich countries and high return/poor ones. To focus on the link between returns and
income, we form bundles, or portfolios, of countries, grouped by levels of income. Our ap-
proach follows widespread practice in empirical asset pricing, which has generally moved from
addressing variation in individual asset returns to returns on asset portfolios, sorted by factors
that are known to predict returns. This procedure proves useful in eliminating asset-specific


                                                                                                                      9
diversifiable risk (e.g., country-specific idiosyncratic factors that are unrelated to their levels
of economic development) and so in honing in on the sources of return variation of interest.
Additionally, the portfolio approach also aids in eliminating potential measurement error in
country-level variables. Further, we are able to expand the number of countries as data become
increasingly available, enabling us to include the largest possible set of countries in our analysis.
This is particularly important for poor countries, where time-series coverage is more limited.
    We perform our analysis first on 3 portfolios plus the US and then extend it to 5 and 10
portfolios in our quantitative work (with the US always separate). We allocate countries into
portfolios based on average income over the sample period. Figure 1 overlays the portfolio
returns with those at the country-level.11 Portfolio 1 contains the poorest set of countries and
portfolio 3 the richest, with the US always kept apart, so that higher numbered portfolios
are higher income and the US is last, a terminology which will remain consistent throughout
the paper. The portfolios eliminate a good deal of the country-level variation in returns even
conditional on income level or beta, yet retain the systematic relationships illustrated at the
more disaggregate level. We report the levels of average income, expected returns, and beta on
the US return across portfolios in the top panel of Table 1. In line with the plot in Figure 1,
Portfolio 1 shows average returns of 13% compared to 6% in the US, a spread of 7 percentage
points and the highest beta, 1.5.

Second moments. To dig deeper into the betas that we find, Table 1 also reports the cor-
relation of returns in each portfolio with those in the US, as well as the standard deviation
of returns. Strikingly, the correlations move in the opposite direction of the return betas and
actually tend to be lower in poorer countries. However, betas are a composite of the correlation
and standard deviation and the last column of the table shows that returns are much more
volatile in poor and emerging markets - generally twice as high in the poorest two portfolios as
in the US. The extreme differences in volatility more than offset the pattern in correlations and
are largely what drive the disparities in betas. Put another way, when the level of variability
differs substantially, correlations may not be indicative of the true factor loadings.
    Figure 2 displays these patterns at the country level. In the top row, we plot correlations
with US returns against income on the left and average returns against correlations on the right.
Correlations are lower in low-income countries and lower correlations are in fact associated with
higher returns. The bottom row of Figure 2 shows analogous plots using the standard deviation
of returns. Here, the opposite emerges: low-income countries tend to exhibit higher return
volatility and the degree of return volatility is strongly positively related to the average level
of returns. Again, what we learn is that while low-income countries tend to be less correlated
 11
      Appendix F lists the countries by portfolio and year in which they entered the PWT dataset.


                                                      10
                                    Table 1: The Returns to Capital
 Returns
 Portfolio                     E [yj,t ]   E [rj,t ]     β (rj,t , rU S,t )     corr (rj,t , rU S,t )    std (rj,t )
 1                              8.29       13.01             1.53                     0.71                 0.063
 2                              9.57       11.06             1.39                     0.76                 0.053
 3                             10.56        8.04             1.19                     0.83                 0.042
 US                            10.98        6.01             1.00                     1.00                 0.027
 Dividend Growth Rates
 Portfolio                                             β (∆dj,t , ∆dU S,t ) corr (∆dj,t , ∆dU S,t ) std (∆dj,t )
 1                                                          0.47                   0.18                0.083
 2                                                          0.49                   0.21                0.074
 3                                                          0.60                   0.31                0.064
 US                                                         1.00                   1.00                0.026
 GDP Growth Rates
 Portfolio                                             β (∆yj,t , ∆yU S,t )   corr (∆yj,t , ∆yU S,t )   std (∆yj,t )
 1                                                          0.18                     0.06                  0.081
 2                                                          0.23                     0.10                  0.071
 3                                                          0.45                     0.26                  0.059
 US                                                         1.00                     1.00                  0.023
Notes: The top panel of the table reports moments for returns to capital during the 1950-2008 period for three
portfolios, sorted by mean income per worker, and the US. The middle panel reports moments for growth rates
of dividends from capital during the same period. The last panel reports moments for growth rates of real GDP
during the same period.


with the US, their high level of volatility more than offsets this pattern, leading them to have
higher return betas.

Dividend and GDP growth rates. Since, in theory, cash flows from capital investments
drive valuations of capital goods and therefore returns, it is of interest to examine the properties
of the dividends from capital and compare them to the behavior of returns. The center panel
of Table 1 reports second moments of the growth rates of dividends as implied by expression
(1). Comovement of dividend growth with that in the US, as measured by the beta of foreign
dividend growth on US dividend growth, is lower in poorer countries, the opposite pattern to
that in returns. The same pattern is true in terms of correlations. Finally, dividend growth is
more volatile in lower-income countries, for example, portfolio 1 has three times the standard
deviation of the US. The fact that low-income countries show (1) high comovement of returns
but (2) low comovement of dividend growth, alongside (3) high levels of volatility, will all play
a role in our quantitative analysis of risk-based explanations below.
    Lastly, from expression (1), dividend growth comes from changes in income, i.e., GDP, and
changes in the capital stock. To get a sense of the role of each, the bottom panel of Table 1

                                                         11
                                        1.00                                                                             USA                                         0.35
                                                                                                    HUN        FRA
                                                                                                             CZE ISL
                                                                                                                  BEL                                                       rj=0.231*** − 0.180***corr(rj,rUS)
                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                         GRC  DNK DEU
                                                         CAF
                                                                      NER                      NAM         NZL
                                                                                                      VEN FINNLDITA LUX                                                       (0.024)    (0.031)
                                                                           CPV                    ZAF              CHE
                                                                            MRT
                                        0.90                            COM
                                                                                          JAM CRI MEXJPN
                                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                                           CYPSVN
                                                                                                            ESP                                                       0.3
                                                              TGO                       GTM                SVK MAC
                                                                                       BRA          KOR
                                                                                                   TUR                                                                            ETH
Correlation with US Return



                                                MOZ                                                             ISR
                                                                        GIN        HND ECU  BGR
                                                                                            TKM
                                                                                           FJI
                                                                                                    PRT
                                                                                               MYSPOL  LTU HRV AUS                                                                                                                MLI
                                                              TZA      IND     BOL LKA DOM ARG   IRN                                                                                                                             LCA
                                        0.80                      LSO            BTN    PERALB SRB
                                                                                         UKR ROU
                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                           SGP
                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                                                    QAT                              0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BRB                                 TTO
                                                            UGA       NGAAGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BEN VCT




                                                                                                                                                Return to Capital
                                                                                              COL GAB                                                                                                                                     NPL
                                                       BFA LBR     GMB      CIV MDAUZB         BLZ                                                                                                                                                BLZ
                                                    BDI   MWI                    KGZPRY             LVA TWN IRLNOR
                                                                                               KAZCHL
                                                                                                   PAN                                                                                                                                              UGA
                                                                  NPL                                  EST       HKG
                                        0.70                 SLV        BGD
                                                                      ZMB                        BLRSUR TTO
                                                                                                       ATG
                                                                                                                       SAU                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      COG
                                                                                PAKPHL
                                                                               MNG           JOR RUS URY                                                                                                                                 BGD
                                                              MLI               TJK ARM                                                                                                                            GRD                               CIV
                                                                       CHN          DJI   VCTLCA
                                                                                  THA
                                                                                    MAR     TUN                                                                                                                    BHS MUS        TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MAR     BFA
                                        0.60                        BEN      IDN                            OMNBHR
                                                                                                                                                                     0.15                                                JOR SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PRY  NGA           CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GTM
                                                        COD             STP COG
                                                                       KEN                         MUS                                                                                                                CHN            GMB
                                                                                                             MNE                                                                                                          PAK      BDI
                                                                                            GRD               BHS                                                                                                 IDN      ATG CHLUZB DOM     GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KEN TUN                       LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZMB  PAN            MOZ
                                        0.50                                             AZE                                                                                                  SYR                OMN      URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HKG     GAB     HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FJI
                                                                  TCD                     GEO                                                                         0.1                         BWA    AZE  CODBHR     PHL      KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LTU   MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                   BRB                                                                                                             IRL QAT PER   TUR
                                                                                                SWZ                                                                                           SEN                   THA           MWI      AUT PRT MAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                                 BWA      MKD                                                                                BRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SWZ                                   SGPARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BGRTGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IRN       ESP NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ARM SUR EST        GBR                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NZL
                                        0.40                                  SEN      SYR                                                                                                        MKD                    MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SAU LVACOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JPN MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FRAUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HUN
                                                                      corr(rj,rUS)=0.445*** + 0.033***log yj                        BRN
                                                                                                                                                                     0.05                              GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MNE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               STP                NOR ROU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LBR AGO     MYS COM CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CHE DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DEUISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ALB  HRV          FIN BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BLR               AUSSVKSVN       CZE
                                                                                    (0.105)    (0.011)                                                                                                                            KAZ      BTN         CYPCPV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TJK           MDA SRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NER
                                        0.30            ETH                                                                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TKM
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                           6           7                8       9       10                               11                12                          0.2                     0.4            0.6           0.8                                          1
                                                                        Log GDP per Worker                                                                                                        Correlation with US Return
                                        0.18                          NPL                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ETH
Standard Deviation of Capital Returns




                                                                                                std(rj)=0.140*** − 0.009***log yj                                                                                                        MLI
                                        0.16                                                                                                                                                                         LCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BRB                 TTO
                                                                                                         (0.120)    (0.002)
                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VCT                                               BEN           NPL
                                        0.14                            BEN                                                                                                                      BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            UGA
                                                                                                                   TTO                                                                         TCD
                                                                                 COG

                                        0.12            ETH
                                                                MLI                      MAR
                                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                                                                                 Return to Capital    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COG

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GRD
                                                                                                                                                                                           BHS             MUS TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                CRI           PRYBFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NGA                        MAR
                                         0.1            BFA
                                                                                                                 BRB
                                                                                                                                                                     0.15               GTM                    SLV                        JOR
                                                                                                 GRD           TWN                                                                                         CHN
                                                         COD SLV              BGDCIV                                                                                                          GMB
                                                                                         PRY      LCA                                                                                      PAK BDI
                                                                            NGA          AZE               URY                                                                        UZB IDN    DOM ATG CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                             GIN
                                        0.08                  UGA LSO
                                                                             CHN
                                                                            ZMB                  TUN
                                                                                                         MUS
                                                                                                         CHL                                                                             KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                       MOZPAN
                                                                                                                                                                                          HND
                                                                                                                                                                                        SYR        HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                 OMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   rj=0.014*** + 1.613***std(rj)
                                                                                                           GAB                                                                           FJI            GAB URY
                                                                TZA
                                                                                         LKA    SWZ
                                                                                                            ATGBHR                                                    0.1             MEXBWA
                                                                                                                                                                                     BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                    IND
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                              PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BHR LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            TZA       COD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AZE                 (0.006)       (0.109)
                                                                                                                                                                                   LTU         KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 IRLPER
                                                                                                                                                                                               QAT
                                        0.06                                       THA PERVCT
                                                                                           DOM IRN
                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                            OMN
                                                                                                                 HKG
                                                                                                                       SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                     MACKOR
                                                                                                                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                           BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                          BRN
                                                                                                                                                                                          BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              NAM MWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ARGTHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                 CRI PRT SGP                                                                           JAM   TGO     IRN   SWZ
                                                      BDI           GMB                    ARG BLZ                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                  EST   CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                       NZL ARM DJI
                                                            MWI TCD             MNG                  SUR ESP                                                                             SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                          ISR    SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MNG
                                                             LBR         GIN
                                                                          SEN IDN KGZ
                                                                                    DJI NAM                    IRL                                                               MKDUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                          POL
                                                                                                  ZAF                               QAT                                             HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                  LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                  MNE
                                                                                                                                                                                    NLDDNK   MRT
                                                                                                                                                                                           VENSTP SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                            JPN
                                        0.04                    TGO      COMMRTPAKHND
                                                                        STP
                                                                        KENAGO
                                                                                      GEO
                                                                                    PHL
                                                                                            BWA
                                                                                       BRAALB      PAN JPNBHSCHE
                                                                                               MYSTUR                                                                0.05         COL
                                                                                                                                                                                ROU CAFNOR
                                                                                                                                                                                       GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                      ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                      LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                   DEU MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                              GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                             COM
                                                                                                                                                                                            AGO
                                                MOZ
                                                                                     ARM
                                                                            CPV TJKSYR  GTMFJI
                                                                                            BGR  BLR
                                                                                               KAZ POLVEN SWE
                                                                                                    KOR         ISRCAN
                                                                                                                                    BRN                                        HRV
                                                                                                                                                                               SVK
                                                                                                                                                                              SVN
                                                                                                                                                                              CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                   BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                  AUS FIN  ALB LBR
                                                                                                                                                                                          BLR
                                                                                 BTN UZBECU
                                                                                          JAM       RUS  GRC
                                                                                                           NZLDNK
                                                                                                             FIN  NOR
                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                                      MEX       FRA
                                                                                                                 ISL LUX                                                          CYP BTN KAZ
                                                            CAF         IND     BOL
                                                                                         UKRTKM      HUN     GBRNLDMAC
                                                                                                                  DEU USA                                                         MDA CPV
                                                                                                                                                                                 SRB       TJK
                                                                   NER            MDA         COL   LVALTU CYP
                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                                     MKD     MNE  BEL
                                                                                                                  AUS                                                             NER
                                                                                                SRB
                                        0.02                                                 ROU
                                                                                                           SVK
                                                                                                            HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                  TKM RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                   UKR
                                                                                                             CZE
                                                                                                               SVN                                                     0
                                            6          7                8       9       10                                11               12                           0                    0.05           0.1           0.15                                           0.2
                                                                        Log GDP per Worker                                                                                                 Standard Deviation of Capital Returns


                                                              Figure 2: The Returns to Capital - Correlations and Volatilities

reports the second moments of GDP growth rates across the portfolios. These display patterns
similar to those in dividend growth - lower betas and correlations with US GDP growth in
low-income countries and higher levels of volatility. Dividends clearly inherit much of the
properties simply of GDP growth. This is not overly surprising, given the slow-moving nature
of the capital stock, which does not tend to be very volatile at short frequencies.

Relation to previous estimates. Our findings of significant (and systematic) variation in
capital returns stand in contrast to those in CF. Although the measure of returns in expression
(2) builds closely on the insights in that paper in accounting for differences in relative prices
when measuring the cross-sectional dispersion in capital returns, there are a number of differ-
ences in our approach. First, and most importantly, CF examine the cross-section of returns in
a single year, 1996, whereas we study average returns over a longer time period. It turns out


                                                                                                                                          12
that this largely explains the differences in our findings - simply put, the results from 1996 do
not seem to generalize to the longer time span.
    In addition to expanding the time period under study, our measurement approach differs
from CF in several ways. First, we include capital gains, which is in line with Gomme et al.
(2011), who point out the importance of changes in the relative price PI,t in driving the time
series behavior of capital returns, at least in the US, and in particular, the contribution of
this term to the volatility of returns. Second, and also in line with the latter paper, all prices
are expressed in units of US consumption, not of region-specific output. The calculations in
CF imply that the investor considers his return in units of output received per unit of output
invested; here, the investor considers units of consumption received per unit of consumption
invested, and a corresponding adjustment must be made when mapping (2) to the data. A
third departure from CF is in the cost of the original unit of the investment good: there,
investors purchase investment goods locally, that is, in the region where they will be invested;
in our setup, the US investor purchases these goods domestically, no matter the location of
the investment.12 However, these variations do not play a large role in driving the differences
between our results and theirs.
    To reconcile our results with those in CF, we explore a number of variants on our mea-
surement approach that bring our calculations closer to theirs. First, we relax our assumption
of a common price of investment goods. To do so, we use country-specific prices as reported
in the PWT for all prices in equation (2). This is precisely the price adjustment made in
CF. Second, we use country-year specific capital shares, with an adjustment for the shares of
non-reproducible capital, again as in CF. To do so, we obtain data on the shares of payments
to natural resources in GDP from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI)
database. We compute the reproducible capital share as one minus the labor share minus the
natural resource (non-reproducible) share.13 These data are available for 115 of our original
144 countries only over the period 1970-2008. We report the results across the three portfolios
in the top panel of Table 2. First, using country-specific prices has only modest effects on our
estimates; while the dispersion in returns falls slightly, the differences between the returns on
different portfolios and the US remain significant, both economically and statistically.14 Second,
in the more limited time period and country sample for which we can compute country-specific
capital shares, differences in returns relative to the US remain large and statistically signifi-
  12
     As discussed above, the majority of investment goods are produced in a small number of developed countries.
  13
     It should be noted that payments to natural resources include oil rents, natural gas rents, coal rents, mineral
rents, and forest rents, and whether or not these are truly ‘non-reproducible’ is unclear: consider, for example,
an investment by Exxon-Mobil in a new oil well.
  14
     The US changes most, increasing about 2 percentage points simply from using PWT relative prices, rather
than those from the BEA.



                                                        13
cant. Finally, using both country-specific prices and capital shares, dispersion falls modestly,
yet, in line with with our main findings, Portfolios 1 to 3 continue to exhibit returns that are
significantly different from those in the US.

                 Table 2: Capital Returns - Alternative Measurement Approaches
               Portfolio     Baseline     Country         Baseline     Country        Country
                                           prices                        α’s        prices & α’s
                                  1950-2008                              1970-2008
               1            13.01*** 11.94***                9.59***   13.23***       12.85***
               2            11.06*** 10.44***                7.53***   12.50***       12.27***
               3             8.04*** 9.30***                 6.32**     9.04***       11.10***
               US            6.01       8.20                 5.21       6.19           9.37
                                       1996                                1996
               1              5.37**      3.32               4.93**     8.36***        6.21
               2              5.20*       5.89               3.97       8.11**         9.37
               3              3.90        10.03**            3.67       6.55          14.17***
               US             3.63        7.23               3.63       5.51           9.55
              Notes: Table reports the returns to capital across portfolios under a number of mea-
              surement approaches and time periods. Baseline uses US prices from BEA. Country
              prices uses country-specific PY , PI , PC from PWT. Country α’s uses country-year α
              from PWT and subtracts from α the share of payments to non-reproducible cap-
              ital from WDI. Country prices and α’s uses country prices and country-year α as
              described above. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote sig-
              nificance of difference from US values: *** difference significant at 99%, ** 95%, and
              * 90%.


    Next, we recompute returns for only the year 1996 - the year that CF study - under our
baseline approach and each alternative. Under our baseline, the spread in returns in 1996 is
much smaller than the average over the period, falling to less than 2% from almost 7%. Although
the difference from the US remains statistically significant for Portfolios 1 and 2 (although at
lower levels), the economic magnitudes are clearly much smaller. Using country-specific prices,
statistical significance as well as the systematic pattern across portfolios disappears.15 Similar
patterns hold with country-specific α’s and the combination of the two. Thus, under any of these
approaches, differences across portfolios are significant - both economically and statistically -
when the entire time-period is under examination, but the returns do not obey any particular
pattern in a single year such as 1996. These findings lead us to conclude that differences in the
time-period under study is the primary reason why we find systematic cross-country differences
in returns whereas CF do not.16 The risk-based explanations that we explore below are designed
  15
     Portfolio 3, which contains the richest countries in the world, enjoys very high returns in 1996 when computed
in this fashion.
  16
     We should note that one important reason why CF may have chosen to work with year 1996 is because the


                                                        14
to account for these long-run differences, i.e., differences in expected returns over time, not those
in any given year based on some particular realization of the stochastic processes that drive
returns.17

Capital market frictions. Measured returns may differ systematically across countries due
to the presence of frictions associated with foreign investments in some countries. These capital
market distortions may be explicit (ex. trading limits, taxes, etc.) or implicit—for example,
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) posit that credit market imperfections, expropriation risk, bu-
reaucracy, bribery, and corruption in poor countries may result in a ‘wedge’ between social and
private returns to physical capital there. Such a wedge may imply that the US investor expects
to receive only a fraction of the dividend and/or capital gains yield on investments in poor
countries. Hence, in order to invest there, he would demand higher pre-wedge rates of return.
This naturally leads to the question, to what extent can these frictions account for the return
differentials that we find?
    The literature has made attempts to quantify explicit frictions that international investors
face, commonly referred to as capital controls, and to categorize countries according to their
degree of ‘capital account openness.’ To understand whether systematic differences in openness
can account for the observed return differentials in the data, we have recomputed returns using
only the countries that have capital accounts classified as open according to a number of indices
(Chinn and Ito, 2006; Quinn, 2003; Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti, 1995). The thought experiment
is as follows: if differences in capital controls are the primary source of differences in returns
to capital across countries, then returns should be at least approximately equalized among
countries with open capital accounts. Relegating the details to Appendix B, we continue to
find a strong negative relationship between income and returns among economies typically
classified as open (for example, the spread between the US and portfolio 1 exceeds 5 percentage
points), suggesting that capital control differences cannot fully account for the differences in
prices in the PWT 6.1 version that they use correspond to 1996—the benchmark year in PWT 6.1. Prices in
PWT are obtained from the International Comparison Program (ICP), which collects prices of narrowly-defined
and comparable consumer and capital goods across retail locations in a given year. The prices used outside of
the benchmark years are interpolated, so they should be interpreted with caution. As noted earlier, we rely on
an entirely different version of the PWT—8.0, where the price data were collected in year 2005. Moreover, in
our baseline case, where we compute returns from the point of view of a US investor, we rely on price indices
from the BEA, which samples prices annually, thus circumventing the problem of interpolated prices between
ICP benchmarks. We do use GDP data (in current 2005 PPP prices) from the PWT, so the price of output
of each country relative to the US in all years reflects the 2005 PPP adjustment. However, the capital stock
in PWT 8.0 is expressed in the same unit; hence, PPP adjustments disappear when we compute dividends and
therefore returns.
   17
      We should note that the returns across portfolios over the last decade of the PWT data show some con-
vergence compared to earlier periods. However, insufficient data are yet available to determine whether this
is a temporary or more permanent change. For example, as we show below, stock and sovereign bond returns
continue to show substantial differences over recent periods (1988-2014 and 1995-2009, respectively).

                                                     15
returns between rich and poor countries.18
    Measuring the types of implicit frictions described above with the intent of adjusting realized
returns is very difficult.19 To the extent that these frictions are correlated with capital controls,
the analysis just described is one way to address this issue. Moreover, it is not our intent
to rule out the role that these frictions play in explaining return differentials; indeed, we find
that a risk-based explanation accounts for only some portion of observed return differences,
and it is likely that these alternative factors account for an important piece. Our strategy
to identify long-run risks relies primarily on first-differenced variables (and in particular on
second moments), which should not be directly affected by country-specific wedges that are not
time-varying. Finally, it is worth noting that these mechanisms may not be easily separable in
the sense that some of the frictions may be the underlying sources of risk that the investors
in our structural model price. For example, weak institutions within a country may be behind
the high volatility of macroeconomic variables and, in particular, the excessive responsiveness
of these variables to global shocks.20

Further Evidence. In this section, we provide further evidence of the key facts using data
on directly observable returns on tradable assets - namely, stocks and sovereign bonds. Turning
first to stocks, we obtain quarterly country-level stock market returns denominated in US
dollars from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI), which we deflate using the US CPI.
To ensure a clean comparison across countries, we limit the sample to countries classified as
‘Developed’ or ‘Emerging’ by MSCI, which have data available beginning in 1988 (this is the
earliest date available for most emerging markets). We additionally include Argentina, which
is classified as ‘Frontier,’ but has data back to 1988. Our final sample consists of a balanced
panel of 33 countries over the period 1988-2014, 22 classified as developed (including the US)
and 11 as emerging.21
    For purposes of brevity, we report our detailed results using stock market data in Table 8
  18
      In an additional exercise, when considering stock returns, MSCI reports for a few countries and years returns
both before and after withholding taxes. Using these to impute a measure of the effective tax rates, we find no
significant relationship between the level of taxes and income.
   19
      For example, Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) impute the capital wedge for each country so as to match
the discrepancy between actual investment rates in the data and those predicted by a one-sector deterministic
neoclassical growth model with a capital tax and fixed world interest rate. The authors find that the imputed
capital wedge is higher in poorer countries—an observation that is consistent with the existence of capital market
distortions. As the authors note, however, the wedge is consistent with another mechanism: inefficiencies in
producing investment goods in poor countries that distort the relative price of capital to consumption goods
as argued by Hsieh and Klenow (2007). We follow this line of analysis and adjust our measure of returns for
relative prices, without taking a stand on the source of relative price differences.
   20
      Relatedly, Alfaro et al. (2008) empirically document the role of institutional quality in hindering capital
flows to high return countries.
   21
      We provide further details on the data construction in Appendix A.



                                                        16
in Appendix B and illustrate them in Figure 4 (these are analogous to Table 1 and Figure 1).
First, we find that average stock returns exhibit a strong negative relationship with average
income - the spread between a portfolio of poor countries and the US is about 9 percentage
points. Second, countries with higher average stock market returns tend to be those that exhibit
high betas on the US stock market return. These are the two main facts reported from our
baseline measure in Table 1. We also investigate the second moments of stock market returns
and in Figure 5 we display plots analogous to Figure 2. Again, the patterns are similar -
low income/high return countries actually have lower correlations with US returns; however,
return volatility is extremely high in these countries, which leads to high betas on the US
return. Thus, our main empirical findings are confirmed by equity returns, which represent
a largely assumption-free measure and are less affected by concerns regarding tradability and
other market frictions than our broader measure of the return to the entire capital stock.22
    Finally, we obtain bond return data from Borri and Verdelhan (2012), who report credit
spreads on sovereign bonds for 36 emerging markets. In line with our findings, they show that
mean returns on emerging market sovereign bonds are significantly above US bond returns:
the average difference is about 5.4% (see Table 6 in their paper). Moreover, they show that
(portfolios of) countries with a high beta on US bond returns (measured using the Merrill Lynch
US BBB corporate bond index) have higher bond returns - even conditional on default risk.
The spread between high and low beta portfolios ranges from 4% to 7%. Thus, our two stylized
facts apply to sovereign bond returns as well.
    Examining sovereign bonds is useful for two additional reasons. First, they provide one
direct way to control for currency risk, since all the bonds under study are denominated in US
dollars. The existence of significant spreads suggests that currency risk alone cannot account
for a large portion of the differences in returns that we observe. Second, as already noted,
the spreads associated with differences in betas are conditional on default risk, measured as
the probability of default based on credit ratings from Standard and Poor’s. Appendix B
summarizes the results from sovereign bond data in more detail.
  22
    Harvey (1995), Bekaert and Harvey (1995) and Bekaert and Harvey (1997) report similar results for subsets
of the countries in earlier time periods. We rely on equity data for robustness only because stock returns are
available for a much smaller set of countries and span a shorter period than our baseline return measure (in
large part because stock markets did not exist in the majority of emerging markets). Additionally, stock returns
may not be fully representative of the return to capital for a foreign investor, since equity is only one of several
ways to invest in foreign markets and only a small fraction of the capital stock in emerging markets tends to be
publicly listed.




                                                        17
3        A Long-Run Risk Explanation
Thus far, we have documented two important empirical regularities of capital returns: first,
low-income countries tend to offer high average returns. Second, average returns are strongly
related to a country’s beta on the US return. Further, traditional explanations, for example,
frictions in international capital markets, only go some way in accounting for return disparities.
In this section, we quantitatively explore a novel explanation for these patterns - namely, the
risk-return tradeoff implied by asset pricing theory and specifically, the role of long-run risks
due to uncertainty regarding future economic growth prospects.


3.1      The Model
We follow the international long-run risk literature and consider a representative US investor in
an international endowment economy.23 Consumption of the investor and payments to capital
in each region (e.g., country or portfolio) experience shocks to expected future growth rates.
Each region is exposed to both global and idiosyncratic components of these shocks. Regions
differ in their exposure to the global shock process and in the characteristics of the idiosyncratic
one. Heterogeneity in exposure to global shocks will play a crucial role in leading to return
differences across regions.

Preferences. The representative US investor has recursive preferences à la Epstein and Zin
(1989). The investor seeks to maximize lifetime utility

                                                               ψ
                                                              ψ−1
                                 ψ−1                   ψ−1                                        1
                                                                                         1−γ  1−γ
                                  ψ
              Vt = (1 − β) Ct          + βνt (Vt+1 )    ψ            ,   νt (Vt+1 ) = Et Vt+1

where ψ denotes the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, γ risk aversion, β the rate of time
discount, and νt (Vt+1 ) the certainty equivalent of period t + 1 utility. Standard methods give
the usual Euler equations, one for each risky asset and one for the risk-free asset:

                                         1 = Et [Mt+1 Rj,t+1 ] ∀ j                                         (3)
                                         1 = Et [Mt+1 Rf,t+1 ]

where Rj,t is the (gross) return on capital in region j as defined in equation (2), Rf,t is the
return on a risk-free bond and Mt+1 denotes the investor’s stochastic discount factor (SDF),
    23
    An important exception is Ho et al. (2014) who analyze capital flows in an international production economy
featuring long-run risk. We discuss our assumption of an endowment economy in Appendix C.




                                                        18
given by
                                                                − ψθ
                                                  θ       Ct+1            θ−1
                                      Mt+1 = β                           Rc,t+1
                                                           Ct
            1−γ
where θ = 1−   1 and Rc,t+1 denote the return on an asset that pays aggregate consumption as
               ψ
its dividend, or equivalently, the return to aggregate wealth.

Dynamics of consumption and dividends. The following system lays out the joint dy-
namics of US consumption and domestic and foreign dividends. We denote with an asterisk a
representative foreign region, a convention we follow hereafter.

                        ∆ct+1 = µc + xt + ηt+1                                                             (4)
                          xt+1 = ρxt + et+1
                       ∆dt+1 = µd + φxt + πηt+1 + µt+1
                       ∆d∗t+1 = µ∗d + φ∗ xt + π ∗ ηt+1 + πd∗ µt+1 + φ̃∗ x∗t + µ∗t+1
                          x∗t+1 = ρ∗ x∗t + e∗t+1

    A detailed description of the environment is as follows: turning first to the US, µc is the
unconditional mean of consumption growth and xt a time-varying, small but persistent compo-
nent of the growth rate, so that the conditional expectation at time t of consumption growth
in t + 1 is µc + xt . The persistent component evolves according to an AR(1) process with
persistence ρ and variance in the innovations σe2 . Consumption growth is also subject to purely
transitory shocks ηt+1 with variance ση2 . Dividend growth in the US has unconditional mean
µd and a levered exposure to the persistent component of consumption growth, xt , captured
by φ. Intuitively, the higher the value of φ the more responsive are dividend growth rates to
innovations in x. The transitory consumption shock ηt+1 also influences the dividend process,
with the magnitude of this relationship governed by π. Dividend growth is also subject to a
purely transitory shock µt+1 with variance σµ2 . All shocks are i.i.d. and normally distributed.
    The dynamics of foreign dividends are similar. Dividend growth has unconditional mean
µ∗d and a levered exposure to a small but persistent component of the growth rate, which is
now composed of two pieces. First, there is an exposure to the US long-run shock x, with the
degree of exposure governed by φ∗ and it is in this sense that x represents a ‘global’ shock.
Additionally, there is a region-specific idiosyncratic long-run component x∗ (with the degree
of exposure governed by φ̃∗ ), which evolves according to an AR(1) process with persistence
ρ∗ and variance in the innovations σe2∗ .24 We allow for transitory shocks to foreign dividend
  24
    We model the US x as directly influencing the foreign dividend process. Alternative approaches would be
to explicitly include a world x and a region-specific one as in Nakamura et al. (2012), or only region-specific


                                                          19
growth rates to be correlated with temporary shocks to US dividend growth rates µt+1 and
US consumption growth ηt+1 . The strength of these relationships is captured by πd∗ and π ∗ ,
respectively. Lastly, each region is also subject to an idiosyncratic transitory shock µ∗t+1 with
variance σµ2 ∗ . As in the US, all shocks are i.i.d. and normally distributed.
    We do not need to explicitly specify the foreign consumption process. However, a natural
way that fits into our framework (and is symmetric with the US process) would be

                                                                            ∗
                                  ∆c∗t+1 = µ∗c + ξ ∗ xt + x∗t + πc∗ ηt+1 + ηt+1                                  (5)

and to reformulate the exposure of dividend growth to the long-run process as φ̃∗ (ξ ∗ xt + x∗t ).
Then, σµ2 ∗ may include some variance coming from an exposure to local consumption shocks
  ∗
ηt+1  and the parameter φ∗ is a composite of φ̃∗ and ξ ∗ . It is straightforward to prove that
this distinction has no bearing on our results (and further, that our model does not have
any counterfactual implications for the second moments of the empirical consumption process,
since there are still free parameters we have not placed values on - for example, πc∗ and ση2∗
in (5)).25 Explicitly modeling the foreign consumption process along with detailed data on
foreign consumption would allow one to study how the shocks in our model jointly determine
real exchange rates along with risk premia (for example, Colacito and Croce (2011) study how
these shocks determine real exchange rates between the US and UK).
    The presence of idiosyncratic shocks points to incomplete risk-sharing and can take several
interpretations, for example, some form of market incompleteness, or complete markets with
complete home bias à la Colacito and Croce (2011). We follow Lewis and Liu (2015) in not
taking a stand on the precise market structure at work that leads to this outcome, but rather
specify the consumption process directly and work with a general Euler equation, which holds for
any level of market integration, and prices both domestic and foreign assets. The consumption
process that we measure in the data is an equilibrium outcome based on the true market
structure and by working directly with consumption, we avoid having to explicitly specify
trading protocols. Additionally, our approach is fairly general, in the sense that the perfect
risk-sharing outcome is nested in our framework, and would simply entail a finding of no
x’s with some correlation in their innovations as in Colacito and Croce (2011) and Lewis and Liu (2015). It is
straightforward to show that these setups are all equivalent (i.e., that ours can be mapped directly to theirs)
with a simple change of notation.
   25
      This result implies that we do not need to make use of any moments in foreign consumption in our quantita-
tive analysis. This is a significant advantage of our approach, since the limited availability of foreign consumption
data would be problematic for our analysis. For example, data on non-durables and services such as those that
we obtain from the BEA for the US are not generally available in the full cross-section of countries (particularly
developing ones). Only total consumption for each country is available from the PWT, but as has been recog-
nized in the literature, the inclusion of durables makes the connection to the marginal flow utility of consumption
(i.e., to the agent’s SDF) rather tenuous, and for many countries the series are quite short.



                                                         20
significant idiosyncratic shocks when we take the model to the data.

Risk premia. We solve the model and derive its asset return implications using standard
approximation methods.26 Expected risk premia (in excess of the risk-free rate) on the US and
foreign capital assets are, respectively
                                          
                                   1       1    κm,1       κ1
                     E [rte ]
                            =  φ−      γ−                       σ 2 + γπση2                   (6)
                                  ψ       ψ 1 − κm,1 ρ 1 − κ1 ρ e
                                                 κ∗m,1
                                           
                                ∗   1       1               κ1
                        e∗
                    E [rt ] =  φ −      γ−                       σ 2 + γπ ∗ ση2 ,
                                    ψ       ψ 1 − κm,1 ρ 1 − κ1 ρ e
                                                    ∗



where κ1 , κm,1 and κ∗m,1 are linearization constants that are endogenous and depend in a non-
linear way on the parameters of the US consumption process and those of the US and foreign
dividend processes, respectively. The mean risk free-rate is given by:
                                                                    2           2
                               µ 1          1−γ      2  1            1         κ1
          E [rf,t ] = − log β + +               − γ ση + (θ − 1) 1 −                    σe2   (7)
                               ψ 2           ψ          2            ψ      1 − κ1 ρ

which is a function only of the parameters governing the US consumption process.

Intuition. Equation (6) shows that excess returns are composed of two pieces, the first re-
lating to long-run risks and the second to short-run. First, notice that setting γ = ψ1 , which
is the case of CRRA preferences, eliminates the long-run component so that risk premia are
determined only by the transitory comovement in consumption and dividend growth (πση2 ),
which is ‘priced’ at γ. The same is true if σe2 = 0, that is, there is no long-run risk in con-
sumption growth, or if ρ = 0, simply with an adjustment to reflect the additional variance σe2 ,
which would then be purely transitory in nature. Thus, both recursive preferences, i.e., the
disentangling of γ and ψ, as well as the persistent and stochastic nature of growth rate shocks
are necessary for risk premia to differ from the case with no long-run risk.
    The sensitivity of dividends to changing global growth conditions, φ in the US and φ∗
abroad, although not sufficient statistics, are key in determining risk premia. Intuitively, the
higher this sensitivity, the riskier is the asset and the higher the associated risk premium. An
important piece of our empirical work is to pin down the values of these parameters. In contrast,
the idiosyncratic portion of the long-run shock abroad (x∗t ) does not enter the return equations
anywhere. Because these shocks are by construction only regional, they do not enter the US
investor’s SDF and so are not risky from his perspective; in other words, idiosyncratic shocks
are diversifiable and so do not garner risk premia. This does not mean that we can ignore these
 26
      Because these techniques are widely used, we detail the steps in Appendix C.


                                                      21
shocks, however; doing so may bias our estimates of the parameters that do determine returns.
We next outline an identification strategy that addresses this challenge, among others.


3.2     Identification
To derive the model’s return implications and assess its ability to account for the cross-section of
capital returns in the data, we must assign values to the parameters governing the consumption
and dividend processes laid out in (4). Here, we outline an empirical strategy to parameterize
the model. We demonstrate that moments of US consumption growth, dividend growth in each
region, and the comovement of returns in each region with those in the US - closely related to
the betas in Section 2 above - enable us to identify all the necessary parameters.

Preferences and US consumption. We begin by assigning values to the preference param-
eters. We set γ = 10, ψ = 1.5, and β = 0.99, all standard values in the long-run risk literature.
Our choice of β enables the model to approximately match the mean level of the risk-free rate.
    Turning to the consumption process, we first assign a value to the persistence parameter ρ.
This parameter is notoriously difficult to identify and rather than attempting to do so, we take
guidance from the existing literature and set its value to 0.93.27 This is reported as the mean
estimate from annual US data in Ferson et al. (2013) and is quite close to the annual estimate
from Bansal et al. (2012b) of 0.91.28 We determine the values of the remaining parameters
of the US consumption process - µc , σe2 and ση2 - in order to match the unconditional mean,
variance, and autocovariance (i.e., persistence) of US consumption growth. In Appendix C we
prove that these three moments identify the three parameters.

US dividends. We pin down the parameters of the US dividend process in a similar fashion.
These include: the mean growth rate of dividends µd ; the exposure to the persistent shock φ;
the correlation with transitory consumption shocks, governed by π; and the volatility of the
transitory shock, σµ2 . We set these to match the observed mean growth rate in dividends, the
autocovariance of dividend growth relative to that of consumption growth, the covariance of
dividend growth with consumption growth, and the variance of dividend growth. In Appendix
C we prove that these four moments identify the four parameters.
  27
     Because we are interested in the spread in returns between foreign regions and the US, another approach
here would have been to choose ρ to match the mean US return. Our model prediction will be quite close to
the actual return for the US, lending an additional degree of confidence in the value of ρ.
  28
     Much of the long-run risk literature considers monthly decision frequencies and estimates parameters to
match moments aggregated to the annual frequency. We abstract from this issue here and focus only on an
annual model.




                                                    22
Foreign dividends. Identification of the parameters of the foreign dividend process is com-
plicated by two elements. To see these, recall that returns to both US and foreign assets are in
large part driven by their exposure to the global persistent shock, governed by φ in the US and
φ∗ abroad. A seemingly natural way to identify φ∗ would be to follow an approach analogous
to the one used above to infer φ, i.e., to look at the persistence in foreign dividend growth
relative to that in US consumption growth. As we prove in Appendix D, however, due to the
presence of local long-run shocks (i.e., x∗ ), this moment does not deliver the true value of φ∗ .
Alternatively, since x∗ is orthogonal to x, it may seem that the comovement between domestic
and foreign dividend growth would be an informative moment to identify the exposure of for-
eign dividends to the common component x. Although this moment is indeed unaffected by the
foreign long-run shock x∗ , because we also allow for correlation in the transitory movements of
dividend growth rates across countries (i.e., through µt+1 ), this single moment does not provide
enough information to disentangle comovement due to long-run and short-run components. We
show in Appendix D that both of these potential biases pointed can be substantial and failure
to account for them would lead to misleading conclusions regarding the role of long-run risk.
    To overcome these challenges, we employ a strategy that builds on the insight of Lewis and
Liu (2015), who face a related problem of having to distinguish correlations in persistent and
transitory sources of risk across a few developed economies. Specifically, they show that, in
addition to dividend growth comovement, the comovement of returns contains information that
can be used to disentangle long-run from short-run correlations - specifically, a high comovement
of returns relative to that of dividends is indicative of a greater exposure to common persistent
shocks.29 Although our environment is not identical to theirs, the strategy that we employ is
very much in this spirit.
    To see this logic, we can derive expressions for the above two moments as

                                              σe2
                 cov (∆d∗t , ∆dt )   = φφ   ∗
                                                   2
                                                     + π ∗ πση2 + πd∗ σµ2                                   (8)
                                            1−ρ
                            ∗           1    σe2
                      cov (rt , rt ) =   2        2
                                                     + π ∗ πση2 + πd∗ σµ2
                                       ψ 1−ρ
                                                       κ∗m,1
                                                                                 
                                           κm,1                           1    ∗  1
                                     +                      ∗
                                                                  φ−          φ −     σe2 .                 (9)
                                       1 − κm,1 ρ 1 − κm,1 ρ              ψ       ψ

Both the comovement of dividend growth rates (8) and returns (9) depend on both types
of common shocks, transitory and persistent. While the former enter both equations in an
identical way, return comovement is more sensitive to common long-run shocks than is dividend
  29
     A similar insight is in Bansal and Lundblad (2002), who show that exposure to a persistent global shock
can account for the excess correlation as well as excess volatility of returns over cash-flow growth rates among
five developed economies.


                                                      23
comovement. Intuitively, a persistent shock leads to large revisions in asset valuations, since
expected future growth prospects are changed, which serves to increase the comovement of
asset returns relative to the comovement in period-by-period dividend growth rates.30 The
higher is φ∗ , the greater is the response of foreign returns to the global shock and the higher is
the comovement of returns relative to that in dividends. Guided by this result, we target the
covariance of dividend growth rates (8) and the covariance of returns (9), which we normalize
                                                    cov(r∗ ,r )
by the standard deviation of the US return, i.e., std(rt t )t . This moment is clearly closely related
to the betas from Section 2 and has the feature of being independent of the variance of US
returns.31
     With this result in hand, we prove in Appendix C that we can identify the remaining
parameters of the foreign dividend growth process following a similar strategy as for the US,
i.e., using first and second moments of dividend growth rates and their comovement with US
dividend and consumption growth. Finally, we require a value for ρ∗ , a parameter that is highly
difficult to estimate for the US, and more so in emerging markets for which data are significantly
more limited. We begin by making the simple assumption that ρ∗ = ρ.32

Moments and Parameters. Table 3 reports the target moments for the 3 portfolio case.
For ease of interpretation, we report both covariances and the associated correlations. Dividend
and return measures are consistent with those in Section 2.1. US consumption moments are
computed using data on nondurables and services over the period 1929-2014, the longest avail-
able series from the BEA. The moments for each portfolio represent the mean values for the
countries in that portfolio (listed in Appendix F). We provide further details on our empirical
work in Appendix A.
    In the top panel of Table 3, we display the moments in US consumption and dividend growth
rates. The mean growth rate in consumption is about 2%, with a standard deviation of about
0.02 and an autocovariance of 0.00024, which together imply an autocorrelation of 0.50. These
values are quite close to those found by other authors over similar time periods, for example,
Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Bansal et al. (2012a). Turning to the portfolio moments in the
bottom panel, the patterns are largely as discussed in Table 1: portfolios 1 and 2 display a high
covariance of returns with those in the US (here we report covariances scaled by the standard
  30
      To see this more clearly, subtract (8) from (9). The resulting expression is independent of transitory shocks
(i.e., of the terms involving ση2 and σµ2 ), up to linearization constants.
   31
      Because we neither target nor exactly match the US return variance (our estimate is slightly higher than
the empirical value, 0.035 vs. 0.027), the estimated covariances will not match the actual. Normalizing both the
model-implied and empirical covariances by the standard deviation of US returns ensures that this discrepancy
does not affect our estimation.
   32
      This assumption is standard in the literature, for example, in Lewis and Liu (2015), Colacito and Croce
(2011) and Nakamura et al. (2012). We show below that under our identification strategy, the results are only
negligibly affected by even large changes in this parameter.

                                                        24
                                   Table 3: Target Moments - 3 Portfolios
 US
 Consumption      E [∆ct ]    cov (∆ct+1 , ∆ct )        std (∆ct )
                   0.018           0.00023                0.021
                              corr (∆ct+1 , ∆ct )
                                     0.50
                                cov(∆dt+1 ,∆dt )
 Dividends        E [∆dt ]      cov(∆ct+1 ,∆ct )     cov (∆dt , ∆ct )     std (∆dt )
                  −0.006             4.89                0.00018            0.026
                              corr (∆dt+1 , ∆dt )    corr (∆dt , ∆ct )
                                     0.28                  0.60
 Foreign
                                                                                                               cov(rt∗ ,rt )
                  E [∆d∗t ]   cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t      cov (∆d∗t , ∆ct )    std (∆d∗t )   cov (∆d∗t , ∆dt )
                                                
 Portfolio                                                                                                       std(rt )
 1                −0.017           0.00122               0.00011            0.083           0.00032             0.041
 2                −0.015           0.00156               0.00011            0.074           0.00033             0.037
 3                −0.011           0.00075               0.00015            0.064           0.00040             0.032
                              corr ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t     corr (∆d∗t , ∆ct )                 corr (∆d∗t , ∆dt )   corr (rt∗ , rt )
                                                 

 1                                   0.18                  0.12                               0.18               0.71
 2                                   0.28                  0.13                               0.21               0.76
 3                                   0.19                  0.21                               0.31               0.83
Notes: Table reports target moments for baseline parameterization. Consumption is measured as real per-capita con-
sumption of non-durables and services. Consumption moments are computed over the period 1929-2008, the longest
available from the BEA. Dividends are measured in exactly the same manner as described in (1). Portfolio moments
are computed over the period 1950-2008 using data from PWT and US prices from BEA. The moments for each
portfolio represent the mean values for the countries in that portfolio.


deviation of US returns since this is the exact moment we target) alongside a low covariance of
dividend growth rates. The high return comovement alongside low dividend growth comovement
seen in poorer portfolios is precisely what suggests relatively low contemporaneous correlations
in transitory shocks and high exposure to the global long-run shock. Similarly, the covariance
of dividend growth rates with US consumption growth tends to increase with income across the
portfolios, which again suggests that developed countries co-move more with the US at high
frequencies. The correlations of foreign variables with US ones are ordered similarly to the
covariances with the exception of returns, for which, as we saw earlier, correlations are ordered
in the opposite direction from covariances.33
    We report the resulting parameter estimates (along with those assigned outside the model)
in Table 4. The consumption parameters are relatively standard. Turning to the portfolio-
specific parameters, the moments detailed above imply a greater exposure of poor countries
to the global long-run shock, captured by a higher value of φ. In contrast, the correlation of
transitory shocks with the US (captured by π and πd ) is generally increasing in income, and, not
 33
    Dividend growth rates tend to be negative, as capital-output ratios, an important component of our return
measure, have been increasing.


                                                       25
                               Table 4: Parameter Values - 3 Portfolios
             Preferences:       γ = 10 ψ = 1.5 β = 0.99
             Consumption:       ρ = 0.93 µc = 0.018 σe = 0.006 ση = 0.01
             Portfolio           µd            φ            π         πd          σµ   φ̃∗ σe∗
             1                  −0.017        5.09        −1.16     −0.15        0.074 0.005
             2                  −0.015        4.20        −0.75      0.00        0.062 0.011
             3                  −0.011        2.85         0.35      0.29        0.056 0.008
             US                 −0.006        2.21         0.99        -         0.020     -
            Notes: Table reports parameter values that match moments for baseline parameteri-
            zation reported in Table 3.


surprisingly, is highest in the US. This parameter configuration implies that poor countries are
more sensitive to the global long-run shock, even while allowing for richer countries to display
the greater period-by-period comovement with the US observed in the data. It is precisely these
two forces that our empirical strategy allows us to disentangle. Poor countries also experience
more volatile idiosyncratic transitory shocks, captured by σµ , a property inherited from the
ordering of overall dividend growth volatility.34 Next, we assess the implication of these cross-
region differences for capital returns, that is, do these patterns across income-sorted portfolios
lead to differentials in expected returns of the order that we observe in the data?


3.3     Results
Baseline. We report our baseline results in the first two columns of Table 5. The table reports
the actual expected return to capital in each portfolio, r, and the expected return predicted by
the model, r̂, from equations (6) and (7) under the parameter configuration in Table 4. The
model predicts returns in line with those in the data and that mimic the decreasing pattern
across higher income portfolios. Predicted returns range from about 10.3% for the poorest
Portfolio, 1, to about 5.9% for the US, compared to 13% and 6% in the data. The predicted
values for the intermediate Portfolios 2 and 3 are 9.1% and 7.0%, respectively, compared to 11%
and 8%. Across portfolios, the model predicts a mean level of returns of about 8.1%, slightly
below, but in line with, the average of 9.5% observed in the data. Finally, and perhaps most
importantly, the model predicts a spread in returns between Portfolio 1 and the US of about
4.5 percentage points, which represents about 64% of the actual spread of 7 percentage points.
In other words, given the parameter configuration in Table 4, long-run risk implies a return
differential across income-sorted portfolios almost two-thirds of the actual.
  34
    In Appendix C, we prove that our estimation only requires us to pin down the composite parameter φ̃∗ σe∗ .
We report the estimated value for completeness, although because we cannot separate the two components, this
value is difficult to interpret in a meaningful way.


                                                     26
                        Table 5: The Returns to Capital - Predicted vs. Actual
                       3 Portfolios                         5 Portfolios            10 Portfolios
                                   rb        r                  rb       r              rb       r
           1                      10.35   13.01        1      10.81   14.37       1    12.13    16.38
           2                       9.14   11.06        2      10.60   10.88       2     9.46    12.37
           3                       7.04    8.04        3       8.59   11.39       3     9.77    10.27
           US                      5.90    6.01        4       8.15   10.06       4    11.10    11.37
                                                       5       6.16    6.74       5     7.33    10.64
                                                      US       5.90    6.01       6     9.84    11.98
                                                                                  7     7.93    9.74
                                                                                  8     8.34    10.39
                                                                                  9     6.47    7.62
                                                                                 10     5.92    5.99
                                                                                 US     5.90     6.01
           Average:               8.11     9.53               8.37     9.91             8.56    10.25
           Spread: 1-US           4.45     6.99               4.91     8.36             6.24    10.37
           Percent of actual       64                          59                        60
                r, r)
           corr(b                 1.00                        0.92                      0.91
          Notes: Table reports the expected return to capital in each portfolio as measured in the data,
          r, and as predicted by the model, r̂, from equations (6) and (7) under the parameter configu-
          ration in Tables 4, 16, and 17 for 3, 5, and 10 portfolio groupings, respectively.


    It is important to note that one would reach a very different conclusion from following an
alternative empirical strategy, specifically, one that does not explicitly account for idiosyncratic
long-run shocks or for correlation in short-run comovement in dividends. In Appendix D, we
re-parameterize the model under these alternative cases and show that the implied expected
returns may be significantly biased and in fact, lead to substantially smaller return differentials
or even a reversal in ordering (i.e., higher expected returns in richer countries). Thus, careful
consideration of each element in the model is important to reach accurate inferences regarding
the nature of long-run risks across regions.

Disaggregated portfolios. In our baseline analysis, we group countries into 3 income-based
portfolios, along with the US. In the remainder of Table 5 we use the richness of our data to
examine the implications of our model for more disaggregated groups of countries, specifically,
groups of 5 and 10 portfolios (always along with the US). The middle panel reports the results
across a 5-portfolio grouping, and the right-hand panel across 10 portfolios.35 As we move to
more disaggregated levels, the spread between the poorest countries in Portfolio 1 and the US
widens, going from about 7% to about 8% to about 10%. The increase is due to a rise in returns
 35
      We report moments and parameters for the 5 and 10 portfolio cases in Appendix G.


                                                       27
in Portfolio 1 (the US, of course, remains the same). The model captures this feature of the data
to a large extent, with the predicted spread also increasing, although not quite in-step with the
actual, from 4.5% to 4.9% to 6.2%. The model accounts for about 60% of the observed spread
with 5 and 10 portfolios, compared to 64% with 3. As we increase the number of portfolios,
the correlation of predicted and actual returns becomes a useful statistic, which remains quite
high even in the 10 portfolio case at 0.9. What we glean from Table 5 is that long-run risks
seem to play a quantitatively important role in driving return differentials across countries at
different stages of development, and that this finding is not an artifact of our baseline choice
of 3 portfolios: the model predicts returns that are in line with the data at each of the levels
of aggregation that we examine (and indeed, as we show below, continues to hold significant
explanatory power even at the country level).

Rebalanced portfolios. Our baseline approach classifies countries according to their mean
income over the period. An alternative approach would be to ‘rebalance’ portfolios by reclassi-
fying countries in each year based on their rank in the income distribution within that particular
year. We have also performed this exercise and for purposes of brevity, we report the results in
Appendix D. Our results change only minimally under this alternative.

Country-level analysis. Although the portfolio-based approach lends certain advantages, it
is nonetheless worth exploring the implications of our model when the parameters are estimated
to match moments of individual countries. To do so, we restrict our analysis to countries with
sufficiently long time-series of available data. Our empirical strategy relies heavily on time-series
moments and short samples are thus problematic. Consequently, we examine only countries for
which data availability reaches back at least to 1961, so that at least approximately 50 years of
data are available.36 This gives us 96 countries on which we perform our analysis, still a large
number, although less than the 144 we include in our portfolio analyses above. We parameterize
the model country-by-country and compute predicted returns on this basis.37
    We analyze the results in a number of ways. First, we simply ask: does the model predict
a relationship between returns and income at the country-level that resembles the one that we
observe in the data? To answer this question, we regress country-level returns on income both
in the data and as predicted by the model. We obtain a clear negative relationship between
capital returns and income in the data: the line of best fit has a slope of -0.023, which is
  36
      Countries tend to be added to the PWT in waves, so we are including here the original 1950 wave, and a
second wave that spans 1960 and 1961. The next major wave of additions is not until 1970.
   37
      We denote by 1 the countries included in the analysis in Appendix F, column 6, titled Ctry An. A handful
of countries feature a configuration of moments that imply a negative σµ2 ∗ due to its residual nature. In order
not to lose these countries, we set σµ2 ∗ = 0.05, which is the average of the other countries. This choice makes
little difference to the results.


                                                      28
significant at the 99% level.38 The model also predicts a negative relationship: the line of best
fit has a slope of -0.013, about 55% the actual, and is significant at the 95% level. In this sense,
even when parameterized at the country-level, the model can account for a significant portion
(about 55%) of the average relationship between the returns to capital and income.
     To get a sense of how the model predictions line up with actual returns on a country-level
basis (similar to the correlations reported at the portfolio level above), we display in Figure 3
the predicted vs. actual values, along with the 45 degree line. If the model were a perfect fit to
the data, each point would lie exactly on the line. Although there is a good deal of variation
at the country level, as should be expected, the model predicts returns that are generally in
line with the data: the correlation between the predicted and actual returns is quite high at
about 0.61 and is significant at the 99% level. We view this as a strong confirmation of the
explanatory power of the theory: the cross-sectional distribution of returns at the country-level
is likely determined by a host of factors specific to each country; that our relatively parsimonious
theory predicts returns that are highly correlated with the empirical ones suggests that long-run
risks indeed play a key role in leading to the variation in returns observed in the data.

                                                                   ETH
                                                                                                            MLI
                                                             BRB                                                  TTO
                                       0.25
                                                                                                          NPL
                                                                                                           BEN
                                                                               UGA
                                                       TCD
                                        0.2                                                                 COG
                                                                              BGD
                       Actual Return




                                                                                              CIV
                                                                    MUS               TWN
                                                                     CRI                NGA         PRY BFA MAR
                                                                        SLV
                                       0.15                  GTM
                                                                         GMB   CHN
                                                                                                           JOR
                                                                                                       corr=0.61***
                                                            PAKBDI
                                                           IDN DOM                CHL
                                                                    GIN
                                                  KEN                            LKA
                                                       PAN  MOZ HKG ZMB               TUN
                                          SYR             HND                  GAB
                                                     FJI                                URY
                                        0.1BWA       IND BOL MEX   PHL
                                                                       LSO ZAF
                                                                                  TZA
                                                       TURIRL                     PER
                                                   SEN
                                                    KOR       BRA     MWI THAARG AUT
                                                                 NAMESP
                                                              SGP  TGO    PRT    IRN
                                                JAM
                                                  GBR NZLCAN  SWEISR
                                                           USA
                                                          FRA        ECU
                                                      NLDDNK
                                                       COL  MRTJPNCHE     VEN
                                       0.05         NOR
                                                  CAF  GRC ITA
                                                     LUX
                                                   BEL DEU FIN
                                                              ISL COM
                                                              MYS
                                                 AUS
                                              CYP                  CPV
                                                          NER

                                         0
                                          0            0.05              0.1      0.15      0.2                     0.25
                                                                           Predicted Return

                       Figure 3: Country-Level Returns - Predicted vs. Actual



Long-run vs short run risk. Expressions (6) and (7) show that we can express predicted
returns as the sum of three components: the risk-free rate, i.e., the level of returns in the
absence of any risk, excess returns due to short-run risk, i.e., risk derived from period-by-
  38
     This statistic is the same as the line of best fit in Figure 1, but the sample here contains only the subset of
countries for which we have sufficient data to pass through the model.


                                                                               29
period comovement between dividend and consumption growth, and excess returns due to
long-run risk, i.e., risk derived from volatility in growth-rate regimes. In Table 6, we report the
contribution of each source to the total predicted return.

                               Table 6: The Composition of Returns
                               Actual                              Predicted
                 Portfolio       r             rb     =      rbf      +       e
                                                                            rbsr   +       e
                                                                                         rblr
                 1              13.01        10.35         1.27            −0.25        9.32
                 2              11.06        9.14          1.27            −0.16        8.02
                 3              8.04         7.04          1.27            0.07         5.70
                 US             6.01         5.90          1.27            0.21         4.42
                Notes: Table reports actual expected returns, r, and predicted expected
                returns from the model, r̂, computed using the parameters in Table 4. The
                predicted returns are decomposed into three components: risk-free rate, r̂f ,
                                  e                         e
                short-run risk, r̂sr , and long-run risk, r̂lr using expressions (6) and (7) in
                the text.

    First, the risk-free rate is only about 1%, as in the data, and by construction, is constant
across portfolios due to our focus on a single US investor. Strikingly, excess returns due to short-
run risk are negligible and often negative, ranging from about -0.2% to about 0.2%. Negative
values indicate a risk compensation: because transitory fluctuations in portfolios 1 and 2 are
negatively correlated with US consumption growth, these assets actually represent good hedges
for a US investor and so in the presence of only short-run risk, would provide lower returns
than in the US. This is intuitive: period-by-period fluctuations in more developed countries
are more correlated with those in the US, which implies higher risk premia in those countries,
exactly opposite of the patterns actually observed in the data. However, the magnitude of
the differences is quite small, with the US demanding 0.5% higher returns than portfolio 1
due to short-run risk. These findings suggest that a model without long-run risks, such as
the traditional consumption-based capital asset pricing model with power utility (CCAPM),
may struggle to account for the capital returns differentials across rich and poor countries
observed in the data. We elaborate further on this point in Appendix D, where we show that
an alternative approach to quantifying the CCAPM model (using the covariance of returns
with US consumption growth, a sufficient statistic for risk premia in that environment) leads to
similar results. Thus, (more than) the entirety of the systematic return differentials predicted
by our model is due to long-run risk. The last column in Table 6 shows that long-run risks
command excess returns as high as 9.3% in portfolio 1 compared to about 4.4% in the US,
leading to a return differential of about 5 percentage points.




                                                      30
Further evidence from stock returns. As an additional exercise, we have also quantified
our model using stock market data for two income-sorted portfolios of foreign countries and the
US. The results are broadly similar to those in our baseline analysis (details of this exercise are
in Appendix D): predicted returns are about 17% in the poorest portfolio compared to about
9% in the US, leading to a spread of about 9 percentage points. The corresponding figures
from the data are 18%, 10%, and 9 percentage points, respectively. Thus, both the levels and
differences in expected stock market returns generated by the calibrated model are in line with
those in the data. Further, in Table 14 we perform a similar decomposition of expected stock
returns as in Table 6. We again find that long-run risks play a crucial role in accounting for
the empirical return differences - as in our baseline, short-run risk premia are actually higher
in more developed countries. For example, these risks alone would suggest a risk premium in
the US about 3 percentage points higher than in the emerging markets. These findings confirm
the important role of long-run risks in leading to persistent return differences on international
investments that we found using our broader baseline measure.


4    Conclusion
In this paper, we have compiled a new panel dataset of international capital returns and doc-
umented that poor and emerging markets exhibit (1) high average returns to capital and (2)
large exposures to movements in US returns, measured by the beta of the foreign return on the
US one. We have found that long-run risk, i.e., risk due to persistent fluctuations in economic
growth rates, is a promising channel to reconcile these facts. Key to our results is that emerging
markets not only feature large fluctuations in growth rates, but also that the shocks are sys-
temically related across countries, i.e., these markets are highly exposed to global growth-rate
shocks.
    We leave for future work a more detailed investigation into the sources of the differences in
long-run risk that we measure. The implications of such an analysis would clearly be important
on many dimensions; from the point of view of our analysis, in reducing required risk premia
associated with investments in poor countries and so potentially attracting additional invest-
ment flows. Potential avenues of research include understanding the role that high dependence
on the production and export of commodities, whose prices are known to be highly volatile,
plays in generating volatility in emerging market macro aggregates. Additionally, examining
the degree to which institutional differences across countries shape the ability to respond to
external shocks may provide further insights into the mechanisms that result in high exposure
of emerging markets to global shocks.
    We have focused on consumption-based risk due to uncertainty regarding the payoffs to

                                                31
capital investments, both in the short- and long-run. By doing so, we have abstracted from
a number of other sources of risk that may play a role in leading to return differences, for
example, default risk or expropriation risk. Additionally, our model does not shed light on
the fundamental source of long-run risk, i.e., changing prospects for technological progress, low
frequency movements in relative prices, etc. Further work investigating these issues and their
interaction with rates of return on capital around the world could be quite fruitful.


References
Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2007): “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the
 Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 69–102.

Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych (2008): “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow
 from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation,” The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 90, 347–368.

Backus, D., A. Ferriere, and S. Zin (2014): “Risk and Ambiguity in Models of Business
 Cycles,” mimeo, New York University.

Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (2005): “Growth theory through the lens of development
 economics,” Handbook of economic growth, 1, 473–552.

Bansal, R., D. Kiku, and A. Yaron (2012a): “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run
 Risks Model for Asset Prices,” Critical Finance Review, 1, 183–221.

——— (2012b): “Risks For the Long Run: Estimation with Time Aggregation,” Working Paper
 18305, NBER.

Bansal, R. and C. Lundblad (2002): “Market efficiency, asset returns, and the size of the
 risk premium in global equity markets,” Journal of Econometrics, 109, 195–237.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
 Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59, 1481–1509.

Barro, R. (2006): “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 121, 823–866.

Bekaert, G. and C. R. Harvey (1995): “Time-varying world market integration,” The
 Journal of Finance, 50, 403–444.



                                               32
——— (1997): “Emerging Equity Market Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics, 43, 29–
 77.

Borri, N. and A. Verdelhan (2012): “Sovereign Risk Premia,” mimeo, MIT Sloan.

Brusa, F., T. Ramadorai, and A. Verdelhan (2014): “The international CAPM redux,”
 Available at SSRN 2462843.

Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2009): “Productivity Growth and Capital Flows: The Dynamics
 of Reforms,” Working Paper 15268, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Burnside, C. and A. Tabova (2009): “Risk, Volatility, and the Global Cross-Section of
 Growth Rates,” Working Paper 15225, NBER.

Burstein, A., J. Cravino, and J. Vogel (2013): “Importing Skill-Biased Technology,”
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 32–71.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. n. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
 Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–
 251.

Caselli, F. and J. Feyrer (2007): “The Marginal Product of Capital,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 122, 535–568.

Chinn, M. and H. Ito (2006): “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
 Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81, 163–192.

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2011): “Risks for the Long Run and the Real Exchange
 Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 153 – 181.

——— (2013): “International Asset Pricing with Recursive Preferences,” Journal of Finance,
 68, 2651–2686.

Colacito, R., M. M. Croce, F. Gavazzoni, and R. C. Ready (2014): “Currency Risk
 Factors in a Recursive Multi-Country Economy,” unpublished manuscript.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2001): “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Economic Review,
 45, 1195–1235.

Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989): “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Be-
 havior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57,
 937–69.

                                           33
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. Timmer (2013): “The Next Generation of the Penn
  World Table,” Working Paper 19255, NBER.

Ferson, W., S. Nallareddy, and B. Xie (2013): “The “Out-of-Sample” Performance of
  Long Run Risk Models,” Journal of Financial Economics, 107, 537–556.

Gabaix, X. (2008): “Variable Rare Disasters: A Tractable Theory of Ten Puzzles in Macro-
 finance,” American Economic Review, 98, 64–67.

Gollin, D. (2002): “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 458–
 474.

Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011): “The Return to Capital and the
 Business Cycle,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 262–278.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and O. Jeanne (2013): “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The
 Allocation Puzzle,” Review of Economic Studies, 80, 1484–1515.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2013): “External adjustment, global imbalances and valu-
 ation effects,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan (2014): “Uncertainty and International Capital
 Flows,” MIT, mimeo.

Grilli, V. and G.-M. Milesi-Ferretti (1995): “Economic Effects and Structural Determi-
 nants of Capital Controls,” IMF Staff Papers, 42, 517–551.

Harvey, C. (1995): “The Cross-Section of Volatility and Autocorrelation in Emerging Mar-
 kets,” Finanzmarkt und Portfolio Management, 9, 12–34.

Hassan, T. A. (2013): “Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns,” The
 Journal of Finance, 68, 2269–2308.

Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2016): “Not so disconnected: Exchange
 rates and the capital stock,” Journal of International Economics, 99, S43–S57.

Ho, S., P. Howard, M. Croce, and R. Colacito (2014): “BKK the EZ way. International
 Long-Run Growth News and Capital Flows,” Working Paper.

Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2007): “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity,” American
 Economic Review, 97, 562–585.



                                            34
Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014): “The Global Decline of the Labor Share,”
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 61–103.

Kose, M. A. (2002): “Explaining business cycles in small open economies: ‘How much do
 world prices matter?’,” Journal of International Economics, 56, 299–327.

Kose, M. A., C. Otrok, and C. H. Whiteman (2003): “International business cycles:
 World, region, and country-specific factors,” The American Economic Review, 93, 1216.

Kraay, A., N. Loayza, L. Serven, and J. Ventura (2005): “Country Portfolios,” Journal
 of the European Economic Association, 3, 914–945.

Lewis, K. K. and E. X. Liu (2015): “Evaluating International Consumption Risk Sharing
  Gains: An Asset Return View,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 84–98.

Longstaff, F. A., J. Pan, L. H. Pedersen, and K. J. Singleton (2011): “How Sovereign
 Is Sovereign Credit Risk?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 75–103.

Lucas, Jr., R. (1990): “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American
  Economic Review, 80, 92–96.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011): “Common Risk Factors in Currency
  Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 24, 3731–3777.

Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007): “The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia
  and Consumption Growth Risk,” American Economic Review, 97, 89–117.

Mehra, R. and E. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 15, 145–161.

Miranda-Agrippino, S. and H. Rey (2014): “World Asset Markets and the Global Financial
 Cycle,” Tech. rep., Technical Report, Working Paper, London Business School.

Mutreja, P., B. Ravikumar, and M. Sposi (2012): “Capital Goods Trade and Economic
 Development,” Working Paper 183, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Nakamura, E., D. Sergeyev, and J. Steinsson (2012): “Growth-Rate and Uncertainty
 Shocks in Consumption: Cross-Country Evidence,” Working Paper 18128, NBER.

Naoussi, C. F. and F. Tripier (2013): “Trend shocks and economic development,” Journal
 of Development Economics, 103, 29 – 42.



                                          35
Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005): “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role
 of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 345–380.

Obstfeld, M. and A. M. Taylor (2003): “Globalization and capital markets,” in Global-
 ization in historical perspective, University of Chicago Press, 121–188.

Ohanian, L. and M. Wright (2007): “Where Did Capital Flow? Fifty Years of International
 Rate of Return Differentials and Capital Flows,” mimeo, UCLA.

Prasad, E. S., R. G. Rajan, and A. Subramanian (2007): “Foreign Capital and Economic
 Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 38, 153–230.

Quinn, D. P. (2003): “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 1890-1999:
 A Synoptic View,” International Journal of Finance & Economics, 8, 189–204.

Rangvid, J., M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2014): “Dividend predictability around
 the world,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 49, 1255–1277.

Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2004): “Serial Default and the “Paradox” of Rich-to-Poor
 Capital Flows,” The American Economic Review, 94, 53–58.

Reinhart, C. M. and V. R. Reinhart (2008): “Capital flow bonanzas: an encompassing
 view of the past and present,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rey, H. (2015): “Dilemma not trilemma: the global financial cycle and monetary policy
 independence,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Uribe, M. and V. Z. Yue (2006): “Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives
 whom?” Journal of International Economics, 69, 6–36.




For Online Publication: Appendix
A     Data
Returns to capital. As described in the text, we use data on relative prices and US per-
capita consumption from the BEA. We obtain data from the Penn World Tables Version 8.0
(PWT) to construct dividends and returns in foreign countries. We exclude countries where
insufficient data are available, with clear data errors, or that are large outliers. Altogether,
these amount to 23 out of 167 countries, leaving us with the 144 used in the main text.

                                              36
     Due to the long time horizon that we analyze, some notes about the PWT country clas-
sification are in order. West Germany proxies Germany prior to the unification of East and
West Germany. Data for Ethiopia for the period of 1970-1990 refer to the former territory of
Ethiopia, including Eritrea. Czechoslovakia is not contained in PWT. Czech Republic and Slo-
vak Republic are added in 1990. USSR is not contained in PWT. Russia, Azerbaijan, Estonia,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lithuania, Latvia and Moldova are added in 1990. Yu-
goslavia is not contained in PWT. Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Slovenia are added in 1990.
     We analyze portfolios of countries during the 1950-2009 period. Countries are added to
the PWT in waves. In Appendix F we list the countries we use in our benchmark analysis,
classified by the portfolio they fall into. In addition, we list the year the country was added to
the PWT database and indicate the set of countries we analyze in the country-level exercises as
well as those with open capital accounts. As described in the text, mean returns at the country
level are computed as the time-series average for each country. To form portfolio returns, these
are averaged across countries within each portfolio and through time. All moments for our
empirical work are computed analogously, both at the country and portfolio level.

Stock market data. We obtain data from MSCI on quarterly returns denominated in US
dollars. The data can be accessed at https://www.msci.com/end-of-day-data-search. We de-
flate these using the US CPI and limit the sample to countries classified as ‘Developed’ or
‘Emerging’ by MSCI, which have data available beginning in 1988 (this is the earliest date
available for most emerging markets). We additionally include Argentina, which is classified
as ‘Frontier,’ but has data back to 1988. Our final sample consists of a balanced panel of 33
countries over the period 1988-2014, 22 classified as developed (including the US) and 11 as
emerging. The countries included are: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
Switzerland, Chile, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Finland, France, Great Britain, Greece, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Malaysia, Netherlands, Norway, New
Zealand, Phillipines, Portugal, Singapore, Sweden, Thailand, Turkey, and the US.


B      Robustness and Further Empirical Findings
Capital market frictions. Chinn and Ito (2006), Quinn (2003), and Grilli and Milesi-
Ferretti (1995) provide measures of capital account openness at the country-year level.39 The
  39
    The Grilli/Milesi-Ferretti index covers 61 countries during the 1966-1995 period. Quinn (2003) covers a
large number of countries during the 1950-2004 period. Chinn and Ito (2006) build on the work by Quinn
(2003) and expand the country coverage to the majority of countries in the world as well as extend the time
coverage to 2011.


                                                    37
first two indices provide continuous measures of openness, while the last is an indicator function.
For each of the first two indices, we compute the median index value over the covered period
and we define a country to be open in a given year if its index value exceeds this threshold. In
the case of the Grilli/Milesi-Ferretti index, we define a country to be open in every year in the
sample the indicator takes on the value of 1.
    Having obtained definitions of openness, we turn to the three portfolios analyzed in the
baseline case and examine only the countries that are considered open according to one of the
three indices described above. The list of open countries according to each measure, classified
by portfolio, are reported in Appendix F. Notice that the number of open countries in Portfolio
1 is significantly smaller than the number of open countries in Portfolios 2 and 3. Thus,
there is some evidence that poorer countries are characterized by more strict capital controls.
In addition, there is considerable overlap across the different measures of openness, which is
reassuring.

                              Table 7: Capital Returns - Open Countries
                                                   Measure of Openness
                  Portfolio         Chinn, Ito      Quinn      Grilli, Milesi-Ferretti
                  1                   10.38∗∗∗       12.39∗∗∗             11.48∗∗∗
                  2                    8.74∗∗∗       11.27∗∗∗             10.28∗∗∗
                  3                     5.61           6.66                7.57∗∗
                  US                    5.22           6.06                 5.85
                  Notes: Table reports the returns to capital across portfolios for economies
                  that are characterized as open according to three indices: Chinn/Ito,
                  Quinn, and Grilli/Milesi-Ferretti, respectively. Chinn/Ito and Quinn
                  openness cutoff is median value in sample. Grilli/Milesi-Ferretti open-
                  ness indicator is unity. Asterisks denote significance of difference from
                  US values: *** difference significant at 99% and ** 95%.


    Table 7 reports the returns in open countries, classified according to each of the three
different measures, as well as US returns. US returns differ across columns due to the different
time periods covered by each openness measure. Overall, Portfolios 1 and 2 yield significantly
higher expected rates of return to US investors, regardless of the measure of openness employed.
Returns are monotonically decreasing across portfolios, as in the baseline. Portfolio 3 remains
higher than the US, although the difference is somewhat narrower, and is statistically significant
in only one case.40

  40
   Returns are even closer to our baseline as reported in Table 1 if we use the less conservative cutoff for
openness in the Quinn database that corresponds to the cutoff used by Lustig and Verdelhan (2007).




                                                      38
                                            0.3                                                                                                                                  0.3
Annualized Stock Market Return 1988−2014




                                                                                                                                     Annualized Stock Market Return 1988−2014
                                                                                                                                                                                         rj=−0.066* + 0.161***β(rj,rUS)
                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.007) (0.005)
                                                                       ARG         rj=0.455*** − 0.035***log yj                                                                          R2=0.46                                            ARG
                                           0.25                                       (0.077)    (0.008)
                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                 BRA    TUR                                                                                                                                                               BRA           TUR

                                              IDN                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN

                                            0.2                              MEX                                                                                                 0.2                                MEX

                                                                1                                                                                                                                                               1

                                           0.15        THA
                                                                         CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                0.15     CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                                                                  SWE                                                                                                               SWE
                                             PHL                                         KOR          HKG       FIN DNK                                                                   DNK           HKGPHL                       KOR          FIN

                                                                  MYS                                                                                                                          MYS
                                            0.1                                                                             NOR                                                  0.1     CHE NOR
                                                                                                                 2 US                                                                                       US
                                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                        SGP AUS                                                                              AUS      SGP
                                                                                                GRC
                                                                                                      ESP     BELNLD
                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                             CAN USA
                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BEL NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                   USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAN    FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2     DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GRC

                                                                                                       NZL       GBR                                                                     NZL    GBR
                                                                                                                 AUT                                                                             AUT
                                           0.05                                                              ITA   IRL                                                          0.05                     ITAIRL


                                                                                           PRT                                                                                                    PRT
                                                                                                               JPN                                                                 JPN
                                             0                                                                                                                                    0
                                              7              8            9            10                                    11                                                           0.8             1      1.2     1.4      1.6                   1.8   2
                                                              Average Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                                  Beta on US Stock Market Return


                                                                                      Figure 4: Stock Market Returns

Stock market returns. Figure 4 replicates Figure 1 using annualized stock market returns.
The left-hand panel shows that average equity returns exhibit a negative and significant rela-
tionship with average income.41 The right-hand panel shows that high return countries tend
to be those that exhibit high betas on the US stock market return. An examination of the
plot shows that countries clearly fall into two categories: high-income/low return, with South
Korea representing the lower bound along the income dimension, and low-income/high return.
We group countries into two portfolios according to this classification and overlay the graph
with these portfolios. Additionally, we report the corresponding values in Table 8. At the
portfolio level, stock market returns exhibit similar patterns as our baseline measure of returns:
low-income countries feature higher mean returns and returns are strongly related to the beta
on the US return.

                                                                                       Table 8: Stock Market Returns
                                                     Portfolio log(income)                        E [rj,t ]              β (rj,t , rU S,t ) corr (rj,t , rU S,t ) std (rj,t )
                                                     1                         8.25                   17.73                       1.26                                                             0.46                          0.437
                                                     2                        10.35                   8.31                        1.04                                                             0.65                          0.254
                                                     US                       10.58                   8.84                        1.00                                                             1.00                          0.156
                                                    Notes: Table reports moments for returns to equities. Quarterly returns data are from
                                                    MSCI and are annualized. Portfolio moments are computed over the period 1988-2014.
                                                    The moments for each portfolio represent the mean values for the countries in that port-
                                                    folio.

                                41
   Since the PWT data end in 2009, average income here is measured using (log) GDP per capita from the
World Bank World Development Indicators database over the period 1988-2014.



                                                                                                                           39
Correlation of Stock Market Return with US Return
                                                     1                                                                    USA                                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                             Annualized Stock Market Return 1988−2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rj=0.221*** − 0.180**corr(rj,rUS)
                                                    0.9                                                                                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.041)      (0.066)
                                                            corr(rj,rUS)=−0.330* + 0.096***log yj                                                                                                                    BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TUR
                                                                         (0.018) (0.174)
                                                    0.8                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                                     SWE                                                                              IDN

                                                                                                                   DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2                                            MEX

                                                                                                            ESP                   CHE
                                                    0.7                                                           AUS
                                                                                                                          IRL


                                                                                                              SGP
                                                                                                                 ITABEL
                                                                                                                    FIN     DNK                                                         0.15                        CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     THA
                                                    0.6                                                     HKG                                                                                                    PHL      KOR         HKG     FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SWE
                                                                                             MEX     PRT    NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MYS

                                                                                                    KOR            JPN
                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                                                                                                   NOR                                                   0.1                                      NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SGP AUS ESPDEU           NLD                      USA
                                                    0.5                                  TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GRC                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FRA
                                                                 THA             BRA      CHL
                                                     PHL                          MYS                 GRC                                                                                                                               NZL                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT

                                                    0.4                                                                                                                                 0.05                                                    ITA     IRL
                                                                                       ARG
                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JPN
                                                    0.3                                                                                                                                   0
                                                       7                 8            9            10                                   11                                                0.3               0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7    0.8     0.9                                              1
                                                                          Average Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                          Correlation with US Stock Market Return
                                                    0.6                                                                                                                                  0.3




                                                                                                                                             Annualized Stock Market Return 1988−2014
                                                                                         TUR
Standard Deviation of Stock Market Return




                                                                                       ARG
                                                      IDN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.25
                                                    0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRA                    TUR
                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                      GRC                                                                                                                                                                                IDN

                                                                 THA
                                                                                                    KOR                                                                                  0.2                                            MEX

                                                    0.4
                                                     PHL                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.15                               CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                                  MYS        MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HKG                  FIN            KOR
                                                    0.3                                                                                                                                               DNK                                     PHL

                                                                                         CHL                         AUT                                                                                                                MYS
                                                                                                     PRT
                                                                                                             HKG
                                                                                                              SGP
                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                   NOR                                                   0.1    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                            BELDEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                 ITADEU                                                                   USA         CAN FRA
                                                                                                                        IRL                                                                                                                                           GRC
                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                            std(rj)=1.114*** − 0.083***log yj                NZL FRAJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                    0.2                                                           AUS NLDDNK
                                                                                                                   CAN                                                                                      NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AUT                      rj=−0.001 + 0.373***std(rj)
                                                                   (0.139)    (0.014)
                                                                                                                    GBR           CHE                                                   0.05                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ITA                                (0.019) (0.057)
                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                            JPN
                                                    0.1                                                                                                                                   0
                                                       7                 8            9            10                                   11                                                             0.2         0.3           0.4         0.5                                                 0.6
                                                                          Average Log GDP per Capita                                                                                                      Standard Deviation of Stock Market Return


                                                                          Figure 5: Stock Market Returns - Correlations and Volatilities

    Analogous to Figure 2, Figure 5 illustrates the patterns in second moments for stock returns.
Precisely the same regularities emerge: first, the correlation of returns with those in the US
are actually lower in low-income countries and high correlation countries feature lower average
returns. However, these patterns are reversed when examining the volatility of returns: low-
income countries are extremely volatile and higher volatility is associated with higher mean
returns. This latter finding is what primarily drives the strong relationships between average
returns, betas, and income.

Sovereign bonds. We obtain bond return data from Borri and Verdelhan (2012), who report
credit spreads on sovereign bonds for 36 emerging markets. First, in line with our findings, they
show that mean returns on emerging market sovereign bonds are significantly above US bond
returns: the average difference is about 5.4% (see Table 6 in their paper). Next, Borri and

                                                                                                                                        40
Verdelhan (2012) sort countries into six portfolios along two dimensions: the probability of
default based on credit ratings from Standard and Poor’s and their beta on a single US bond
(the Merrill Lynch US BBB corporate bond index). We summarize their findings in Table 9.
Each row in the table shows the credit spreads for one level of default risk, for both high beta
and low beta countries. Each column shows the credit spread for one level of beta across the
various default probabilities.
    In the right-hand column, we calculate the difference in yields between high-beta and low-
beta portfolios, conditional on the level of default, that is, within each default group. The
differences are substantial, ranging from 4% to almost 7%. In the bottom row, we calculate
the difference in yields between high and low default portfolios, conditional on the beta. The
differences here are significant as well, ranging from about 3.5% to about 6.5%, but, if anything,
are slightly smaller than those due to beta risk. These results suggest that both beta risk and
default risk are important in leading to return differentials across sovereign bonds. In our
analysis, we focus on the former, and note that return differentials remain large even after
controlling for default risk.

                             Table 9: Emerging Market Sovereign Spreads
                                           Beta
                                                   Low (0.4)    High (1.3)    Beta: High-Low
            Default Rating
            Low                                       3.01          7.03             4.02
            Medium                                    5.62         10.15             4.53
            High                                      6.54         13.50             6.96
            Default: High-Low                         3.53          6.47
           Notes: Table reports credit spreads for emerging markets. Countries are grouped by (i)
           default risk (each row represents a group) and (ii) beta on US BBB corporate bond index
           (each column represents a group). All data are from Borri and Verdelhan (2012).




C       Model and Identification
Endowment vs production economy. Our choice to work within an endowment economy
is an important element of our analysis. There are several motivations for this approach. First,
it lends a great deal of tractability in allowing for sharp closed-form expressions for risk premia
as well as a transparent identification strategy for pinning down the key parameters. Second,
Table 1 shows that the payoffs to capital generally inherit the properties of GDP growth,
primarily because the capital stock does not move much at higher frequencies.42 Finally, the
Euler equations that we explore hold no matter the precise mechanisms that give rise to the
 42
      The endowment approach is standard when examining stock market returns, which we do in Appendix D.


                                                     41
observed joint dynamics of consumption and dividends. In other words, to the extent that a
fully-parameterized production economy is able to generate consumption and dividend processes
like those in the data (which we match by construction in our quantitative work), the asset
pricing implications will be exactly the same as those in the simpler endowment economy that
we analyze.43 Thus, it is not clear that explicitly modeling production and capital accumulation
and the accompanying loss of tractability (and perhaps even loss of computational feasibility
given the number of countries that we analyze) would lead to very different results. Moreover,
there is some evidence that the underlying mechanisms in our framework go through in an
environment with production. For example, Ho et al. (2014) show that a standard two country
production economy augmented with Epstein-Zin utility and long-run shocks to productivity
growth rates can reconcile some of the key patterns in international capital flows.

Solution. We begin by writing the investor’s SDF in logs as

                                                     θ
                                mt+1 = θ log β −       ∆ct+1 + (θ − 1) rc,t+1                               (10)
                                                     ψ

Covariation with mt+1 will determine the risk premia on each asset. To characterize the SDF,
we solve for the consumption return rc,t+1 , which we approximate as

                                     rc,t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zt+1 − zt + ∆ct+1                                     (11)
                  
                   Pt
where zt = log     Ct
                        is the log price-consumption ratio and the two κ’s are constants of approx-
                                                              exp z
imation that depend on the unconditional mean of z, z: κ1 = 1+exp   z
                                                                      and κ0 = log (1 + exp z) −
zκ1 . We similarly approximate returns to the US and a representative foreign asset as, respec-
tively,

                               rm,t+1 = κm,0 + κm,1 zm,t+1 − zt + ∆dt+1
                                ∗
                               rm,t+1 = κ∗m,0 + κ∗m,1 zm,t+1
                                                       ∗
                                                             − zt∗ + ∆d∗t+1
                   
                    Pt
where zm,t = log D   t
                         is the US log price-dividend ratio, which has unconditional mean z m ,
and the κm ’s depend on z m in an analogous way to the κ’s on z above (similar relationships
hold for the foreign asset).
   Given the endowment nature of the economy, we need find solutions for the price-consumption
  43
     Of course, if the production economy does not match the empirical processes, the resulting asset prices will
differ, but not necessarily because there is some failure of the Euler equation, the margin on which we focus.
Backus et al. (2014) show that the behavior of asset prices changes very little with endogenous consumption
and investment.



                                                       42
ratio and the price-dividend ratio for each asset in order to characterize returns. The state vari-
ables in the economy are the expected growth rates xt and x∗t , and these ratios are approximately
linear in the states, i.e.,

                                              zt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 x∗t
                                            zm,t = Am,0 + Am,1 xt + Am,2 x∗t
                                             ∗
                                            zm,t = A∗m,0 + A∗m,1 xt + A∗m,2 x∗t

Substituting into the Euler equation (3), we can find

                                1
                          1−    ψ
              A1 =                                                                                                 (12)
                     1 − κ1 ρ
              A2   = 0
                                                                                  2 
                                              1              1               1      κ1
                      log β + 1 −             ψ
                                                      µ + κ0 + (1 − γ) 1 −
                                                             2
                                                                             ση + 1−κ1 ρ σe2
                                                                             ψ
                                                                              2

              A0 =
                                                                 1 − κ1

and for the US asset,
                                             1
                                        φ−   ψ
                   Am,1 =                                                                                          (13)
                            1 − κm,1 ρ
                   Am,2   = 0
                            θ log β − γµ + (θ − 1) (κ0 + A0 (κ1 − 1)) + µd + κm,0
                   Am,0   =
                                                   1 − κm,1
                                    1
                                    2
                                        (π − γ)2 ση2 + 21 ((θ − 1) κ1 A1 + κm,1 Am,1 )2 σe2 + 21 σµ2
                          +
                                                               1 − κm,1

and lastly, for the foreign asset,

                     φ∗ −   1
                            ψ
      A∗m,1    =                                                                                                   (14)
                   1 − κ∗m,1 ρ
                       φ̃∗
      A∗m,2 =
                   1 − κ∗m,1 ρ∗
                                                                                                       2
                 θ log β − γµ + (θ − 1) (κ0 + A0 (κ1 − 1)) + µ∗d + κ∗m,0 + 21 κ∗m,1 A∗m,2                   σe2∗
      A∗m,0    =
                                                     1 − κ∗m,1
                 1    ∗      2 2    1                    ∗     ∗
                                                                   2 2 1 ∗2 2 1 2
                   (π   − γ)  σ η +   (θ − 1) κ1 A 1 +  κm,1 A m,1   σe + 2 πd σµ + 2 σµ∗
               + 2                  2
                                                       ∗
                                                1 − κm,1

Solving for mean excess returns entails finding the vectors of consumption parameters A and


                                                              43
κ and the corresponding vectors of return parameters, Am and κm , both for the US and each
foreign asset. This can be done following a simple iterative procedure. As an example, consider
the consumption parameters. First, note that z = A0 . Then, for a candidate value of z, we
can compute values for κ. We can then compute the vector A using (12), which produces an
updated value for z. We then iterate until convergence. We use an analogous procedure to
solve for the return parameters, both in the US and each foreign region. The mean risk-free
rate depends only on consumption and preference parameters.

Identification of parameters for US consumption and dividend growth. The param-
eters µc , σe and ση are identified by the three moment conditions:

                                        E [∆ct ] = µc                                     (15)
                                                        σe2
                               cov (∆ct , ∆ct+1 ) = ρ
                                                   1 − ρ2
                                                    σe2
                                      var(∆ct ) =        + ση2
                                                  1 − ρ2

The mean growth rate µc is pinned down by its sample value. For a given value of ρ, the autoco-
variance in consumption growth identifies σe2 and given this value, the variance of consumption
growth identifies ση2 .
    Turning to the US dividend growth process, we rely on the following moment conditions:

                                    E [∆dt ] = µd                                         (16)
                        s
                            cov (∆dt+1 , ∆dt )
                                               = φ
                            cov (∆ct+1 , ∆ct )
                                                   σe2
                              cov (∆dt , ∆ct ) = φ      + πση2
                                                1 − ρ2
                                                    σe2
                                   var(∆dt ) = φ2        + π 2 ση2 + σµ2
                                                  1 − ρ2

The mean growth rate µd is identified directly from its sample value. The leverage parameter
φ is pinned down by the ratio of the autocovariance of ∆d to that of ∆c. Given the value of φ,
the covariance of ∆d with ∆c identifies π. The variance of ∆d then pins down the value of σµ2 .

Identification of parameters for foreign dividend growth. In addition to the two mo-
ment conditions in expressions (8) and (9), we rely on the following four moment conditions to




                                               44
identify the parameters that govern foreign dividend growth:

                              E [∆d∗t ] = µ∗d                                                                                         (17)
                                                         σe2
                     cov (∆d∗t , ∆ct ) = φ∗                     + π ∗ ση2                                                             (18)
                                                       1 − ρ2
                                                  ρ                      2 ρ ∗
                cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t            = (φ∗ σe )2          ∗
                                         
                                                         +     φ̃   σ e ∗                                                             (19)
                                                1 − ρ2                       1 − ρ∗2
                                                             2
                                                        ∗ ∗
                                         ∗
                                       (φ σe )2      φ̃  σ e               2         2
                         var (∆d∗t ) =       2
                                                 +           ∗2     + π ∗ ση2 + πd∗ σµ2 + σµ2 ∗                                       (20)
                                        1−ρ         1−ρ

Identification proceeds as follows. Because the κ’s in (9) are nonlinear functions of the other
parameters of the model, we employ a numerical fixed point procedure. We first use (17) to
infer the mean dividend growth rate µ∗d from its sample value. We then guess a candidate
value for φ∗ . Using this guess and the set of US parameters, (18) pins down π ∗ . With these
values in hand, (8) identifies πd∗ . Next, (19) pins down the parameter combination φ̃∗ σe∗ (for a
given value of ρ∗ ) and (20) pins down σµ2 ∗ . Lastly, we construct the model-implied covariance
of returns in expression (9) and iterate on the initial guess of φ∗ until we match the empirical
moment.
    As a final note, because (9) depends on κ∗m,1 , we must prove that φ̃∗ σe∗ is sufficient to
compute κ∗m,1 , i.e., that we do not need to to separately identify φ̃∗ and σe∗ . To see this,
combine the expressions in (14) to obtain
                                                                                                           κ∗m,1
                                                                                                                       2
                θ log β − γµ + (θ − 1) (κ0 + A0 (κ1 − 1)) + µ∗d + κ∗m,0 +                         1
                                                                                                  2       1−κ∗m,1 ρ∗
                                                                                                                            (φ̃∗ σe∗ )2
    A∗m,0   =
                                                                   1 − κ∗m,1
                                                                    κ∗
                                                                                          2
                     ∗     2                                                     ∗                              2
                1
                2
                    (π − γ)    ση2   +   1
                                         2
                                                 (θ − 1) κ1 A1 +       m,1
                                                                     1−κ∗m,1 ρ
                                                                                 φ −   1
                                                                                       ψ
                                                                                                 σe2 + 12 πd∗ σµ2 + 12 σµ2 ∗
            +
                                                                1 − κ∗m,1

Only φ̃∗ σe∗ appears in the expression. Because κ∗m,1 is simply a nonlinear function of A∗m,0 , the
same argument goes through.


D      Robustness of Quantitative Analysis
Rebalanced Portfolios. As an alternative approach to classifying countries into portfolios,
we group countries according to income on an annual basis. Specifically, we ‘rebalance’ our
portfolios on an annual basis, i.e., classify countries in each year based on their rank in the




                                                                45
income distribution within that particular year.44 The main advantage of this approach is that
it accounts for the changing place of countries as the income distribution evolves; the drawback
is that it introduces a significant degree of turnover in the portfolios, i.e., many countries move
in and out of each portfolio, particularly so at finer levels of disaggregation. From our point
of view, we are most interested in the robustness of our results to this alternative grouping
procedure. We report the results in Table 10.45 Our results are robust to this alternative
grouping procedure. The model predicts a spread in returns between Portfolio 1 and the US of
between 4.5% and 5.3%, which accounts for between 60% and 74% of the spread in the data.
These results are quite close to those obtained in our baseline approach. The correlation of
predicted and actual returns across portfolios ranges upward from a low of about 0.9.

               Table 10: The Returns to Capital - Annually Rebalanced Portfolios
                     3 Portfolios                         5 Portfolios            10 Portfolios
                                 rb        r                  rb       r              rb       r
         1                      10.36    12.08       1      10.82   12.98       1    11.23    14.89
         2                       8.58    10.22       2       9.88   10.82       2    10.39    10.90
         3                       6.91     7.56       3       7.99   10.17       3     9.59    10.48
         US                      5.90     6.01       4       7.34    8.48       4    10.18    11.15
                                                     5       7.05    7.25       5     8.10    10.50
                                                    US       5.90    6.01       6     7.91     9.86
                                                                                7     8.19    8.94
                                                                                8     6.50    8.00
                                                                                9     7.15    6.86
                                                                               10     6.95    7.63
                                                                               US     5.90    6.01
         Average:               7.94     8.97               8.16     9.29             8.37    9.57
         Spread: 1-US           4.46     6.07               4.92     6.97             5.33    8.88
         Percent of actual       74                          71                        60
              r, r)
         corr(b                 1.00                        0.96                      0.91



Alternative Identification Strategies. In this section, we perform several exercises to
illustrate the important role played by the various elements of the model and our identification
strategy in accurately measuring the extent of long-run risks. The key challenge is to identify
the parameter that measures the exposure of foreign dividends to the global persistent shock
and ultimately governs foreign expected returns, namely φ∗ .
  44
     This approach has been widely used in examining cross-sectional differences in returns. See, for example,
Lustig and Verdelhan (2007).
  45
     Moments and parameter estimates for this exercise are available upon request.



                                                     46
   First, as mentioned in the text, following the same procedure as we do for the US does not
identify the desired parameter. To see this, maintaining the assumption that ρ∗ = ρ, we can
derive the following equation from (4), which makes clear the difficulty:
                           s                            v                 !2
                                                       u
                               cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t        u       φ̃∗ σe∗
                                                   = φ∗ t 1 +                                  (21)
                               cov (∆ct+1 , ∆ct )               φ ∗ σe

This moment identifies the true φ∗ only if φ̃∗ σe∗ = 0, that is, only if there are no regional
long-run shocks to dividend growth rates. Otherwise, relying on this moment gives a biased
estimate of φ∗ , with the bias corresponding to the term in square root. This term is weakly
larger than 1, implying an upward bias, which would tend to deliver a higher estimate of the
risk premium.
    To quantify the extent of this bias, we parameterize the model ignoring region-specific
idiosyncratic long-run shocks, i.e., under the naive assumption that φ̃∗ σe∗ = 0 (or alternatively,
that ρ∗ = 0). In this case, we are clearly able to infer φ∗ from expression (21). The third column
of Table 11 reports the implied returns when following this alternative identification strategy
(the US return does not change, since we are only changing assumptions regarding foreign
idiosyncratic shocks). The first two columns report the actual returns and those predicted
under our baseline approach, respectively. A comparison of the second and third columns
shows that ignoring regional long-run shocks would lead to substantial bias in the results. As
predicted by expression (21), returns are everywhere biased upward. The magnitude of this bias
ranges from 0.7% in portfolio 1 to 2.5% in portfolio 3. Clearly, not accounting for idiosyncratic
long-run shocks leads to significant bias under an approach that relies solely on moments in
persistence.
    In contrast, the fourth column of Table 11 reports the predicted returns under the same
assumption of no foreign persistent shocks, i.e. φ̃∗ σe∗ = 0, but following our baseline identifica-
tion strategy. The predicted returns are nearly identical to those obtained from our benchmark
approach. Notice this exercise is equivalent to a model where ρ∗ is set to zero, and so also serves
as a robustness exercise on the value of this parameter. In other words, under our proposed
empirical strategy, the results change only negligibly whether we account for local persistent
shocks or not, and they are robust to large changes in the persistence of those shocks (recall
that the benchmark value of ρ∗ is relatively high at 0.93). This robustness to the properties of
regional long-run shocks is an attractive feature of our approach and is intuitive when examining
our identification equations (8)-(9) and (17)-(20) and the expressions for predicted returns (6)
and (7). The parameters of the foreign shock processes (ρ∗ and σe2∗ ) do not enter anywhere into
the latter two, implying that they do not directly impact expected returns; their only effect is


                                                 47
indirect by affecting κ∗m,1 , and so our estimate of φ∗ (through expression (14)). However, these
indirect effects are quantitatively negligible.
    Because we allow for correlation in both the transitory and persistent movements of dividend
growth rates across countries, the comovement of domestic and foreign dividend growth does not
provide enough information to identify φ∗ . Expression (8) shows that even if we knew the value
of π ∗ , which measures the exposure of foreign dividend growth to the transitory component of
US consumption growth, we cannot separately identify φ∗ from πd∗ . Failure to account for the
portion of the comovement of dividend growth rates that is due to temporary shocks - πd∗ - may
bias the estimate of φ∗ .
    In the last column of Table 11, we compute predicted returns under the assumption that
there is no transitory comovement between dividend growth rates, i.e., πd∗ = 0. Imposing this
restriction implies that correlations in dividend growth rates across countries are due only to
exposure to the common long-run shock, and to their common dependence on the transitory
consumption shock governed by π ∗ and π. In this case, the covariance of dividend growth
rates with those in the US and with US consumption growth (expressions (8) and (18)) are
clearly sufficient to tease out φ∗ . The implications are very stark: Portfolio 3 now yields the
highest returns while Portfolio 1 yields the lowest. As discussed earlier, since period-by-period
comovement between dividend growth in developed economies and the US is higher than in less
developed countries, attributing this comovement only to persistent components would result in
the misleading conclusion that developed countries are actually riskier, leading to a full reversal
in the ordering of implied risk premia.
    Finally, we note that using foreign consumption data and specifying a foreign consumption
process as in expression (5) in order to use a strategy exactly analogous to that in the US - i.e.,
the ratio of the autocovariance of foreign dividend to foreign consumption growth - is also not
sufficient. Using the notation from expression (5), this moment exactly identifies φ̃∗ , but does
not hold any information regarding ξ ∗ and therefore does not pin down φ∗ , as can be seen from
the following expression:
                                   s                     
                                       cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t
                                                          = φ̃∗                              (22)
                                       cov ∆c∗t+1 , ∆c∗t

In other words, this ratio tells us the translation from persistence in local consumption growth
to dividend growth, but does not identify how the local consumption process itself depends on
the global long-run shock.




                                                 48
                Table 11: Predicted Returns - Alternative Empirical Strategies
                                                                   σe∗ = 0
                 Portfolio            r          rb         rbautocov    rbbaseline   rbπd∗ =0
                 1                  13.01      10.35        11.00         10.36        8.69
                 2                  11.06       9.14        12.00          9.16        9.18
                 3                   8.04       7.04         9.54         7.05        10.47
                Notes: The first two columns of the Table report actual expected returns,
                r, and predicted expected returns from the model, r̂, computed using the
                parameters in Table 4. The third column, denoted by rbautocov reports pre-
                dicted expected returns when σe∗ = 0 and φ∗ satisfies expression (21);
                all remaining parameters satisfy moment conditions as in baseline. The
                fourth column, denoted by rbbaseline reports predicted expected returns when
                σe∗ = 0 and all remaining parameters satisfy moment conditions as in base-
                line. The fifth column, denoted by rbπd∗ =0 reports predicted expected returns
                when πd∗ = 0 and all remaining parameters satisfy moment conditions as in
                baseline.


E     Consumption CAPM
In this section, we take an alternative approach to illustrate the implications of the traditional
power-utility CCAPM model - namely, we use the covariance of returns with consumption
growth, which is a sufficient statistic for risk premia in that framework. Consider a representa-
tive US investor with CRRA preferences

                                                       c1−γ −1
                                              u (ct ) = t
                                                         1−γ

where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion (here also the inverse of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution).
    Euler equations of the form in expression (3) continue to hold with the investor’s SDF
                                −γ
now given by Mt+1 = β CCt+1    t
                                     . To simplify matters, we linearize the SDF around its
                        Mt+1
unconditional mean as E[M t+1 ]
                                ≈ 1 + mt+1 − E [mt+1 ] where mt = log Mt . Using the definition
of mt along with the unconditional expectation of (3) gives the standard covariance formula
                                            e 
                                          E rj,t = γcov (∆ct , rj,t )                            (23)

which relates the mean excess return on an asset to the covariance of its returns with log
consumption growth. The degree of risk aversion γ governs the strength of this relationship,
that is, it determines how much additional compensation is demanded for each additional unit
of covariance risk.
    To assess the ability of the CCAPM to account for the patterns in international capital


                                                       49
returns, it remains to construct the objects in equation (23). Mean excess returns are computed
as the average of annual returns less the annual return on a 3 month treasury bond. US
consumption is measured as real per-capita consumption of non-durables and services.46 The
covariance for each portfolio is calculated as the average covariance of the countries within that
portfolio (recall that in our baseline approach, countries do not change portfolios).
    We report the results in Table 12. First, we set a value for γ and evaluate the right hand side
of (23). This is the excess return predicted by the CCAPM. We set γ = 10, which is towards
the higher end of the range commonly deemed to be reasonable.47 Excess returns range from
a low of 0.10% to a high of 0.27%. Quantitatively, these are essentially negligible: the model
generates excess returns orders of magnitude below the actual, and only a minimal spread
between portfolios. Clearly, the CCAPM cannot rationalize the patterns of capital returns
observed in the data, at least not for this level of risk aversion.

                       Table 12: Capital Returns in the Consumption CAPM
                                                                                                          rbe
   Portfolio            re     cov (rj,t , ∆cU S,t )   corr (rj,t , ∆cU S,t )   std (rj,t )   γ=   10           480
   1                  11.79         0.00027                    0.30              0.063             0.27     12.75
   2                  9.84          0.00019                    0.25              0.053             0.19      8.96
   3                  6.82          0.00012                    0.23              0.042             0.12      5.95
   US                 4.79          0.00010                    0.31              0.027             0.10      4.94
   Spread: 1-US        6.99             -                        -                  -              0.16         7.81
  Notes: Table reports excess returns across portfolios, re , the covariance and correlation of returns with US
  consumption growth, the volatility of returns and the predicted excess returns from the CCAPM model
  under two alternative levels of risk aversion.

   Next, we ask what level of risk aversion is needed to best fit the observed levels of returns
across portfolios? To answer this, we compute the slope of the line of best fit (with a constant
term of zero) across portfolios, which gives a value of 480. The associated excess returns are
reported in the last column of the table, which shows that to generate levels of returns on par
with the data within this framework requires an unreasonably high level of risk aversion.48

Long-run risk and international stock market returns. Our approach to analyzing stock
market returns is quite similar to that in our baseline analysis . Moments in US consumption
growth are exactly the same. Rather than estimating φ in the US, we follow the literature
and assign the well-accepted value of φ = 3 (see, for example, Bansal and Yaron (2004) and
many more). The remainder of the calibration follows the same strategy as in the baseline,
 46
    Data on treasury returns are obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis FRED database.
 47
    See, for example, Mehra and Prescott (1985).
 48
    We have also performed this exercise using stock market returns. The results are similar.

                                                         50
but employing moments from stock market data. We use annual data for both returns and
dividends (hence, the return values differ slightly from those in Table 8, which were annualized
from quarterly data). Return data are as described in Appendix A. Due to known problems with
imputing dividend series from the return and price indices provided by MSCI, see, for example,
the discussion and references in Rangvid et al. (2014), we follow these authors and use dividend
data obtained from Datastream. Datastream reports quarterly dividend yields and price indices
in US dollars for most of the countries in our sample, from which we can compute the level
of dividends.49 We deflate quarterly dividends using the US CPI and because of well-known
seasonality in dividend payouts, we aggregate to an annual frequency.
    Both the dividend and returns series exhibit a handful of extreme outliers. As has been
recognized in the literature, emerging stock markets are prone to extremely large short-term
fluctuations, due, for example, to events such as currency crises, default episodes, movements in
commodity prices etc. Given our rather short time frame and small number of countries, even
one of these episodes can have a large influence on the results (for example, returns exceeding
100% within a single quarter or fluctuations in dividend growth rates of over 300% in a year).
The dividend series are also subject to at least two other considerations: first we are only able
to compute total dividends from the Datastream data, not dividends per share. To the extent
that the number of firms in the Datastream index is changing, this may affect the resulting
moments for reasons unrelated to changes in dividends per share, which is the object of interest.
Second, countries may differ in terms of the dividend policy of firms - i.e., to what extent firms
smooth dividends or decide to use retained earnings to finance increased investment rather than
distribute profits to shareholders - and these differences may be independent of actual differences
in the underlying fundamentals of firms. To address this concern we exclude observations where
dividends fluctuate by more than 50% in a single year, roughly the 2% tails of the distribution.
We accordingly do the same for stock returns, where we trim the 3% tails of returns in each
country. We choose this more systematic approach, rather than take a stand on whether
particular episodes represent outliers or not, given their relatively more frequent occurrence in
emerging markets. Our trimming approach tends to be conservative for our quantitative work,
in the sense of generally leading to lower predicted returns from our model.
    The top panel of Table 13 reports the target moments. Even after trimming extreme outliers,
the dividend data show very large differences in mean growth rates across countries. This may
be due in part to the shortness of the time-series available and differences in dividend policies
across countries unrelated to fundamentals. With this in mind, we make the admittedly rough
  49
    Brazil and Switzerland are only available in local currency. For these countries, we convert dividends from
local currency to US dollars using end of quarter exchange rates obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis FRED database.



                                                      51
adjustment of setting all mean growth rates to the US value of 0.02. This has very little effect
on the results, since mean growth rates do not directly affect risk premia.50
                           Table 13: Stock Market Returns - Predicted vs. Actual
 Moments
                                                                                                                     cov(rt∗ ,rt )
                      E [∆d∗t ]   cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t        cov (∆d∗t , ∆ct )    std (∆d∗t )   cov (∆d∗t , ∆dt )
                                                      
 Portfolio                                                                                                             std(rt )
 1                     0.020          0.00812                 −0.00002            0.191          0.00213               0.132
 2                     0.020          0.00655                  0.00044            0.155          0.00254               0.087
 US                    0.020                                   0.00032            0.062
                                  corr ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t       corr (∆d∗t , ∆ct )                 corr (∆d∗t , ∆dt )   corr (rt∗ , rt )
                                                       

 1                                      0.20                    −0.01                               0.17              0.35
 2                                      0.25                     0.21                               0.25              0.43
 US                                     0.54                     0.44                               1.00              1.00
 Parameters
 Portfolio              µd                φ                       π                 πd              σµ                φ̃∗ σe∗
 1                     0.020             7.75                   −14.14             0.20            0.131              0.021
 2                     0.020             3.68                    1.88              0.48            0.127              0.028
 US                    0.020             3.00                    0.83                -             0.055                  -
 Returns
 Portfolio               rb                r
 1                     17.27            18.24
 2                     11.50             8.89
 US                    8.44             9.60
 Average:              12.40            12.25
 Spread: 1-US          8.83             8.64
 Percent of actual      102
Notes: Table reports target moments, calibrated parameters, and expected stock returns as reported in the data, r and
predicted by the model, r̂. Consumption is measured as real per-capita consumption of non-durables and services. Con-
sumption moments are computed over the period 1929-2008, the longest available from the BEA. Dividend data are from
Datastream and returns data are from MSCI. Portfolio moments are computed over the period 1988-2014. The moments
for each portfolio represent the mean values for the countries in that portfolio.

    The center panel of Table 13 reports the parameter estimates and the bottom panel the
predicted mean returns. The model generates expected returns of 17.3% for the low-income
countries and 8.4% for the US, representing a spread of 8.8 percentage points. The correspond-
ing values in the data are 18.2% and 9.6%, so a spread of 8.6%; although the levels of returns
in the model are about 1% lower than the data, the model-implied spread between the poorest
countries and the US is almost exactly that in the data. The higher-income countries exhibit
an intermediate level of returns, both in the model and data, although here the model generates
returns that are quite a bit higher than the data: 11.5% versus 8.9%. In sum, the long-run
risk model leads to stock market returns across income groups very much in line with those in
  50
    For example, setting the growth rate of the low-income portfolio as high as 0.05 changes the risk premium
there only negligibly.

                                                           52
the data and perhaps most importantly, suggests risk premia on the order of those observed.
Indeed, the model seems to fit equity returns more closely than our baseline measure of returns;
this may not be surprising, given that the LRR model was built with equity markets in mind.
    Table 14 performs the analogous exercise as Table 6 and decomposes stock market returns
into their risk-free, short-run and long-run components. The results are similar to those in our
baseline analysis - short-run risks are generally small and ordered in the reverse direction, i.e.,
they are higher in developed countries than developing. Thus, long-run risks account for (more
than) the entirety of the return differentials predicted by the model.

                        Table 14: Stock Market Returns - Decomposition
                          Actual                                Predicted
                                                              f           e                  e
                Portfolio   r                  rb     =      rb    +    rbsr        +      rblr
                1              18.24         17.27          1.27         −2.99           18.98
                2               8.89         11.50          1.27         0.40            9.83
                US              9.60          8.44          1.27         0.18            6.99
               Notes: Table reports actual expected returns, r, and predicted expected re-
               turns from the model, r̂, computed using the parameters in Table 13. The
               predicted returns are decomposed into three components: risk-free rate, r̂f ,
                                 e                         e
               short-run risk, r̂sr , and long-run risk, r̂lr using expressions (6) and (7) in the
               text.




                                                       53
F    List of Countries

                    3 Letter   Init.         Portfolio number                                 Openness
Country               code     year    3 portf. 5 portf. 10 portf.   Ctry An.   α   CI-2004   Q-2004 GMF-1995

Albania              ALB       1970      2         3         5          0       0     1         0       0
Angola               AGO       1970      1         2         3          0       0     0         0       0
Antigua/Barbuda      ATG       1970      3         4         8          0       0     1         0       1
Argentina            ARG       1950      2         3         5          1       1     1         0       1
Armenia              ARM       1990      2         2         4          0       1     1         0       0
Australia            AUS       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Austria              AUT       1950      3         5         9          1       1     1         1       1
Azerbaijan           AZE       1990      2         2         4          0       1     0         0       0
Bahamas              BHS       1970      3         5         9          0       1     0         0       0
Bahrain              BHR       1970      3         5         9          0       0     1         0       1
Bangladesh           BGD       1959      1         1         2          1       0     0         0       0
Barbados             BRB       1960      3         4         8          1       1     0         0       0
Belarus              BLR       1990      2         3         6          0       1     0         0       0
Belgium              BEL       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Belize               BLZ       1970      2         3         6          0       0     0         0       0
Benin                BEN       1959      1         1         2          1       1     0         0       0
Bhutan               BTN       1970      1         2         3          0       0     0         0       0
Bolivia              BOL       1950      1         2         3          1       1     1         1       1
Botswana             BWA       1960      2         3         5          1       1     1         0       0
Brazil               BRA       1950      2         2         4          1       1     1         1       0
Brunei               BRN       1970      3         5        10          0       0     0         0       0
Bulgaria             BGR       1970      2         3         5          0       1     0         1       0
Burkina Faso         BFA       1959      1         1         1          1       1     0         0       0
Burundi              BDI       1960      1         1         1          1       0     0         0       0
Canada               CAN       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Cape Verde           CPV       1960      1         2         3          1       0     0         0       0
Central Afr. Rep.    CAF       1960      1         1         1          1       1     0         0       0
Chad                 TCD       1960      1         1         1          1       0     0         0       0
Chile                CHL       1951      2         3         6          1       1     1         1       0
China                CHN       1952      1         1         2          1       1     0         1       0
Colombia             COL       1950      2         3         6          1       1     1         1       0
Comoros              COM       1960      1         1         2          1       0     0         0       0
Congo, Dem. Rep.     COD       1970      1         1         1          0       0     0         0       0
Congo, Rep. of       COG       1960      1         2         3          1       0     0         0       0
Costa Rica           CRI       1950      2         3         6          1       1     1         1       1
Cote d‘Ivoire        CIV       1960      1         2         3          1       1     0         0       0
Croatia              HRV       1990      3         4         8          0       1     1         0       0
Cyprus               CYP       1950      3         4         8          1       1     1         0       0
Czech Republic       CZE       1990      3         5         9          0       1     1         1       0

                                                   54
                 3 Letter   Init.         Portfolio number                                 Openness
Country            code     year    3 portf. 5 portf. 10 portf.   Ctry An.   α   CI-2004   Q-2004 GMF-1995

Denmark           DNK       1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         1       1
Djibouti           DJI      1970      1         2        4           0       1     1         0       1
Dominican Rep.    DOM       1951      2         3        5           1       1     1         0       0
Ecuador           ECU       1951      2         2        4           1       1     1         1       1
El Salvador       SLV       1950      1         1        1           1       0     1         1       0
Estonia           EST       1990      3         4        7           0       1     1         0       1
Ethiopia          ETH       1950      1         1        1           1       0     0         0       0
Fiji               FJI      1960      2         3        5           1       1     0         0       0
Finland           FIN       1950      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       1
France            FRA       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Gabon             GAB       1960      3         4        7           1       0     0         0       0
Gambia, The       GMB       1960      1         1        2           1       0     1         0       1
Georgia           GEO       1990      2         2        4           0       1     1         0       0
Germany           DEU       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Greece            GRC       1951      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       0
Grenada           GRD       1970      2         3        5           0       0     0         0       0
Guatemala         GTM       1950      2         2        4           1       1     1         1       1
Guinea            GIN       1959      1         1        2           1       0     0         0       0
Honduras          HND       1950      1         2        4           1       1     1         0       1
Hong Kong         HKG       1960      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Hungary           HUN       1970      2         4        7           0       1     1         1       0
Iceland            ISL      1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         0       0
India             IND       1950      1         1        2           1       1     0         1       0
Indonesia         IDN       1960      1         2        3           1       1     1         1       1
Iran              IRN       1955      2         3        6           1       1     1         0       0
Ireland           IRL       1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         0       1
Israel             ISR      1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         1       0
Italy             ITA       1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         1       1
Jamaica           JAM       1953      2         3        5           1       1     1         1       0
Japan             JPN       1950      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       0
Jordan            JOR       1954      2         3        6           1       1     1         0       0
Kazakhstan        KAZ       1990      2         3        6           0       1     0         0       0
Kenya             KEN       1950      1         1        2           1       1     1         1       0
Korea, Rep. of    KOR       1953      2         4        7           1       1     1         1       0
Kyrgyzstan        KGZ       1990      1         2        3           0       1     1         0       0
Latvia            LVA       1990      2         4        7           0       1     1         0       1
Lesotho           LSO       1960      1         1        2           1       1     0         0       0
Liberia           LBR       1964      1         1        1           0       0     1         0       0
Lithuania         LTU       1990      3         4        7           0       1     0         0       1
Luxembourg        LUX       1950      3         5        10          1       1     0         0       0
Macao             MAC       1970      3         5        10          0       1     1         0       0


                                                55
                  3 Letter   Init.         Portfolio number                                 Openness
Country             code     year    3 portf. 5 portf. 10 portf.   Ctry An.   α   CI-2004   Q-2004 GMF-1995

Macedonia          MKD       1990      3         4        7           0       1     1         0       0
Malawi             MWI       1954      1         1        1           1       0     0         0       0
Malaysia           MYS       1955      2         3        6           1       1     1         0       1
Mali               MLI       1960      1         1        1           1       0     0         0       0
Mauritania         MRT       1960      1         2        3           1       1     0         0       0
Mauritius          MUS       1950      2         4        7           1       1     1         0       0
Mexico             MEX       1950      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       0
Moldova            MDA       1990      1         2        3           0       1     0         0       0
Mongolia           MNG       1970      1         2        3           0       1     1         0       0
Montenegro         MNE       1990      3         5        9           0       0     1         0       0
Morocco            MAR       1950      2         2        4           1       1     0         0       0
Mozambique         MOZ       1960      1         1        1           1       1     0         0       0
Namibia            NAM       1960      2         3        5           1       0     0         0       0
Nepal              NPL       1960      1         1        1           1       0     0         0       0
Netherlands        NLD       1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         1       1
New Zealand        NZL       1950      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       1
Niger              NER       1960      1         1        2           1       1     0         0       1
Nigeria            NGA       1950      1         1        2           1       0     0         1       0
Norway             NOR       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         1       1
Oman               OMN       1970      3         5        9           0       0     1         0       1
Pakistan           PAK       1950      1         2        3           1       0     0         0       0
Panama             PAN       1950      2         4        7           1       1     1         0       1
Paraguay           PRY       1951      1         2        4           1       1     1         0       0
Peru               PER       1950      2         2        4           1       1     1         1       1
Philippines        PHL       1950      1         2        4           1       1     1         1       0
Poland             POL       1970      2         3        6           0       1     1         1       0
Portugal           PRT       1950      2         4        7           1       1     0         1       1
Qatar              QAT       1970      3         5        10          0       0     1         0       1
Romania            ROU       1988      2         3        6           0       1     1         0       0
Russia             RUS       1990      2         4        7           0       1     0         1       0
S.Tome/Principe    STP       1970      1         1        2           0       1     1         0       0
Saudi Arabia       SAU       1970      3         5        10          0       0     1         0       1
Senegal            SEN       1960      1         1        2           1       1     0         1       0
Serbia             SRB       1990      2         3        6           0       1     1         0       0
Singapore          SGP       1960      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       1
Slovak Rep.        SVK       1990      3         4        8           0       1     1         0       0
Slovenia           SVN       1990      3         5        9           0       1     1         0       0
South Africa       ZAF       1950      2         3        6           1       1     0         1       0
Spain              ESP       1950      3         4        8           1       1     1         1       1
Sri Lanka          LKA       1950      2         2        4           1       1     1         1       0
St. Lucia          LCA       1970      2         3        6           0       0     1         0       0


                                                 56
                   3 Letter   Init.         Portfolio number                                 Openness
Country              code     year    3 portf. 5 portf. 10 portf.   Ctry An.   α   CI-2004   Q-2004 GMF-1995

St.Vincent/Gren.    VCT       1970      2         3         5          0       0     0         0       0
Suriname            SUR       1970      2         4         7          0       1     0         0       0
Swaziland           SWZ       1970      2         3         5          0       1     0         0       0
Sweden              SWE       1950      3         5         9          1       1     1         1       1
Switzerland         CHE       1950      3         5        10          1       1     1         0       1
Syria               SYR       1960      1         2         4          1       0     0         0       0
Taiwan              TWN       1951      3         4         8          1       0     1         0       0
Tajikistan          TJK       1990      1         2        3           0       1     0         0       0
Tanzania            TZA       1960      1         1        1           1       1     0         0       0
Thailand            THA       1950      1         2        3           1       1     1         0       0
Togo                TGO       1960      1         1        1           1       0     0         0       0
Trinidad/Tobago     TTO       1950      3         4        8           1       0     0         0       1
Tunisia             TUN       1960      2         3        5           1       1     0         1       0
Turkey              TUR       1950      2         4        7           1       1     0         1       0
Turkmenistan        TKM       1990      2         3        5           0       0     0         0       0
Uganda              UGA       1950      1         1        1           1       0     1         1       0
Ukraine             UKR       1990      2         3        5           0       1     0         0       0
United Kingdom      GBR       1950      3         5        9           1       1     1         1       1
United States       USA       1950      4         6        11          1       1     1         1       1
Uruguay             URY       1950      2         4        7           1       1     1         1       0
Uzbekistan          UZB       1990      2         2        4           0       0     0         0       0
Venezuela           VEN       1950      3         4        7           1       1     0         1       0
Zambia              ZMB       1955      1         1        2           1       0     1         0       0



G    Additional Tables




                                                  57
              Table 16: Target Moments and Parameter Values, 5 Portfolios
Moments
                                                                                                       cov(rt∗ ,rt )
             E [∆d∗t ]   cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t       cov (∆d∗t , ∆ct )   std (∆d∗t )   cov (∆d∗t , ∆dt )
                                             
Portfolio                                                                                                std(rt )
1            −0.016          0.00148                0.00014            0.084          0.00042            0.045
2            −0.016          0.00160                0.00005            0.078          0.00010            0.036
3            −0.016          0.00116                0.00014            0.077          0.00039            0.037
4            −0.013          0.00102                0.00015            0.070          0.00046            0.037
5            −0.011          0.00058                0.00015            0.060          0.00038            0.028
Parameters
Portfolio     µd                 φ                    π                 πd               σµ             φ̃∗ σe∗
1            −0.016           5.37744              −0.96821          −0.00010           0.074          0.00715
2            −0.016           5.33112              −2.07645          −0.57545           0.062          0.00846
3            −0.016           3.83740              −0.27666          0.14880            0.069          0.00918
4            −0.013           3.51331              0.01263           0.35320            0.061          0.00887
5            −0.011           2.39233              0.58129           0.27506            0.054          0.00715



             Table 17: Target Moments and Parameter Values, 10 Portfolios
Moments
                                                                                                       cov(rt∗ ,rt )
             E [∆d∗t ]   cov ∆d∗t+1 , ∆d∗t       cov (∆d∗t , ∆ct )   std (∆d∗t )   cov (∆d∗t , ∆dt )
                                             
Portfolio                                                                                                std(rt )
1            −0.019          0.00138                0.00016            0.089          0.00041            0.049
2            −0.014          0.00161                0.00013            0.079          0.00043            0.041
3            −0.018          0.00107                0.00005            0.087          0.00009            0.033
4            −0.015          0.00208                0.00005            0.069          0.00009            0.038
5            −0.017          0.00114                0.00016            0.082          0.00042            0.033
6            −0.014          0.00116                0.00012            0.072          0.00037            0.041
7            −0.017          0.00113                0.00012            0.074          0.00041            0.035
8            −0.010          0.00091                0.00017            0.066          0.00052            0.039
9            −0.013          0.00069                0.00014            0.060          0.00037            0.029
10           −0.009          0.00047                0.00016            0.059          0.00039            0.027
Parameters
Portfolio     µd                 φ                    π                 πd               σµ             φ̃∗ σe∗
1            −0.019           6.45374              −1.33225          −0.18904           0.073          0.01000
2            −0.014           4.35358              −0.62409          0.19171            0.067          0.01123
3            −0.018           4.77576              −1.77650          −0.51733           0.078          0.00516
4            −0.015           5.65472              −2.24257          −0.62392           0.044          0.01100
5            −0.017           3.07385              0.30829           0.29047            0.074          0.01061
6            −0.014           4.66260              −0.90714          0.02476            0.062          0.00672
7            −0.017           3.46198              −0.25718          0.29270            0.065          0.00981
8            −0.010           3.55182              0.24894           0.42668            0.057          0.00783
9            −0.013           2.59247              0.32249           0.25836            0.053          0.00788
10           −0.009           2.23859              0.79737           0.28864            0.054          0.00631



                                                     58
