                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE RISE AND DECLINE OF GENERAL LAWS OF CAPITALISM

                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                         James A. Robinson

                                        Working Paper 20766
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20766


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We thank David Autor, Amy Finkelstein, Johan Fourie, Bengt Holmstrom, Chang Tai Hsieh, Chad
Jones, Matthew Kustenbauder, Naomi Lamoureux, Ulrike Malmendier, Kalle Moene, Joel Mokyr,
Suresh Naidu, Jim Poterba, Matthew Rognlie, Ragnar Torvik, Laurence Wilse-Samson, Francis Wilson
and Timothy Taylor for The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Rise and Decline of General Laws of Capitalism
Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 20766
December 2014
JEL No. O20,P16,P48

                                               ABSTRACT

Thomas Piketty's (2014) book, Capital in the 21st Century, follows in the tradition of the great classical
economists, like Marx and Ricardo, in formulating general laws of capitalism to diagnose and predict
the dynamics of inequality. We argue that general economic laws are unhelpful as a guide to understand
the past or predict the future, because they ignore the central role of political and economic institutions,
as well as the endogenous evolution of technology, in shaping the distribution of resources in society.
We use regression evidence to show that the main economic force emphasized in Piketty's book, the
gap between the interest rate and the growth rate, does not appear to explain historical patterns of inequality
(especially, the share of income accruing to the upper tail of the distribution). We then use the histories
of inequality of South Africa and Sweden to illustrate that inequality dynamics cannot be understood
without embedding economic factors in the context of economic and political institutions, and also
that the focus on the share of top incomes can give a misleading characterization of the true nature
of inequality.


Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E18-269D
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu

James A. Robinson
Harvard University
Department of Government
N309, 1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jrobinson@gov.harvard.edu
   Economists have long been drawn to the ambitious quest of discovering the general laws of
capitalism. David Ricardo, for example, predicted that capital accumulation would terminate
in economic stagnation and inequality as a greater and greater share of national income accrued
to landowners. Karl Marx followed him by forecasting the inevitable immizerization of the
proletariat. Thomas Piketty’s (2014) tome, Capital in the 21st Century, emulates Marx in his
title, his style of exposition, and his critique of the capitalist system. Piketty is after general
laws which will demystify our modern economy and elucidate the inherent problems of the
system— and point to solutions.
   But the quest for general laws of capitalism is misguided because it ignores the key forces
shaping how an economy functions: the endogenous evolution of technology and the institutions
and the political equilibrium that in‡uence not only technology but also how markets function
and how the gains from various di¤erent economic arrangements are distributed. Despite his
erudition, ambition, and creativity, Marx was led astray because of his disregard of these forces.
The same is true of Piketty’s sweeping account of inequality in capitalist economies.
   In the next section, we review Marx’s conceptualization of capitalism and some of his
general laws. We then turn to Piketty’s approach to capitalism and his version of the general
laws. We will point to various problems in Piketty’s interpretation of the economic relationships
underpinning inequality, but the most important shortcoming is that, though he discusses the
role of certain institutions and policies, he allows neither for a systematic role of institutions
and political factors in the formation of inequality nor for the endogenous evolution of these
institutional factors. We illustrate this by …rst using regression evidence to show that Piketty’s
central economic force, the relationship between the interest rate and the rate of economic
growth, is not correlated with inequality (in particular, with the key variable he focuses on,
the share of national income accruing to the richest 1 percent, henceforth, the top 1 percent
share). We then use the examples of the South African and Swedish paths of inequality over
the 20th century to demonstrate two things. First, that using the top 1 percent share may
miss the big picture about inequality. Second, it is impossible to understand the dynamics of
inequality in these societies without systematically bringing in institutions and politics, and
their endogenous evolution. We conclude by outlining an alternative approach to inequality
that eschews general laws in favor of a conceptualization in which both technology and factor
prices are shaped by the evolution of institutions and political equilibria, and the institutions
themselves are endogenous and are partly in‡uenced by, among other things, the extent of
inequality. We then apply this framework to the evolution of inequality and institutions in
South Africa and Sweden.
   We should note at this point that we believe the term “capitalism” not to be a useful one



                                                1
for the purposes of comparative economic or political analysis. By focusing on the ownership
and accumulation of capital, this term distracts from the characteristics of societies which
are more important in determining their economic development and the extent of inequality.
For example, both Uzbekistan and modern Switzerland have private ownership of capital, but
these societies have little in common in terms of prosperity and inequality because the nature
of their economic and political institutions are so sharply di¤erent. In fact, Uzbekistan’s
capitalist economy has more in common with the avowedly non-capitalist North Korea than
Switzerland, as we argued in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012). That said, given the emphasis
in both Marx and Piketty on capitalism, we have opted to bear with this terminology.


Capital Failures

Though many important ideas in social science can be traced to Karl Marx’s oeuvre, his
de…ning approach was to identify certain hard-wired features of capitalism— what Marx called
“general laws of capitalist accumulation.” This approach was heavily shaped by the historical
context of the middle 19th century in which Marx lived and wrote. Marx experienced …rst-
hand both the bewildering transformation of society with the rise of industrial production, and
the associated huge social dislocations.
   Marx developed a rich and nuanced theory of history. But the centerpiece of this theory,
“historical materialism,” rested on how material aspects of economic life, together with what
Marx called “forces of production”— particularly technology— shaped all other aspects of so-
cial, economic and political life, including the “relations of production.” For example, Marx
famously argued in his 1847 book The Poverty of Philosophy, that “the hand-mill gives you
society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill society with the industrial capitalist”(as reprinted
in McLellan, 2000, pp. 219-220). Here the hand-mill represents the forces of production while
feudalism represents the relations of production, as well as a speci…c set of social and political
arrangements. When the forces of production (technology) changed, this destabilized the re-
lations of production and led to contradictions and social and institutional changes that were
often revolutionary in nature. As Marx put it in 1859 in A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy (McLellan, 2000, p. 425):

         [T]he sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic struc-
     ture of society – the real foundation, on which rise legal and political superstruc-
     tures and to which correspond de…nite forms of social consciousness. The mode of
     production of material life conditions the general character of the social, political
     and spiritual processes of life. At a certain state of their development the material
     forces of production in society come into con‡ict with the existing relations of pro-
     duction or – what is but a legal expression of the same thing – with the property

                                                2
         relations within which they had been at work before. From forms of development of
         the forces of production these relations turn into fetters. Then comes the epoch of
         social revolution. With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense
         superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed.

       Marx hypothesized that the forces of production, sometimes in conjunction with the own-
ership of the means of production, determined all other aspects of economic and political
institutions— the de jure and de facto laws, regulations, and arrangements shaping social life.
Armed with this theory of history, Marx made bold predictions about the dynamics of capi-
talism based just on economic fundamentals— without any reference to institutions or politics,
which he generally viewed as derivative of the powerful impulses unleashed by the forces of
production.1
       Most relevant for our focus are three of these predictions concerning inequality. In Volume
1, Chapter 25 of Capital, Marx developed the idea that the “reserve army of the unemployed”
would keep wages at subsistence level, making capitalism inconsistent with steady improve-
ments in the living standards of workers. His exact prediction here is open to di¤erent inter-
pretations. Though Marx viewed capitalism as the harbinger of “misery, agony of toil, slavery,
ignorance, brutality, mental degradation” for working men, it is less clear whether this was
meant to rule out real wage growth. Blaug (1997) states that Marx never claimed that real
wages would be stagnant, but rather that the share of labor in national income would fall since
Marx says “real wages ... never rise proportionately to the productive power of labor.” Foley
(2008, Chapter 3), on the other hand, argues that Marx did start by asserting that real wages
would not rise under capitalism, but then weakened this claim to a falling labor share when
he realized that wages were indeed increasing in England. This motivates us to state this law
in both a strong and a weak form.

1: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation. Strong Form: Real wages are stagnant
         under capitalism. Weak Form: The share of national income accruing to labor would
         fall under capitalism.

       Under its either strong or weak form, this law implies that any economic growth under
   1
     There is no consensus on Marx’s exact formulation of the relationship between the “substructure,”compris-
ing productive forces and sometimes the relations of production, and the “superstructure” which includes what
we call political institutions and most aspects of economic institutions. In Chapter I of the Communist Mani-
festo, Marx and Engels wrote that “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles”.
But the idea here, so far as we understand, is not that “class struggle” represents some autonomous historical
dynamic, but rather that it is an outcome of the contradictions between the forces of production and the own-
ership of the means of production. In some writings, such as The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, Marx
also allowed for feedback from politics and other aspects of society to the forces of production. But it is clear
from his work that he regraded this as second order (see Singer, 2000, Chapter 7 for a discussion of this). Marx
never formulated an approach in which institutions play the central role and themselves endogenously change.



                                                        3
capitalism would almost automatically translate into greater inequality— as capitalists bene…t
and workers fail to do so.
   In Volume III of Capital, Marx proposed another general law:

2: The General Law of Declining Pro…t: as capital accumulates, the rate of pro…t falls.

   These two laws came along with a third, less often stressed but highly relevant, law pre-
sented in Volume I of Capital :

3: The General Law of Decreasing Competition: capital accumulation leads to increased in-
     dustrial concentration.

   Marx’s general laws did not fare well, however. As Marx was writing, real wages, which had
previously been falling or constant, had already been rising, probably for about two decades
(Allen, 2001, 2007, 2009a; Clark, 2005; Feinstein, 1998). The share of labor in national income,
which had fallen to under 50% by 1870, also started to increase thereafter, reaching 2/3 in the
20th century. Allen’s (2009a) calculation of the real rate of pro…t suggests that the pro…t rate
was comparatively low at the end of the 18th century and rose until around 1870 reaching a
maximum of 25%, but then fell back to around 20% where it stabilized until World War I.
Matthews, Feinstein and Odling-Smee (1982, pp. 187-188) suggest that these rates did not
fall in the 20th century, though there is a lot of heterogeneity across sectors. (The third law’s
performance was no better as we discuss below).
   Why did Marx’s general laws fail? Mostly because they ignored both the endogenous
evolution of technology (despite his great emphasis on the forces of production) and the role of
institutions and politics that shape markets, prices and the path of technology. The increase
in real wages in Britain, for example, was in part a consequence of the change in the pace
and nature of technological change, rapidly increasing the demand for labor (Crafts 1985;
Allen 2009b; Mokyr 2012). It was also a consequence of the radical political changes Britain
underwent at the time, which both in‡uenced technology and directly impacted wages. The
rationalization of property rights, dismantling of monopolies, investment in infrastructure, and
the creation of a legal framework for industrial development including the patent system were
among the institutional changes contributing to rapid technological change and its widespread
adoption in the British economy (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012; Mokyr, 2012).
   The distribution of the gains from new technologies was also shaped by an evolving institu-
tional equilibrium. The Industrial Revolution went hand-in-hand with major political changes,
including the development of the state and the Reform Acts of 1832, 1867, and 1884, which
transformed British political institutions and the distribution of political power. For example,
in 1833 a professional factory inspectorate was set up, enabling the enforcement of legislation


                                               4
on factory employment. The political fallout of the 1832 democratization also led in 1846 to
the repeal of the Corn Laws— which were tari¤s limiting imports of lower-priced foreign corn,
lowering the price of bread, raising real wages, and simultaneously undermining land rents
(Schonhart-Bailey, 2006). The Factory Act of 1847 took the radical step of limiting working
hours in the textile mills to 10 hours per day for women and teenagers. The Reform Act of 1867
led to the abolition of the Masters and Servants Acts in 1875— which had imposed on workers
legally-enforceable duties of loyalty and obedience, and limited mobility— was an example of
pro-worker labor market legislation that increased real wages (Naidu and Yuchtman, 2013).
   Another telling example is the failure of Marx’s third general law in the United States: the
prediction of increased industrial concentration. After the end of the Civil War came the age
of the robber barons and the huge concentration of economic ownership and control. By the
end of the 1890s, companies such as Du Pont, Eastman Kodak, Standard Oil and International
Harvester came to dominate the economy, in several cases capturing more than 70 percent of
their respective markets (Lamoreaux, 1986, pp. 3-4). It looked like a Marxian prediction come
true.
   Except that this situation was only transitory and was duly reversed as popular mobi-
lization, in part triggered by the increase in inequality, changed the political equilibrium and
the regulation of industry (Sanders, 1999). The power of large corporations started being
curtailed with the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 and then the Sherman Anti-Trust Act
of 1890, which were used in the early 20th-century trust-busting e¤orts against Du Pont, the
American Tobacco Company, the Standard Oil Company and the Northern Securities Com-
pany, then controlled by of J.P. Morgan. The reforms continued with the completion of the
break-up of Standard Oil in 1911, and the rati…cation of the Sixteenth Amendment in 1913,
which introduced the income tax, and the Clayton Anti-Trust Act in 1914 and the founding of
the Federal Trade Commission. These changes not only stopped further industrial concentra-
tion but reversed it (Collins and Preston 1961; Edwards 1975). White (1981) shows that U.S.
industrial concentration in the post-World War II period changed little (see White, 2002, for
an update).
   Crucially, the political process that led to the institutional changes transforming the British
economy and inequality in the 19th century was not a forgone conclusion. Nor was the rise in
inequality in the United States after the Civil War an inevitable consequence of capitalism. Its
reversal starting in the early 1900s was equally dependent on an evolving institutional equilib-
rium. In fact, while the power of monopoly and inequality were being curtailed in the United
States, inequality continued to increase rapidly in neighboring Mexico under the authoritarian
rule of Por…rio Diaz, culminating in revolution and civil war in 1910, and demonstrating the
central role of the endogenous and path-dependent evolution of institutions.



                                                5
   The failure of Marx’s general laws was for the same reason that other previous general
laws by economists performed poorly. These laws were formulated in an e¤ort to compress
the facts and events of their times into a grand theory aiming to be applicable at all times
and places— with little reference to institutions and the (partly institutionally-determined)
changing nature of technology. For example, when David Ricardo published the …rst edition
of On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation in 1817, and predicted that a rising
share of national income would accrue to land, he had indeed been living through a period of
rapidly rising land rents in Britain. But soon thereafter, the share of national income accruing
to land started a monotonic decline, and by the 1870s real rents started a rapid fall which
would last for the next 60 years (Beckett, Turner and Afton 1999; Clark 2002, 2010).
   In short, Marx’s general laws, like those before him, failed because they relied on a concep-
tion of the economy that did not recognize the endogenous evolution of technology and the role
of changing economic and political institutions, shaping both technology and factor prices. In
fact, even Marx’s emphasis on the de…ning role of the forces of production, so emblematic of
his approach, was often inadequate not only as the engine of history, but also as a description
of history, including his paradigmatic example of hand-mills and steam-mils. For example,
Bloch (1967) argued persuasively that the hand-mill did not determine the nature of feudal
society, nor did the steam-mill determine the character of the post-feudal world.


Seeking 21st-Century Laws of Capitalism

Thomas Piketty is also an economist of his milieu, with his thinking heavily colored by in-
creasing inequality in the Anglo-Saxon world and more recently in continental Europe— and in
particular compared to the more equal distribution of labor and total incomes seen in France
in the 1980s and 1990s. A large literature in labor economics had done much to document
and dissect the increase in inequality that started sometime in the 1970s in the United States
(see the surveys and the extensive references to earlier work in Katz and Autor, 1999, and
Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). This literature has demonstrated that the increase in inequality
has taken place throughout the income distribution, and that it can be explained reasonably
well by changes in the supply and demand for skills and in labor market institutions. Piketty
and Saez (2003) brought a new and fruitful perspective to this literature by using data from
tax returns, con…rming and extending the patterns the previous literature had uncovered, and
placing a heavy emphasis on rise in inequality at the very top of the income distribution.
   In Capital in the 21st Century, Piketty goes beyond this empirical and historical approach
to o¤er a theory of the long-run tendencies of capitalism. Though Piketty’s data con…rm the
…nding of the previous literature that widening inequality in recent decades, at least in ad-
vanced economies, had been driven by rising inequality of labor incomes, his book paints a


                                               6
future dominated by capital income, inherited wealth and rentier billionaires. The theoretical
framework used to reach this conclusion is a mix of Marxian economics with Solow’s growth
model. Piketty de…nes capitalism in the same way that Marx does, and has a similarly materi-
alist approach linking the dynamics of capitalism to the ownership of the means of production
(in particular capital) and the ironclad nature of technology and exogenous growth dynamics.
It is true that Piketty sometimes mentions policies and institutions (for example, the wealth
tax and the military and political developments that destroyed capital and reduced the ratio
of wealth to income during the …rst half of the 20th century). But their role is ad hoc. Our
argument is that, to explain inequality, these features and their endogenous evolution have to
be systematically introduced into the analysis.
   This approach shapes Piketty’s analysis and predictions about the nature of capitalism.
Capital in the 21st Century starts by introducing two “fundamental laws,” but the more
major predictions ‡ow from what Piketty calls a “fundamental force of divergence” (p. 351)
or sometimes the “fundamental inequality” (p. 25), comparing the (real) interest rate of the
economy to the growth rate.
   The …rst fundamental law is just a de…nition:
                                                                    K
                           capital share of national income = r       ;
                                                                    Y
where r is net real rate of return on capital (the real interest rate), K is the capital stock, and
Y is GDP (or equivalently, national income as the economy is taken to be closed).
   The second fundamental law is slightly more substantial. It states that
                                             K  s
                                               = ;
                                             Y  g
where s is the saving rate and g is the growth rate of GDP. As we explain in the online appendix
(available with this paper at http://e-jep.org), a version of this law does indeed follow readily
from the steady state of a Solow-type model of economic growth (but see Krusell and Smith,
2014, and Ray, 2014). At an intuitive level, the growth rate of the capital stock K will be given
by net investment, which in a closed economy is equal to saving, sY . Thus the ratio K=Y will
re‡ect the change in K to the change in Y over time due to economic growth, s=g.
   Let us follow Piketty here and combine these two fundamental laws to obtain
                                                                     s
                           capital share of national income = r        :
                                                                     g
Piketty posits that, even as g changes, r and s can be taken to be approximate constants (or
not change as much as g). This then leads to what can be thought of as his …rst general law,
that when growth is lower, the capital share of national income will be higher.
   This …rst law is not as compelling as one might at …rst think, however. After all, one must
consider whether a change in the growth rate g might also alter the saving rate s or the rate

                                                7
of return r since all these are all endogenous variables which are linked in standard models of
economic growth. Piketty argues that r should not change much in response to a decline in g,
because the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is high, resulting in an increase
in the capital share of national income.2
       However, the vast majority of existing estimates indicate a short-run elasticity of substi-
tution signi…cantly less than one (for example, Hamermesh, 1993, Mairesse, Hall and Mulkay,
1999, Chirinko, Fazzari and Meyer, 1999, Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, and Violante, 2000,
Chirinko, 1993, Antras, 2004, Klump, McAdam and Willman, 2007, Ober…eld and Raval,
2014). This is also the plausible case on intuitive grounds: given technology, the ability to
substitute capital for labor would be limited (for example, if you reduce labor to zero, for a
given production process, one would expect output to fall to zero also). Though this elasticity
could be higher in longer horizons, Chirinko (2008) and Chirinko and Mallick (2014) …nd it to
be signi…cantly less than one also in the long run. One reason why the long-run elasticity of
substitution might be greater than 1 is the endogeneity of technology (e.g., Acemoglu, 2002,
2003). In this context, it is worth noting that the only recent paper estimating an elasticity
of substitution greater than 1, Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014), uses long-run cross-country
variation related to changes in investment prices, making their estimates much more likely to
correspond to endogenous-technology elasticities. Nevertheless, as Rognlie (2014) points out,
even an elasticity of substitution signi…cantly greater than 1 would not be su¢ cient to yield
of the conclusions that Piketty reaches.
       Moreover, though it is true that there has been a rise in the capital share of national income,
this does not seem to be related to the forces emphasized in Capital in the 21st Century. In
particular, Bonnet, Bono, Chapelle and Wasmer (2014) demonstrate that this rise in the capital
share is due to housing and the increased price of real estate, shedding doubt on the mechanism
Piketty emphasizes.
       The second general law of Capital in the 21st Century is formulated as

                                                   r > g;

stating that the (real) interest rate exceeds the growth rate of the economy. Theoretically, in
an economy with an exogenous saving rate, or with overlapping generations (e.g., Samuelson,
1958, Diamond, 1965), or with incomplete markets (e.g., Bewley, 1983, Aiyagari, 1994), the
interest rate need not exceed the growth rate. It will do so in an economy that is dynamically
e¢ cient, meaning in an economy in which it is impossible to increase the consumption at all
   2
    However, the interest rate and the growth rate are linked from both the household side and the production
side. For example, with a representative household, we have that r = g + , where is the inverse of the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution and is the discount rate. The fact that the representative household
assumption may not be a good approximation to reality does not imply that r is independent of g. On the
production side, g a¤ects r through its impact on the capital stock, and it is the second channel that depends
on the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor.


                                                      8
dates (thus achieving a Pareto improvement). Whether an economy is dynamically e¢ cient
is an empirical matter (Geerolf, 2013, for example, suggests that several OECD economies
might be dynamically ine¢ cient), and dynamic ine¢ ciency becomes more likely when the
capital-output ratio is very high as Capital in the 21st Century predicts it to be in the future.
       Finally, Piketty’s third and most important general law is that whenever r > g, there will
be a tendency for inequality to diverge. This is because capital income will tend to increase at
the rate of interest rate, r, while national income (and the income of non-capitalists) increases
at the rate g. Because capital income is unequally distributed, this will translate into a capital-
driven increase in inequality, taking us back to the age of Jane Austen and Honoré Balzac. In
the words of Piketty:

            “This fundamental inequality [r > g]. . . will play a crucial role in this book. In
         a sense, it sums up the overall logic of my conclusions.
            When the rate of return on capital signi…cantly exceeds the growth rate of the
         economy. . . , then it logically follows that inherited wealth grows faster than output
         and income.” (pp. 25-26).

       He elaborates this later, writing: “The primary reason for the hyperconcentration of wealth
in traditional agrarian societies and to a large extent in all societies prior to World War I. . . is
that these very low-growth societies in which [sic] the rate of return on capital was markedly
and durably higher than the rate of growth” (p. 351), and proposing an explanation for the
rise in inequality over the next several decades:

            “. . . The reason why wealth today is not as unequally distributed as in the past
         is simply that not enough time has passed since 1945” (p. 372).3

       As with the …rst two general laws, there are things to quibble with in the pure economics
of the third general law. First, as already mentioned, the emphasis on r                     g sits somewhat
uneasily with the central role that labor income has played in the rise in inequality. Second,
as we show in the online appendix, r > g is fully consistent with constant or even declining
inequality. Third, r       g cannot be taken as a primitive on which to make future forecasts, as
both the interest rate and the growth rate will adjust to changes in policy, technology and the
capital stock. Finally, in the presence of a modest amount of social mobility, even very large
   3
      It is unclear whether r > g is a force towards divergence of incomes across the distribution of income, or
towards convergence to a new and more unequal distribution of income. In many places, including those we have
already quoted, Piketty talks of divergence. But elsewhere, the prediction is formulated di¤erently, for example,
when he writes: “With the aid of a fairly simple mathematical model, one can show that for a given structure
of ... [economic and demographic shocks]..., the distribution of wealth tends towards a long-run equilibrium and
that the equilibrium level of inequality is an increasing function of the gap r g between the rate of return on
capital and the growth rate.” (p. 364). In the online appendix, we discuss a variety of economic models linking
r g to inequality.


                                                       9
values of r     g do not lead to divergence at the top of the distribution (as we show in the online
appendix).
      But our major argument is about what the emphasis on r > g leaves out— institutions and
politics. Piketty largely dismisses the importance of institutions against the crushing force of
the fundamental inequality, writing

            “. . . the fundamental inequality r > g can explain the very high level of capital
        inequality observed in the nineteenth century, and thus in a sense the failure of
        the French revolution.. . . The formal nature of the regime was of little moment
        compared with the inequality r > g.” (p. 365).

      In passing, we should note that the available empirical evidence, however, suggests that the
French Revolution not only led to a decrease in inequality (Morrisson and Snyder, 2000), but
also profoundly changed the path of institutional equilibria and economic growth in Europe
(Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson and Robinson, 2011).
      If the history of grand pronouncements of the general laws of capitalism repeats itself—
perhaps …rst as tragedy and then farce as Marx colorfully put it— then we may expect the same
sort of frustration with Piketty’s sweeping predictions as they fail to come true in the same
way that those of Ricardo and Marx similarly failed in the past. We next provide evidence
suggesting that this is in fact quite likely as even the existing evidence goes against these
predictions.


Cross-Country Data on r > g and Top-Level Inequality

The major contribution of Piketty, mostly together with Emmanuel Saez, has been to bring to
the table a huge amount of new data on inequality (Piketty and Saez, 2003). The reader may
come away from these data presented at length in Piketty’s book with the impression that the
evidence supporting his proposed laws of capitalism is overwhelming. However, Piketty does
not present even basic correlations between r             g and changes in inequality, much less any
explicit evidence of a causal e¤ect. Therefore, as a …rst step we show that the data provide
little support for the general laws of capitalism he advances.
      We begin by using as a dependent variable the top 1 percent share (see Atkinson and
Piketty’s World Top Incomes Database at http://topincomes.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/). We
combine this variable with GDP data from Madison’s dataset. For the …rst part of our analysis
where we do not use explicit data on interest rates this gives us an unbalanced panel spanning
1870-2012, and thereafter our panel covers the post-war period (and uses GDP data from the
Penn World Tables).4
  4
      The number of countries varies depending on the measure of the interest rate used and speci…cation. In


                                                     10
    We use three di¤erent measures of r          g. First, we assume that all capital markets are open
and all of the countries in the sample have the same (possibly time-varying) interest rate. Under
this assumption, cross-country variation in r              g will come only because of variation in the
growth rate, g. The …rst three columns in Panel A of this table then simply exploit variation in
g using annual data (that is, we set r g =         g by normalizing r = 0). Throughout, the standard
errors are corrected for arbitrary heteroscedasticity and serial correlation at the country level,
and because the number of countries is small (varying between 18 and 28), they are computed
using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008),
which has better …nite-sample properties than the commonly-used clustered standard errors.
(The same results with ‘traditional’ standard errors that assume no heteroscedasticity and
residual serial correlation are reported in Appendix Table A1 and show very similar patterns).
In column 1, we look at the relationship between annual top 1 percent share and annual growth
in a speci…cation that includes a full set of year dummies and country dummies— so that pure
time-series variation at the world level is purged by year dummies and none of the results rely
on cross-country comparisons. Piketty’s theory predicts a positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient
on this measure of r        g— in countries with higher g, the incomes of the bottom 99 percent
will grow more, limiting the top 1 percent share.5 Instead, we …nd a negative estimate that is
statistically insigni…cant.
    In column 2, we include …ve annual lags of top 1 percent share on the right-hand side to
model the signi…cant amount of persistence in measures of inequality. Though speci…cations
that include the lagged dependent variable on the right-hand side are potentially subject to
the Nickel (1981) bias, given the length of the panel here this is unlikely to be an issue (since
this bias disappears as the time dimension becomes large). The test at the bottom of the table
shows that lagged top 1 percent share is indeed highly signi…cant. In this case, the impact of
r   g is negative and signi…cant at 10 percent— the opposite of the prediction of Capital in the
21st Century. Column 3 includes …ve annual lags of GDP as well as …ve lags of top 1 percent
columns 1-3 Panel A, we have 27 countries, Argentina, Australia, Canada, China, Colombia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mauritius, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States.
In column 2 Panel B, we lose China and Colombia, and additionally Portugal in column 3. In column 4 Panel A,
we lose the non-OECD countries, China, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mauritius and Singapore relative
to columns 1-3, and additionally Germany in columns 5 and 6. In Panel B, we additionally lose Portugal in
columns 4 and 5, and Portugal in Germany in column 6. In column 7 Panel B, we have Uruguay in addition to
the 27 countries in column 1. In columns 8 and 9, we lose Germany and Uruguay. In Panel B, we lose Uruguay
in column 7 relative to Panel A, and additionally China and Colombia in column 8, and Argentina, China,
Colombia, Indonesia and Portugal in column 9.
   5
     With returns to capital income determined in the global economy, i.e., rit = rt (where i refers to country
and t the time period), variation in rt is fully absorbed by the time e¤ects in these regression models, making
the r = 0 normalization without any loss of generality. Note, however, that what determines the dynamics
of inequality in a country according to Piketty’s general law is that country’s growth rate, supporting the
methodology here, which exploits country-speci…c variation in growth rates (conditional on country and time
…xed e¤ects).



                                                      11
share simultaneously. There is once more no evidence of a positive impact of r                       g on top
inequality. On the contrary, the relationship is again negative, as shown by the …rst lag and
also by the long-run cumulative e¤ect reported at the bottom.
    What matters for inequality may not be annual or …ve-year variations exploited in Panel
A, but longer-term swings in r         g. Panel B turns to investigate this possibility by looking at
10-year (columns 1 and 2) and 20-year data (column 3).6 These speci…cations do not provide
any evidence of a positive relationship between this measure of r                g and top 1 percent share
either.
    In columns 4-6 in Panel A, we work with a di¤erent measure of r                      g based on the re-
alized interest rate constructed from data on nominal yields of long-term government bonds
and in‡ation rates from the OECD. The relationship is again negative and now statistically
signi…cant at 5 percent in columns 4 and 5 and at 10 percent in column 6. In Panel B, when
we use 10- and 20-year panels, the relationship continues to be negative but is now statistically
insigni…cant.
    One concern with the results in columns 4-6 is that the relevant interest rate for the very
rich may not be the one for long-term government bonds. Motivated by this, columns 7-9
utilize the procedure proposed by Caselli and Feyrer (2007) to estimate the economy-wide
marginal product of capital minus the depreciation rate using data on aggregate factors of
production, and construct r         g using these estimates. Now the relationship is more unstable.
In some speci…cations it becomes positive, but is never statistically signi…cant.
    Appendix Tables A2 and Ay show that these results are robust to including, additionally,
GDP per capita (as another control for the business cycle and its impact on the top 1 percent
share), population growth, and country-speci…c trends, and to the use of the top 5 percent
measure of inequality as the dependent variable. Appendix Table A4 veri…es that the results
are similar if we limit the analysis to a common sample consisting of OECD countries since
1950, and Appendix Table A5 shows that focusing on the capital share of national income,
rather than the top 1 percent share, leads to a similar set of results, providing no consistent
evidence of an impact from r          g to inequality.7
    Though this evidence is tentative and obviously we are not pretending to estimate any sort
of causal relationship between r         g and the top 1 percent share, it is quite striking that such
basic conditional correlations provide no support for the central emphasis of Capital in the
   6
     To avoid the mechanical serial correlation that would arise from averaging the dependent variable, we take
the top 1% share observations every 10 or 20 years. If an observation is missing at those dates and there exists
an observation within plus or minus two years, we use these neighboring observations. The results are very
similar with averaging.
   7
     This table uses two alternative measures of the capital share of national income from the Penn World Tables
and from the OECD. We do not present regressions using the marginal product of capital from Caselli and Feyrer
(2007) as this measure is computed using the capital share of national income, making it mechanically correlated
with the dependent variable in this table.



                                                      12
21st Century.8 This is not to say that a higher r is not a force towards greater inequality in
society— it probably is. It is just that there are many other forces promoting inequality and
our regressions suggest that, at least in a correlational sense, these are quantitatively more
important than r        g.


A Tale of Two Inequalities: Sweden and South Africa

We now use the histories of inequality during the 20th century in Sweden and South Africa
to illustrate how the dynamics of inequality appear linked to the institutional paths of these
societies— rather than to the forces of r > g. In addition, these cases illustrate that the share
of national income going to the top 0.1 percent or top 1 percent can give a distorted view of
what is actually happening to inequality more broadly. Indeed, this focus on inequality at the
top inevitably leads to a lesser and insu¢ cient focus on what is taking place in the middle or
the bottom of the income distribution.
       Figure 1 shows the evolution of the share of the top 1 percent in national income in Sweden
and South Africa since the early 20th century.
       There are of course some di¤erences. Sweden started out with a higher top 1 percent share
than South Africa, but its top 1 percent share fell faster, especially following World War I. The
recent increase in the top 1 percent also starts earlier in Sweden and is less pronounced than
what we see in South Africa in the 1990s and 2000s. But in broad terms, the top 1 percent
share behaves similarly in the two countries, starting high, then falling almost monotonically
until the 1980s, and then turning up.
       Such common dynamics for the top 1 percent share in two such di¤erent countries— a
former colony with a history of coerced labor and land expropriation, ruled for much of the
20th century by a racist white minority, on the one hand, and the birthplace of European
social democracy, on the other— would seem to bolster Piketty’s case that the general laws of
capitalism explain the big swings of inequality, with little reference to institutions and politics.
Perhaps one could even claim that, just like the French Revolution, the e¤ects of apartheid
and social democracy are tri‡ing details against the fundamental force of r > g.
       Except that the reality is rather di¤erent. In South Africa, for example, the institutionaliza-
tion of white dominance after 1910 quickly led to the Native Land Act in 1913 which allocated
93 percent of the land to the ‘white economy’while the blacks (around 59% of the population),
got 7 percent of the land. In the white economy it became illegal for blacks to own property or
a business, and many types of contractual relations for blacks were explicitly banned. By the
   8
    One important caveat is that the ex post negative returns that may have resulted from stock market crashes
and wars are not in our sample, because our estimates for r are from the post-World War II sample. Nevertheless,
if r g is indeed a fundamental force towards greater inequality, we should see its impact during the last 60
years also.



                                                      13
1920s the ‘Color Bar’blocked blacks from practically all skilled and professional occupations
(van der Horst, 1942; Feinstein, 2005, Chapters 2-4). After 1948 the ‘apartheid’state became
even stronger, implementing a wide array of measures to enforce social and educational seg-
regation between whites and blacks. Finally, in 1994, the apartheid institutions collapsed as
Nelson Mandela became South Africa’s …rst black president. However, a naïve look at Figure 1
would seem to suggest that South Africa’s apartheid regime, which was explicitly structured to
keep black wages low and to bene…t whites, was responsible for a great decrease in inequality,
while the end of apartheid caused an explosion in inequality!
   How can this be? The answer is that measuring inequality by the top 1 percent share
can give a misleading picture of inequality dynamics in some settings. Figure 2 shows the
top 1 percent share together with other measures of inequality in South Africa, which behave
quite di¤erently. To start with, Wilson’s (1972) series for real wages of black workers in gold
mines, a key engine of the South African economy at the time, shows that during the …rst
half of the 20th century, inequality between black workers and whites was massively widening
(a continuation of 19th-century trends, see de Zwart, 2011). This is con…rmed by the white-
to-black per capita income ratio from census data, which does have some ups and downs but
exhibits a fairly large increase from about 10-fold to 14-fold until 1970. Thereafter, it shows
a rapid decline. Even the top 5 percent share behaves somewhat di¤erently than the top 1
percent share (though available data for this variable start only in the 1950s).
   If one wanted to understand economic inequality in South Africa, changes in labor market
institutions and political equilibria appear much more relevant than r and g. Indeed, the
alternative measures of inequality in Figure 2 show that during the time that the share of the
top 1 was falling, South Africa became one of the most unequal countries in the world. As we
will discuss in the next section, the turning points in inequality in South Africa in fact have
institutional and political roots.
   In Sweden, the decline in the top 1 percent share is accompanied by a much more pervasive
fall in inequality. Figure 3 shows that for Sweden, other measures of inequality, including two
series for the Gini index, have similar trends to the top 1 percent and the top 5 percent share.
   However, in the Swedish case as well, the story of inequality seems related not to supposed
general laws of capitalism and changes in r and g, but rather to institutional changes. The
initial fall in the top 1 percent share coincided with large changes in government policy: for
example, a rapid increase in redistribution in the 1920s, from practically nothing in the 1910s
(Lindert, 1994), and an increase in top marginal tax rates from around 10 percent in 1910
to 40 percent by 1930 and 60 percent by 1940 (Roine, Valchos and Waldenström, 2009, p.
982). The expanding role of the government and of redistributive taxation plausibly had a
negative impact on the top 1 percent share. The data in Figures 1 and Figure 3 are for pre-tax



                                              14
inequality, but these are likely to be impacted by taxes, which in‡uence e¤ort and investment
(see the evidence is Roine, Valchos and Waldenström, 2009, on this), and also directly by the
wage compression created by Sweden’s labor market institutions. Indeed, union density rose
rapidly from around 10 percent of the labor force during World War I to 35 percent by 1930
and over 50 percent by 1940 (Donado and Wälde, 2012).
   Piketty emphasizes the role of the destruction of the capital stock and asset price falls in the
aftermath of the world wars as key factors explaining the decline of top inequality during much
of the 20th century. But such factors can hardly explain the trends in Sweden or South Africa.
Sweden was neutral in both wars, and though South Africa provided troops and resources for
the Allied powers in both, neither economy experienced any direct destruction of their capital
stock.


Towards an Institutional Framework

A satisfactory framework for the analysis of inequality should take into account both the impact
of di¤erent types of institutions on the distribution of resources and the endogenous evolution
of these institutions. We now ‡esh out such a framework and then apply it to the evolution
of inequality— and institutions— in Sweden and South Africa. The framework we present is
based on the one we proposed in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005). Adapting Figure
1 from that paper our framework can be represented schematically as follows:


                                  9
                      de jure     >
                                  >
                                  >
                                  >                                                  8
   political          political   >
                                  >                                             9
                                  >
                                  >           economic                               >
                                                                                     >   economic
 institutionst   =)    powert     = =)                            technologyt , =    <
                                            institutionst    =)                        performancet
                          &                                         skillst , &
                                  >
                                  >                                             ; =) >
                                                                                     >       &
                      de facto    >
                                  >                                  pricest         :
                                  >
                                  >                                                    inequalityt+1
 inequalityt     =)   political   >
                                  >
                                  ;
                       powert
                                              political
                                      =)
                                           institutionst+1


   In this approach, the prevailing political institutions at a certain time determine the dis-
tribution of de jure political power (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000, 2008; Acemoglu, 2008;
Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin, 2012, 2014): for example, which groups are disenfranchised, how
political power is contested, and how constrained the economic and political elites are, and
so on. Political institutions also a¤ect, together with inequality in society, the distribution of
de facto political power. For instance, de facto power (which designates political power and
constraints generated by access to the means of violence, collective action, informal institutions
and social norms) depends on the extent to which di¤erent social and economic groups are
organized and how they resolve their collective action problems and how resources in‡uence

                                                  15
their ability to do so. De facto and de jure power together determine economic institutions,
and also the stability and change of political institutions.
   In turn, economic institutions a¤ect the supply of skills— a crucial determinant of inequality
throughout history and even more so today. They also in‡uence, through regulation of both
prices and market structure, by taxation, or by impacting the bargaining power of di¤erent
factors of production and individuals, goods and factor prices. Finally, economic institutions
impact technology, including whether and how e¢ ciently existing technologies are utilized, as
well as the evolution of technology through endogenous innovations and learning by doing.
For example, Zeira (1998) and Acemoglu (2010) show how low wages, resulting from either
supply or institutional factors, can sometimes reduce technology adoption or even technolog-
ical progress, and Hornbeck and Naidu (2014) provide evidence consistent with this pattern.
Through their joint impact on technology, the supply of skills and relative prices, economic
institutions a¤ect not only r and g, but more importantly, inequality. In this approach, in-
equality should not be thought of as always summarized by a single statistic, such as the Gini
index or the top 1 percent share. Rather, the economic and political factors stressed here
determine the distribution of resources more generally.
   We do not mean to suggest that this framework determines the evolution of institutions,
technology and inequality deterministically. The arrows designate in‡uences, which are medi-
ated by various stochastic events and political economy interactions, and as our brief discussion
of the contrast of Mexico and the United States indicates, similar economic developments will
result in very di¤erent institutional responses depending on the prevailing political equilib-
rium. Nor do we imply that the framework captures all economic implications of import— or
all of those that are relevant for inequality. Most centrally, technology will evolve over time
not only because of institutional factors, but also due to scienti…c developments and because
it responds to other economic changes, including factor prices, the abundance and scarcity
of di¤erent types of skills and market structure (for example, Acemoglu, 2002, 2003, 2010).
It is possible as well that technological developments could in turn the impact institutional
dynamics (for example, Acemoglu, Aghion and Violante, 2001, and Hassler, Rodriguez-Mora,
Storlessten and Zilibotti, 2003). Nevertheless, this simple framework is useful for highlight-
ing the potentially important role of institutional equilibria, and their changes, in shaping
inequality.
   Let us now apply it to South Africa. Before 1910, non-whites could vote in the Cape and
Natal as long as they ful…lled certain wealth, income or property restrictions (though this was
more heavily restricted in Natal). After 1910 a speci…cally white franchise was established in the
Transvaal and Orange Free State, and then gradually extended to the rest of the country with
blacks …nally being de…nitively disenfranchised in the Cape in 1936. The formal institutions of



                                               16
the apartheid state cemented the political power of the white minority, and segregationist laws
and other aspects of the regime created economic institutions, such as the skewed distribution
of land and the ‘color bar,’ aimed at furthering the interests of the white minority. So then
why did this and the ‡ourishing of social apartheid after 1948 lead to a fall in the top 1 percent
share?
   The primary reason is that political dynamics in South Africa at this time cannot be fully
captured as a con‡ict between monolithic groups of whites and blacks. Rather, apartheid
should be viewed as a coalition between white workers, farmers and mine-owners— at the ex-
pense of blacks, but also white industrialists who had to pay very high wages for white workers
(Lundahl, 1982; Lipton, 1985). Thus, one reason for a reduction in the top 1 percent share
was that pro…ts were squeezed by wages for white labor. Moreover, by depriving industrialists
of a larger pool of skilled workers, and tilting the price of white labor higher (because the
supply of labor was arti…cially restricted), these rules further stunted South African economic
development.
   In addition, there were forces within apartheid for redistribution from the very rich towards
poorer whites. Indeed, South Africa’s political discussions in the 1920s that led to the further
spread of the ‘color bar’ and subsequently to the victory of the National Party in 1948 were
related to what was called the ‘poor white problem,’highlighting the importance of the speci…c
coalition underpinning apartheid (see Alvaredo and Atkinson, 2010, for discussion of other
factors such as the gold price).
   The compression of the huge wage gaps between South Africa’s whites and blacks starting
in the 1970s should be viewed within the context of the political weakening of the apartheid
regime and its increasing economic problems (see also Wilson, 1980, Mariotti, 2012). The
domestic turning point was the ability of black workers to organize protests and riots, and
exercise their de facto power, particularly after the Soweto uprising of 1976, which led to the
recognition of black trade unions. This process was aided by mounting international pressure,
which induced British and U.S. …rms based in South Africa to push back against workplace
discrimination. Ultimately, this de facto power forced the collapse of the apartheid regime,
leading to a new set of political institutions and the enfranchisement of black South Africans.
The new set of economic institutions, and their consequences for inequality, ‡owed from these
political changes. Consistent with our framework, the institutions of apartheid may have also
fed back into the evolution of technology, for example in impeding the mechanization of gold
mining (Spandau, 1980). As the power of apartheid started to erode in the 1970s, white
businessmen responded rapidly by substituting capital for labor and moving technology in a
labor saving direction (Seekings and Nattrass, 2005, p. 403).
   As can be seen from Figure 1, the top 1 percent share in South Africa shows a steep rise after



                                               17
1994, coinciding with the …nal overthrow of the formidable extractive institutions of apartheid.
No clear consensus has yet emerged on the causes of the post-apartheid increase in inequality,
but one reason is related to the fact that after the end of apartheid, the arti…cially compressed
income distribution of blacks started widening as some portion of the population started to
bene…t from new business opportunities, education, and aggressive a¢ rmative action programs
(Leibbrandt, Woolard, Finn, and Argent, 2010). Whatever the details of these explanations,
it is hard to see the post-1994 rise in the top 1 percent share as representing the demise of a
previously egalitarian South Africa.
   The role of de facto and de jure political power in shaping political and economic institu-
tions is no less central in Sweden, where the important turning point was created by the process
of democratization. Adult male su¤rage came in 1909, but true parliamentary democracy de-
veloped only after the Reform Act of 1918, with signi…cant curbs on the power of the monarchy
and more competitive elections. Both the 1909 reform and the emergence of parliamentary
democracy in 1918 were responses to unrest, strikes and the de facto power of disenfranchised
workers, especially in the atmosphere of uncertainty and social unrest following World War I
(Tilton, 1974). Collier (1999, p. 83) explains: “[I]t was only after the economic crisis of 1918
and ensuing worker protests for democracy led by Social Democrats that the Reform Act was
passed. Indeed, in November 1918, labor protests reached such a point as to be perceived as
a revolutionary threat by Sweden’s Conservative Party and upper classes.”
   Swedish democracy then laid the foundations for modern labor market institutions and
the welfare state, and created powerful downward pressure on inequality, including the top
1 percent share. However, democratic con‡ict in Sweden was not a simple contest between
monolithic groups of workers and businesses either. As Moene and Wallerstein (1995, 2006)
characterize it, social democracy was a coalition of the ends of the income distribution—
businessmen and unskilled workers— against the middle class and skilled workers (see also
Saint-Paul, 2000; Gourevitch, 1986; Luebbert, 1991, for theories about the emergence of such
political coalitions). In consequence, Swedish economic institutions strongly compressed skilled
wages relative to unskilled wages, underpinning the rapid decline in broad-based measures of
inequality. Some businesses bene…tted from these arrangements, particularly those in sectors
exposed to international competition, which used centralized wage bargaining as a tool to
stop wage push from non-traded sectors, such as construction (Swenson, 1991, 2002). Swedish
labor market institutions also likely impacted the path of technology. For instance, Moene
and Wallerstein (1997) emphasize that wage compression acted as a tax on ine¢ cient plants
and stimulated new entry and rapid technological upgrading. In the face of high unskilled
wages and the institutions of the welfare state, it is not a surprise that the top 1 percent share
declined in Sweden as well, even if businessmen also did well out of some aspects of Swedish



                                               18
labor market institutions.
   What explains the fact that the top 1 percent share appears to increase not just in South
Africa and Sweden, but in almost all OECD economies over the last 20 years or so? Factors left
out of our framework— globalization, skill-biased technological changes and the increase in the
size of large corporations— are likely to be important. But these are themselves forces that are
not ironclad, but have likely responded to other changes in the world economy. For example,
Acemoglu (2002) argues that skill-biased technological change cannot be understood without
the increase in the supply of skilled workers in the United States and the world economy,
making these types of technologies more pro…table, and globalization and the increasing size
of global corporations are themselves consequences of regulatory and technological changes of
the last several decades. This simply underscores that the framework presented here cannot
capture the dynamics of all dimensions of inequality— or the rich dynamics of political and
economic institutions for that matter. Nevertheless, the basic forces that it stresses appear to
be important not just in the context of Sweden and South Africa, but much more generally
(as argued in Acemoglu and Robinson 2006, 2012).
   This framework also helps to clarify the reasons why we might care about inequality at
the very top of the income and wealth distributions. Most relevant is that the factors which
undergird a high share of income for the top 1 percent might also represent a lack of equality
of opportunity, or a lack of a level playing …eld. Extending the framework presented above, we
argued in Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) that lack of a level playing …eld, including limited
social mobility, is likely to hold back countries in their investments, innovation and the e¢ -
ciency of resource allocation. However, the top 1 percent share may not be the most relevant
dimension of the distribution of income for evaluating equality of opportunity and barriers to
the e¢ cient allocation of talent and resources in society. For example, if a small number at the
top became wealthier— say, if Bill Gates and Warren Bu¤ett became twice as wealthy— at the
expense of other rich individuals, would that make U.S. society notably less meritocratic? This
seems unlikely. Indeed, Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014b) show that social mobility
at the commuting zone level in the United States is unrelated to income inequality, especially
inequality at the top. Their (2014a) evidence that U.S. social mobility has stayed the same
even as the top 1 percent share has increased rapidly over the last several decades further
corroborates this intuition. Other types of inequality, such as the gap between whites and
blacks as in South Africa or between the bottom and the middle class in the United States,
may be more relevant for thinking about whether there have been changes in social mobility
and the angle of the playing …eld.
   But one dimension of political economy where the top 1 percent share may be central
is the health of political institutions. It may be di¢ cult to maintain political institutions



                                               19
that create a dispersed distribution of political power and political access for a wide cross-
section of society in a society in which a small number of families and individuals have become
disproportionately rich. A cautionary tale about the dangers created by this type of inequality
is discussed in Puga and Tre‡er (2014) and Acemoglu and Robinson (2012): the story of
late medieval Venice. Here, the economic power of the most prosperous and well-established
families ultimately made it possible for them to block the access of others to political power,
and once they thus monopolized political power, they could change economic institutions for
their bene…t by blocking the entry of other families into lucrative businesses and banning
contracts that had previously made it possible for individuals with limited capital to enter
into partnerships for long distance trade. This change in political institutions, feeding into a
deterioration of economic institutions, heralded the economic decline of Venice.
   Yet if the primary threat from the top 1 percent share is political, then the main response
should be related to monitoring and containing the political implications of the increase in top-
level inequality— not necessarily catchall policies such as wealth taxes. Such policies should be
explicitly related to the institutional faultlines of the speci…c society, and should be conceived
in the context of strengthening institutional checks against any potential power grab.


Conclusion

Thomas Piketty’s (2014) ambitious work pro¤ers a bold, sweeping theory of inequality ap-
plicable to all capitalist economies. Though we believe that the focus on inequality and the
ensuing debates on policy can be healthy and constructive, we have argued that Piketty goes
wrong for exactly the same reasons that Marx, and before him Ricardo, went astray: these
quests for general laws ignore both institutions and politics, and the ‡exible and multifaceted
nature of technology, which make the responses to the same stimuli conditional on historical,
political, institutional and contingent aspects of the society and the epoch, vitiating the foun-
dations of theories seeking fundamental, general laws. We have argued, in contradiction to this
perspective, that any plausible theory of the nature and evolution of inequality has to include
political and economic institutions at the center stage, recognize the endogenous evolution of
technology in response to both institutional and other economic and demographic factors, and
also attempt to model how the response of an economy to shocks and opportunities will depend
on its existing political and institutional equilibrium.




                                                20
References

   Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Directed Technical Change,” Review of Economic Studies,
69, 781-810.
   Acemoglu, Daron (2003) “Labor- and Capital-Augmenting Technical Change,”Journal
of European Economic Association, 1, 1-37.
   Acemoglu, Daron (2008) “Oligarchic Vs. Democratic Societies”Journal of the European
Economic Association, 6 (1), 1-44.
   Acemoglu, Daron (2010) “When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?”Journal
of Political Economy, 118(6), 1037-1078.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion and Gianluca Violante (2001) “Deunion-
ization, Technical Change and Inequality” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, 55(1), 229-264.
   Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor (2011) “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implica-
tions for Employment and Earnings,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds. Handbook of
Labor Economics, Volume 4(B),1043-1171.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Cantoni, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson
(2011) “The Consequences of Radical Reform: The French Revolution,”American Economic
Review, 101(7), 3286–3307.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2012) “Dynamics and
Stability of Constitutions, Coalitions, and Clubs,” American Economic Review, 102(4), 1446–
1476.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin (2014) “Political Econ-
omy in a Changing World,” forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2005) “Institutions
as Fundamental Determinants of Long-Run Growth” in Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf
Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1A, Amsterdam; North-Holland, pp. 385-472.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000) “Why Did the West Extend the
Franchise? Growth, Inequality and Democracy in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, CXV, 1167-1199.”
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2006) Economic Origins of Dictatorship
and Democracy, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2008) “Persistence of Power, Elites and
Institutions,” American Economic Review, 98, 267-293.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2012) Why Nations Fail: The Origins
of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, New York: Crown.
   Aiyagari, S. Rao (1994) “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quar-


                                             21
terly Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-84.
   Allen, Robert C. (2001) “The Great Divergence in European Wages and Prices from
the Middle Ages to the First World War”, Explorations in Economic History, 38, 411-447.
   Allen, Robert C. (2007) “Pessimism Preserved: Real Wages in the British Industrial
Revolution,” http://www.nu¢ eld.ox.ac.uk/users/Allen/unpublished/pessimism-6.pdf
   Allen, Robert C. (2009a) “Engels’Pause: A Pessimist’s Guide to the British Industrial
Revolution,” Explorations in Economic History, 46(4), 418–435.
   Allen, Robert C. (2009b) The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective, New
York: Cambridge University Press.
   Alvaredo, Facundo and Anthony B. Atkinson (2010) “Colonial Rule, Apartheid and
Natural Resources: Top Incomes in South Africa, 1903-2007,”
http://www.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/IMG/pdf/DP8155_SouthAfrica.pdf
   Antras, Pol (2004) “Is the US Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New
Estimates of the Elasticity of Substitution” Contributions to Macroeconomics, 4(1).
   Atkinson, Anthony B. and Salvatore Morelli (2014) “Chartbook of Economic In-
equality.” ECINEQ Working paper 324.
   Atkinson, Anthony B., Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez (2011) “Top Incomes
in the Long Run of History,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1), 3–71.
   Beckett, J.V., M. Turner and B. Afton (1999) Agricultural Rent in England, 1690-
1914, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Bewley, Truman F. (1986) “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of In-
dependently Fluctuating Consumers”, in Werner Hildenbrand and Andreu Mas-Colell (eds.):
Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, North-Holland, Ams-
terdam.
   Blaug, Mark (1997) Economic Theory in Retrospect, 5th Edition, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
   Bloch, Marc (1967) Land and Work in Medieval Europe, New York: Harper Tourch-
books.
   Bonnet, Odran, Pierre-Henri Bono, Guillaume Chapelle and Etienne Wasmer
(2014) “Does Housing Capital Contribute to Inequality? A Comment on Thomas Piketty’s
Capital in the 21st Century” SciencesPo Discussion Paper 2014-07.
   Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach and Douglas L. Miller (2008) “Bootstrap-
Based Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors”Review of Economics and Statistics,
90, 414-427.
   Caselli, Francesco and James Feyrer (2007) “The Marginal Product of Capital,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 535-568.



                                              22
   Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez (2014a) “Is
the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5), 141-147.
   Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez (2014b)
“Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the
United States.” forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Chirinko, Robert S. (1993) “Business Fixed Investment: a Critical Survey of Modeling
Strategies, Empirical Results and Policy Implications” Journal of Economic Literature, 31,
1875-1911.
   Chirinko, Robert S., Steven M. Fazzari and Andrew P. Meyer (1999) “How Re-
sponsive Is Business Capital Formation to Its User Cost?” Journal of Public Economics, 75,
53-80.
   Chirinko, Robert S. (2008) “ : The Long and Short of It”Journal of Macroeconomics,
30, 671-686.
   Chirinko, Robert S. and         Debdulal Mallick (2014) “The Substitution Elasticity,
Factor Shares, Long-Run Growth, and the Low-Frequency Panel Model”University of Chicago,
Illinois mimeo.
   Clark, Gregory (2002) “Farmland Rental Values and Agrarian History: England and
Wales, 1500-1912,” European Review of Economic History, 6(3), 281-309.
   Clark, Gregory (2005) “The Condition of the Working-Class in England, 1209-2004,”
Journal of Political Economy, 113(6), 1307-1340.
   Clark, Gregory (2010) “The Macroeconomic Aggregates for England, 1209-2008,” Re-
search in Economic History, 27, 51-140.
   Collier, Ruth B. (1999) Pathways to Democracy, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Collins, Norman R. and Lee E. Preston (1961) “The Size Structure of the Largest
Industrial Firms, 1909-1958,” American Economic Review, 51(5), 986-1011.
   Crafts, Nicholas (1985) British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution, Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
   Diamond, Peter A. (1965) “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Mode,”American
Economic Review, 55(5), 1126-1150.
   Donado, Alejandro and Klaus Wälde (2012) “How Trade Unions Increase Welfare,”
Economic Journal, 122, 990-1009.
   Edwards, Richard C. (1975) “Stages in Corporate Stability and the Risks of Corporate
Failure,” Journal of Economic History, 35(2), 428-457.
   Feinstein, Charles H. (1998). “Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard



                                             23
of Living in Britain During and After the Industrial Revolution,”Journal of Economic History,
58 (3), 625-658.
   Feinstein, Charles H. (2005) An Economic History of South Africa, New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
   Foley, Duncan K. (2008) Adam’s Fallacy: A Guide to Economic Theology, Cambridge:
Bellknap Press.
   Geerolf, François (2013) “Reassessing Dynamic E¢ ciency,” UCLA mimeo
   https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7363883/E¢ ciency_Emp.pdf.
   Gourevitch, Peter (1986) Politics in Hard Times, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Hamermesh, David S. (1993) Labor Demand, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
   Hassler, Jon, José V. Rodriguez-Mora, Kjetil Storlessten and Fabrizio Zilibotti
(2003) “The Survival of the Welfare state”, American Economic Review, 93(1), 87-112.
   Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu (2014) “When the Levee Breaks: Black Migra-
tion and Economic Development in the American South,”American Economic Review, 104(3),
963-990.
   van der Horst, Shelia T. (1942) Native Labour in South Africa, London: Frank Cass
& Co. Ltd.
   Karabarbounis, Loukas and Brent Nieman (2014) “The Global Decline of the Labor
Share” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Katz, Lawrence F. and David Autor (1999) “Changes in the Wage Structure and
Earnings Inequality,”in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds. Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A, 1463-1555.
   Klump, Rainer, Peter McAdam and Alpo Willman (2007) “Factor Substitution
and Factor Augmenting Technical Progress in the US,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
89(1), 183-192.
   Krusell, Per; Lee Ohanian and Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni Violante (2000)
“Capital Skill Complementary and Inequality,” Econometrica, 68, 1029-1053.
   Krusell, Per and Anthony Smith (2014) “Is Piketty’s “Second Law of Capitalism”
Fundamental?” http://aida.wss.yale.edu/smith/piketty1.pdf
   Lamoreaux, Naomi R. (1985) The Great Merger Movement in American Business,
1895-1904, New York: Cambridge University Press.
   Leibbrandt, Murray, Ingrid Woolard, Arden Finn and Jonathan Argent (2010)
“Trends in South African Income Distribution and Poverty since the Fall of Apartheid.”OECD
Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 101, OECD Publishing.
   Lindert, Peter H. (1994) “The Rise of Social Spending, 1880–1930,” Explorations in



                                             24
Economic History, 31, 1–36.
   Lipton, Merle (1985) Capitalism and Apartheid, London: Gower, Temple Smith.
   Luebbert, Gregory M. (1991) Liberalism, Fascism, or Social Democracy: Social Classes
and the Political Origins of Regimes in Interwar Europe, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
   Lundahl, Mats (1982) “The Rationale of Apartheid,”American Economic Review, 72(5),
1169-79
   Mairesse, Jacques, Bronwyn H. Hall and Benoit Mulkay (1999) “Firm-Level In-
vestment in France and the United States: An Exploration over What We Have Returned in
Twenty Years” Annales d’Economie et Statistiques, 15, 27-67.
   Mariotti, Martine (2012) “Labour Markets During Apartheid,” Economic History Re-
view, 65(3), 1100-1122.
   Mathews, Robin C.O., Charles H. Feinstein, John C. Odling-Smee (1982) British
Economic Growth, 1856–1973. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
   McLellan, David ed. (2000) Karl Marx: Selected Writings, 2nd Edition, New York:
Oxford University Press.
   Milanovic, Branko (2013) “All the Ginies Dataset.” The World Bank.
   Moene, Karl Ove and Michael Wallerstein (1995) “How Social Democracy Worked,”
Politics and Society, 23, 185-211.
   Moene, Karl Ove and Michael Wallerstein (1997) “Pay Inequality,”Journal of Labor
Economics, 15(3), 403-430.
   Moene, Karl Ove and Michael Wallerstein (2006) “Social Democracy as a Develop-
ment Strategy,”in Pranab Bardhan, Samuel Bowles and Michael Wallerstein eds. Globalization
and Egalitarian Redistribution, New York: Russel Sage Foundation.
   Mokyr, Joel (2012) The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-
1850, New Haven: Yale University Press.
   Morrisson, Christian and Wayne Snyder (2000) “The Income Inequality of France
in Historical Perspective,” European Review of Economic History, 4, 59-83.
   Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman (2013) “Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law
and the Labor Market in 19th Century Industrial Britain,”American Economic Review, 103(1),
107-144.
   Nickell, Stephen (1981) “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed E¤ects,”Econometrica,
1417–1426.
   Ober…eld, Ezra and Devesh Raval (2014) “Micro Data and Macro Technology”
Princeton mimeo.
   Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2003) “Income inequality in the United States,



                                            25
1913-1998, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1-39.
   Puga, Diego and Daniel Tre‡er (2014) “International trade and institutional change:
Medieval Venice’s response to globalization,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 753-821.
   Ray, Debraj (2014) “Nit-Piketty,” http://www.econ.nyu.edu/user/debraj/
   Rognlie, Matthew (2014) “A Note on Piketty and Diminishing Returns to Capital”
http://www.mit.edu/~mrognlie/piketty_diminishing_returns.pdf.
   Roine, Jesper, Jonas Valchos and Daniel Waldenström (2009) “The long-run
determinants of inequality: What can we learn from top income data?” Journal of Public
Economics, 93, 974–988.
   Saint-Paul, Gilles (2000) The Political Economy of Labor Market Institutions, New
York: Oxford University Press.
   Samuelson, Paul A. (1958) “An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or
without the Social Contrivance of Money,” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6), 467-482.
   Sanders, Elizabeth (1999) Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers and the American State,
1877-1917, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
   Schonhardt-Bailey, Cheryl (2006) From the Corn Laws to Free Trade, Cambridge:
MIT Press.
   Seekings, Jeremy, and Nicoli Nattrass (2005) Class, Race, and Inequality in South
Africa, New Haven: Yale University Press
   Singer, Peter (2000) Marx: A Very Short Introduction, New York: Oxford University
Press.
   Spandau, A. (1980) “Mechanization and Labour Policies on South African Mines,”South
African Journal of Economics, 48(2), 110–120.
   Swenson, Peter A. (1991) “Bringing Capital Back In, or Social Democracy Reconsid-
ered,” World Politics, 43(4), 513-544.
   Swenson, Peter A. (2002) Capitalists against Markets: The Making of Labor Markets
and Welfare States in the United States and Sweden, New York: Oxford University Press.
   Tilton, Timothy A. (1974) “The Social Origins of Liberal Democracy: The Swedish
Case,” American Political Science Review, 68(2), 561-571.
   White, Lawrence J. (1981) “What Has Been Happening to Aggregate Concentration
in the United States?” Journal of Industrial Economics, 29(3), 223-230.
   White, Lawrence J. (2002) “Trends in Aggregate Concentration in the United States,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4), 137-160.
   Wilson, Francis (1972) Labour in the South African Gold Mines, 1911-1969, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
   Wilson, Francis (1980) “Current Labor Issues,”in Robert M. Price and Carl G. Rosberg



                                             26
eds. The Apartheid regime : political power and racial domination, Berkeley: Institute for
International Studies.
   Zeira, Joseph (1998) “Workers, Machines, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 113(4), 1091-1117.
   de Zwart, Pim (2011) “South African Living Standards in Global Perspective, 1835-
1910” Economic History of Developing Regions, 26, 48-73.




                                           27
Online Appendix for “Rise and Decline of General Laws of Cap-
italism”

In this Appendix, we discuss the core theoretical claims of Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century,
in an e¤ort to clarify the relationship between r           g and inequality. The emphasis will be on
four issues: (1) what types of models and economic forces lead to a divergence of inequality
when r > g; (2) the role of social mobility in this process; (3) what types of models lead instead
to a relationship between r        g and the (right) tail of the stationary distribution of income and
wealth; (4) how does r         g respond to policies and capital accumulation.

Divergence of Inequality when r                   g > 0 (without Social Mobility)

The …rst possible reading of the theoretical core of Capital in the 21st Century is that if r            g is
positive (or su¢ ciently large) it will lead to a divergence of wealth between the very rich and the
rest of population. The approach of the book here builds on ideas proposed by Nicholas Kaldor,
in particular, Kaldor (1955). As we will see, this model gives a formalization of the various
intuitions and statements made in Capital in the 21st Century in a rather straightforward
manner, but also shows what the limitations of some of these intuitions and claims are.
      The prototypical Kaldor-type economy consists of “capitalists”and workers (and no land),
and an important dimension of inequality is between these two groups and is fueled by the
assumption that capitalists have a high saving rate (and workers have a saving rate of zero),
and all of the income of the capitalists come from capital. As we will see, there is no need to
assume that workers do not have any capital income; it is su¢ cient to allow di¤erent saving
rates between these two groups.
      Suppose that the economy comprises a single good, so that there is no relative price for
installed capital (relative to …nal output and consumption). We also focus on a continuous-
time economy for notational convenience. Let us denote the capital stock held by capitalists
by KC . For future reference, we also denote the fraction of capitalists in the population by
m, and thus the fraction of workers is 1          m, and without loss of generality, we take these to
be the numbers of capitalists and workers (thus normalizing total population to 1). For now,
there is no social mobility between capitalists and workers, but we will relax this below.
      Since all of the income of the capitalists comes from capital, their total income is simply
given by the capital stock times the rental price of capital. Assuming that capital depreciates
at the rate      and the interest rate is r, total income accruing to capitalists can be written as

                                              IC = (r + )KC ;                                          (A1)

where we are suppressing time indices.9
  9
      Piketty speci…es everything, including the saving rate in net of depreciation units. But as Krusell and


                                                      28
    Now supposing that capitalists have a constant saving rate of sC out of their income, the
evolution of the capital stock held by capitalists can be written as

                                       K_ C       = sC IC        KC
                                                  = [sC (r + )            ]KC ;

where the …rst line simply uses the fact that a constant fraction sC of capitalists’income, IC , is
saved, but then a fraction        of their existing capital stock depreciates. The second line simply
substitutes for IC from (A1).
    To obtain the growth rate of capitalists’ income, we also need to know how the interest
rate varies over time. In particular, the growth rate of capitalists’income can be obtained by
di¤erentiating (A1) with respect to time as

                                       I           K_ C    r_
                                      gC      =         +
                                                   KC     r+
                                                                           r_
                                              = sC (r + )             +       :
                                                                          r+
    Now returning to workers, their income is

                             IW    = (r + )KW + wL
                                   = (r + )KW + Y                (r + )(KC + KW )
                                   = Y         (r + )KC ;

where KW is the capital stock held by workers, w the real wage, L total employment and where
the second line simply uses the fact that labor income is equal to national income minus capital
income. Then, the growth rate of the income of workers can be obtained by straightforward
di¤erentiation with respect to time and by rearranging terms using the expression for the
income of the capitalists from (A1):

                                                   Y_   _ C IC
                                                        K              r_ IC
                                         I         Y    KC Y          r+ Y
                                        gW    =                  IC
                                                                               :
                                                         1       Y

One advantage of this expression is that it is written without reference to the saving rate of
workers, sW , because of the national income accounting identity. But this is also a disadvan-
tage, because, as we discuss below, it masks that comparisons of r to g are implicitly changing
the growth of labor income and the saving rate of workers.
    Denote the fraction of national income accruing to capitalists by                    (= IC =Y ). If capitalists
correspond to the richest 1 percent in the population, then                    is the top 1 percent share measure
Smith (2014) emphasize, this is a di¢ cult assumption to motivate and leads to the unpleasant and untenable
implication of all of national income being saved at low growth rates. In light of this, it is more appropriate to
think of Piketty’s results as being supported by assuming that      0.


                                                         29
used extensively by Piketty. Using this de…nition and denoting the growth rate of GDP (and
national income) by g, we can then write
                                                                       r_
                                    I
                                          g    [sC (r + )       ]     r+
                                   gW =                                     :
                                                       1
         Let us now compare this to the growth rate of the income of the capitalists. A simple
rearrangement gives that

                                               I I
                                              gC
                                              > gW  if and only if
                                                           r_
                                    sC (r + ) > g +           :                                           (A2)
                                                         r+


This expression thus states that there will be divergence between the incomes of the capitalists
and the workers when (A2) holds.10 Note, however, that this sort of divergence, by de…nition,
must be temporary, because if capitalists’ incomes are growing faster than the rest of the
population, at some point they will make up the entire income of the economy.11
         It is now straightforward to observe that the claim in Capital in the 21st Century about
r        g > 0 leading to expanding inequality will hold under two additional conditions:

     1. sC ' 1, which would follow if the very rich save a very large fraction of their incomes. In
           practice, though the very rich save more of their incomes than the poor, sC is signi…cantly
           less than 1, especially once one takes into account charitable contributions and donations
           by the very rich.

     2. r_ = 0, so that the interest rate is constant. Here, as discussed in the text, much of growth
           theory suggests that the interest rate is quite responsive to changes in the capital stock
           (and other factors of production as well as technology).

         Under these two assumptions, (A2) boils down to

                                       I    I
                                      gC > gW if and only if r > g;

as asserted by Piketty. However, (A2) also makes it clear that without the two simplifying
assumptions above, the evolution of top inequality depends on the saving rate and changes in
the interest rate as well as r > g.
    10
     See also Homburg (2014) for an explanation for why r g does not translate to divergence in overlapping
generations models.
  11
     In particular, when (A2) holds for an extended period of time, then all of national income will be in terms
of capital income, so it is impossible for r > g and thus for (A2) to be maintained forever.




                                                      30
Divergence of Inequality with Social Mobility

The simple Kaldor-type model presented in the previous subsection enables us to present a
transparent illustration of how social mobility a¤ects inequality. We will now show that even
under the assumptions enumerated above, modest amounts of social mobility can signi…cantly
change the conclusions. Though the United States is not one of the highest social mobility
countries in the world, it still has a fairly sizable likelihood that those at the top of income
distribution will lose their position, and as mentioned in the text, recent evidence by Chetty,
Hendren, Kline and Saez (2014a,b) suggests that this rate of social mobility has not declined
over time, even though overall inequality has increased sharply.
       Let us now incorporate the possibility of social mobility into this simple framework. To
simplify the exposition, let us suppose that           = r_ = 0 for this part of the analysis.
       We model social mobility as follows. We assume that at some ‡ow rate , a capitalist is hit
by a random shock and becomes a worker, inheriting the worker’s labor income process and
saving rate. At this point, he (or she) of course maintains his current income, but from then
on his income dynamics follows those of other workers. Simultaneously, a worker becomes a
capitalist (also at the ‡ow rate ), keeping the fraction of capitalists in the population constant
at m 2 (0; 1).
       We can now write the dynamics of the total income of capitalists as
                                                            IC     IW
                                    I_C = sC rIC                      ;                               (A3)
                                                            m     1 m
where we are exploiting the fact that, on average, a capitalist leaving the capitalist class has
income IC =m (total capitalists’ income divided by the measure of capitalists), and a worker
entering the capitalist class has, on average, income IW =(1              m). This signi…cantly facilitates
the characterization of inequality between capitalists and workers (though the determination
of the exact distribution of income is more complicated because of the slow growth dynamics
of the income of individuals that change economic class).12
       Now rearranging (A3), we obtain

                                I                      1          1  IW
                               gC    = sC r
                                                       m         1 m IC
                                                       1          1 1
                                     = sC r                                   :
                                                       m         1 m
       With a similar reasoning, the growth rate of the total income of workers is

                             I      g       sC r            1             1
                            gW =                   +   W                          :
                                        1                   m1        1       m
  12
    This also means that the comparison of the incomes of capitalists and workers in this world with social
mobility is only an approximation to the top 1 percent inequality measures (even when capitalists make up 1
percent of the population), because workers who become capitalists will join the top 1 percent only slowly.


                                                       31
Combining these expressions and rearranging terms, we can write

                                             I    I
                                            gC > gW if and only if
                                                         m
                                     sC r    g >             ;                                (A4)
                                                    m(1 m)
where the term on the right-hand side is strictly positive in view of the fact that           > m
(i.e., the share of top 1 percent in national income is greater than 1%). This expression thus
shows that even when sC r          g > 0 (or, fortiori, when r     g > 0), it does not follow that
inequality between capitalists and workers will increase. Whether it does will depend on the
extent of social mobility. In fact, the quantitative implications of social mobility could be quite
substantial as we next illustrate.
      From Chetty, Hendren, Kline and Saez’s data, the likelihood that a child with parents in the
top 1 percent will be in the top 1 percent is 9.6%.13 If we take the gap between generations to
be about 30 years, this implies an annual rate of exiting the top 1 percent approximately equal
to 0.075 (7.5%). There are many reasons why this may be an overestimate, including the fact
that children are typically younger when their incomes are measured and also that in practice,
families exiting the top 1 percent tend to remain at the very top of the income distribution
(rather than follow the income dynamics of a typical worker as in the simple model here). But
there are also reasons for underestimation, including the fact that within-generation transitions
in and out of the top 1 percent are being ignored. For our illustrative exercise, we take this
number as a benchmark (without any attempt to correct it for these possible concerns). This
number corresponds to =m in our model (the probability that a given capitalist is hit by a
shock and becomes a worker), so we take          = 0:00075. Using the top 1 percent’s share as 20%,
we can compute that the right-hand side of (A4) is approximately 0.072 (72%). This implies
that for the left-hand side to exceed the right-hand side, the interest rate would have to be
very high. For example, with a saving rate of 50% and a growth rate of 1%, we would need
the interest rate to be greater than 15%. Alternatively, if we use the top 10 percent so as to
reduce exits that may be caused by measurement error, the equivalent number from Chetty,
Hendren, Kline (2014) is 26%, implying an annual exit rate equal to 4.4%. Using a share of
45% of income for the top 10 percent, the right-and side of (A4) can be computed as 0.038,
again making it very di¢ cult for realistic values of r         g to create a natural and powerful
force for the top inequality to increase. For example, using again a saving rate of 50% and a
growth rate of 1%, the interest rate would need to be over 8.5%. We therefore conclude that
incorporating social mobility greatly reduces any “fundamental force” that may have existed
from r      g towards mechanically greater inequality at the top of the distribution.
 13
      We thank Nathan Hendren for providing us with the data.




                                                    32
r   g and the Stationary Distribution of Income and Wealth

As discussed in the text, Capital in the 21st Century sometimes posits a relationship between
r   g and the stationary distribution of wealth instead of the relationship between r             g
and divergence of incomes and wealth. Empirically the Pareto distribution (with distribution
function 1       a    with Pareto shape coe¢ cient            1) appears to be a good approximation
to the tail of the income and wealth distributions. For this reason, existing models have
focused on stochastic processes for wealth accumulation that generate a Pareto distribution or
distributions for which the right tail can be approximated by the Pareto form. Such models
have a long history in economics, and are discussed in the context of the issues raised in Capital
in the 21st Century in Jones (2014), and we refer the reader to this paper for more extensive
references. Some recent papers that derive Pareto wealth distributions include Benhabib, Bisin
and Zhu (2011), Aoki and Nirei (2013) and Jones and Kim (2014).
    In this part of the appendix, we show that a Pareto tail in the wealth distribution emerges
from certain classes of models, and will, under some conditions, correspond to greater top
inequality when r      g is higher, but we also highlight why these models are often not a good
approximation to the type of top inequality we observe in the data and/or rely on implausible
assumptions.
    To give the basic idea, consider an economy consisting of a continuum of measure 1 of
heterogeneous individuals. Suppose that each individual i is in…nitely lived and consumes a
constant fraction     of her wealth, Ait . She has a stochastic (possibly serially correlated) labor
income Zit (with EZit 2 (0; 1) and …nite variance), and has a stochastic rate of return equal
to r + "it , where "it is a stochastic, return term that is also possibly serially correlated (with
the unconditional mean E"it equal to zero as a normalization). Thus, the law of motion of the
assets of individual i is given by

                                  Ait+1 = (1 + r        + "it )Ait + Zit :

Dividing both sides of this equation by GDP (also average income per capita), Yt , we obtain
                                             1+r    + "it
                                   a
                                   ~it+1 =                a
                                                          ~it + z~it ;
                                                1+g
where a
      ~it      Ait =Yt and z~it    Zit =Yt . A further normalization is also useful. Suppose that
a
~it converges to a stationary distribution (we verify this below). Then let E~
                                                                             a be the average
(expected) value of a
                    ~it in the stationary distribution. Then dividing both sides of this equation
by E~
    a, we obtain
                                             1+r    + "it
                                   ait+1 =                ait + zit ;                          (A5)
                                                1+g
where ait      a
               ~it =E~
                     a and zit       z~it =E~
                                            a, and of course Eait+1 = Eait = 1 in the stationary
distribution. This also implies that Ezit 2 (0; 1).

                                                   33
     Equation (A5) is an example of a Kesten process (Kesten, 1973), discussed, for example,
                                                                   1+r
in Gabaix (1999). Kesten shows that provided that                   1+g         < 1, (A5) converges to a stationary
distribution with a Pareto tail— meaning that the right tail of the distribution, corresponding
to a     a for a su¢ ciently large, can be approximated by 1                                a     for some endogenously-
determined Pareto shape parameter           0.
     To obtain the intuition for why (A5) generates a Pareto tail in the stationary distribution,
we consider the following heuristic derivation, which follows Gabaix (1999). Let us focus on
the case in which z and " are iid. Let us also de…ne the counter-cumulative density function
of (normalized) wealth in this economy to be G (a)                  1           Pr [ait         a]. Then

                               Pr [ait+1   a] = E 1f                ait +z ag           ;
                                                 = E 1fait                  (a z)= g        ;

                                                                                                    1+r+"
where 1fPg is the indicator function for the event P, we have de…ned                                  1+g   for notational
convenience, and we have dropped the indices for z and                              since the stochastic laws for these
variables do not depend on time and are identical across individuals. Then, by the de…nition
of a stationary distribution G, we have
                                                              a     z
                                      G (a) = E G                               :

     Now let us conjecture a Pareto tail with shape parameter , i.e., G (a) = a                                for large a.
Then for large a, we have
                                                                        h       i
                                      a    = E(a              z)                    ,

or
                                                 a       z          h       i
                                      1=E                                       :
                                                     a
                                                                                            a z
Since Ez < 1 and has …nite variance, we can write lima!1 E                                   a       = 1, which con…rms
the conjecture and de…nes       as the positive solution to
                                                 h       i
                                            E                = 1.                                                    (A6)

                                           1+r
This equation also explains why E =         1+g      < 1 is necessary for convergence to a stationary
distribution (as otherwise the wealth distribution would diverge).
     Once pinned down, this Pareto shape parameter of the right tail,                                 , determines wealth
inequality, as well as income inequality, at the top of the distribution. For example, if the
entire wealth distribution were Pareto, then the top k’s percentile’s share of total wealth would
                    1
               k
be simply:    100       . This expression makes it clear that a lower                            corresponds to a “thicker
tail” of the Pareto distribution and thus to a greater share of aggregate wealth accruing to
households in the higher percentiles of the distribution.

                                                     34
   The question of interest is whether an increase in r                          g (or in r            g    ) corresponding to a
rightward shift in the stochastic distribution of               will reduce , thus leading to greater inequal-
ity in the tail of the wealth distribution. Though in general this relationship is ambiguous, in
a number of important cases such rightward shifts do reduce                                      and increase top inequality as
we next show.
   Recall that (again "it and zit being iid), we have

                                            ait+1 =          it ait   + zit :

Taking expectations on both sides, using the fact that                            it       is iid and that in the stationary
distribution Eait+1 = Eait = 1, we have

                                                  E =1                z;

where z = Ezit 2 (0; 1), as noted above. This equation also implies that E 2 (0; 1).
   To determine the relationship between r                   g and , we consider two special cases.
   First suppose that     (or ") is log normally distributed. In particular, suppose that ln                                has
a normal distribution with mean ln (1             z)         2 =2     and variance                 2   > 0 (so that E = 1    z).
Then we have
                                                                      ln
                                             E[        ] = E[e             ];

which is simply the moment generating function of the normally distributed random variable
ln , which can be written as

                                       ln              [ln(1 z)         2 =2]+ 2 2 =2
                                 E[e        ]=e                                              .

Then the de…nition of , E[       ] = 1, implies that

                                                         2                 2 2
                                  [ln (1     z)              =2] +               =2 = 0;

which has two roots,      = 0 (which is inadmissible for the stationary distribution), and the
relevant one,
                                                        ln (1         z)
                                            =1                2 =2
                                                                           > 1.

Finally, for small values of r    g         < 0, we can write

                                                1+r            g           + ",

and thus from the relationship that E = 1                 z, we have that z =                          (r   g   ) > 0, so that

                                                   ln (1 + r               g      )
                                            1                      2 =2
                                                                                       .




                                                         35
It then readily follows that       is decreasing in r    g      , thus implying that higher r         g and
lower marginal propensity to consume out of wealth, , lead to greater top             inequality.14
       Second, a similar relationship can be derived even when         is not log normally distributed,
but only when z is small (and we will see why this may not be very attractive in the context
of the stationary distribution of wealth). Let us start by taking a …rst-order Taylor expansion
of E[     ] = 1 with respect to     around    = 1 (which also corresponds to making z lie close to
zero). In particular, di¤erentiating within the expectation operator, we have

                                       E[ + ln (          1)]    1;

where this approximation requires          to be close to 1.15 Then again exploiting the fact that
E =1         z, we have
                                                      z
                                              1+           > 1:
                                                   E[ ln ]
(where the fact that E[ ln ] > 0 follows from the fact that z is close to zero).16 This expression
clari…es why      is close to 1 when z is close to 0.
       Moreover, note that the derivative of       ln    is 1 + ln . For z small, ln         >     1 with
su¢ ciently high probability, and thus E[ ln ] increases as            shifts to the right (in the sense
of …rst-order stochastic dominance). Therefore, when            is close to 1 or equivalently when z is
close to 0, a higher r    g       increases E[ ln ] and reduces the shape parameter , raising top
inequality. However, it should also be noted that this case is much less relevant for stationary
wealth distributions which have Pareto tails much greater than 1.
       Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011) extend the result on the Pareto-tail of the wealth distri-
bution to a setup with …nitely-lived agents with bequest motives. In this case, the tail of the
distribution is in part driven by which individuals have been accumulating for the longest time.
They also derive the consumption choices from optimization decisions, consider the equilib-
rium determination of the interest rate, and con…rm the results derived heuristically here. In
addition, they show that one type of social mobility— related to the serial correlation of ", thus
making …nancial returns less correlated for a household over time— tends to make the tail less
thick, hence reducing top inequality. These issues are also discussed in Jones (2014).
       There are several reasons why these models may not be entirely satisfactory as models of top
inequality, however. First, to the extent that very rich individuals have diversi…ed portfolios,
  14
     The same conclusion follows without the approximation      1+r g    + ". In this case, we would simply
have
                                                   ln 1 + 1+r
                                                            1+g
                                             =1          2 =2
                                                                  ,

which yields the same comparative statics.
  15
     Formally, we have E[ + ln (       1) + o( )] = 1:
  16
     By noting that ln is a convex function and applying Jensen’s inequality, E[ ln ] > E ln E = (1
z) ln(1 z). For z close enough to zero, (1 z) ln(1 z) = 0, and thus E[ ln ] > 0.



                                                    36
variability in rates of returns as a driver of the tail of the distribution may not be the most
dominant factor. Second, the structure of these models implies that labor income plays no role
in the tail of the stationary wealth distribution, but this may be at odds with the importance
of wages and salaries and “business income” in the top 1 percent or even top 0.1 percent
share of the national income (Piketty and Saez, 2003). Third and relatedly, these models do
not have a role for entrepreneurship, which is one of the important aspects of the interplay
between labor and capital income (see, for example, Jones and Kim, 2014). Fourth, and most
importantly in our opinion, these models do not feature social mobility (except the limited
type of social mobility related to the correlation of …nancial returns considered in Benhabib,
Bisin and Zhu, 2011), which appears to be an important determinant of top inequality and
its persistence. Finally, in more realistic versions such as Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011) and
Jones and Kim (2014), a key determinant of the extent of top inequality turns out to be the
age or some other characteristic of the household which determines how long the household has
been accumulating. But this is also at odds with the salient patterns of the tail of the income
and wealth distribution in the United States, whereby successful entrepreneurs or professionals
are more likely to be represented at this tale than individuals or households that have been
accumulating capital for a long while.

From r      g to the Implications of Low Growth

A key part of Piketty’s argument is that the future will bring even greater inequality because it
will be characterized by low economic growth (at least in the developed ‘capitalist’economies).
This argument relies on two pillars— in addition to the link from r       g to inequality or top
inequality as explicated above. The …rst is that the future will be characterized by low growth.
This is not the place to enter into a long debate about the forecasts of future growth rates,
but it su¢ ces to note that we do not …nd forecasts about future growth that do not make
any reference to the future of technology, innovation, and the institutions that shape them
particularly convincing. Though the demographic trends Piketty emphasizes are well known,
their implications for economic growth are much less well understood.
   The second important point is that, even if one were to take the link between r         g and
inequality on faith, this does not imply that a lower g will translate into a higher r     g. As
we noted in the text, there are two reasons for this. First, changes in g will impact r from
the household side. For example, if consumption decisions are made by optimizing households,
then the interest rate is pinned down as r = g + , where      is the inverse of the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution. If only some fraction of households optimize and the rest are hand-
to-mouth consumers, this equation will still apply because it will be the optimizing consumers
who, at the margin, determine the equilibrium interest rate. In cases where     > 1, r   g would



                                               37
actually decrease with declines in g.
   Second, even ignoring the linkage between r and g coming from the household side, changes
in g will impact r through their in‡uence on the capital-output ratio (since r is related to the
marginal product of capital). This is where Piketty asserts that the elasticity of substitution
between capital and labor is very high, ensuring that changes in the capital-labor ratio in
the economy do not translate into signi…cant changes in the rate of return to capital and the
interest rate. As we noted in the text, however, these strong claims are not backed by the
existing evidence. Therefore, we are particularly skeptical of Piketty’s conclusion from his
theoretical edi…ce, even with the central role assigned to r   g.
   These considerations suggest that even if r g may be a useful statistic in the context of top
inequality, it cannot be used either for comparative static type analysis (because it will respond
endogenously and depending on technology and institutions to the changes being considered)
or even for medium-term forecasting. In addition, the Kaldor-type model presented above
highlights another di¢ culty of reasoning in terms of r   g. For this quantity to be constant, we
need to specify not only what the saving rate of workers has to be but also how it is changing.
In particular, given the saving rate of capitalists and other variables, g is a function of the
capitalists’s share of national income, , the saving rate of workers, sW , and the rate of growth
of their labor income. This implies that if r > g, then because      is changing, the saving rate
and/or the growth rate of labor income of workers must be also implicitly changing.
   All of this suggests that r and g must be treated as endogenous variables, and predictions
about the future or comparative statics must be conducted in terms of exogenous variables,
not in terms of endogenous objects.

Piketty’s Second Fundamental Law of Capitalism

The …nal point we would like to comment on is Piketty’s second fundamental law of capitalism,
linking the capital-GDP ratio to the saving rate and the growth rate of the economy. Piketty
uses this second fundamental law to assert a strong link between the size of the capital stock
relative to GDP and the growth rate of the economy, and then on the basis of his forecasts
of lower economic growth in the future, reaches the conclusion that the future will bring a
pronounced increase in the size of the capital stock relative to GDP in advanced economies.
Given a constant interest rate, r, this also implies the continuation of the recent increase in
the share of capital in national income. Thus, while the fundamental force of r     g provides an
account of a growing top 1 percent share, the second fundamental law of capitalism provides
predictions about the future of capital-GDP ratio and the share of national income accruing
to capital overall.
   In this part of the appendix, we show how something akin to the second fundamental law



                                               38
follows from the Solow growth model, but also that why it is misleading to derive predictions
about the evolution of the capital-GDP ratio (or the capital share of national income) from
this relationship because it relates these objects to endogenous variables that will all tend to
change together in response to shocks or changes in parameters.
   Piketty’s second fundamental law of capitalism is
                                                        Y
                                                 g=s      ;
                                                        K
where s is the aggregate saving rate. Then, combining this with his …rst fundamental law
(which is just an identity as noted in the text), he obtains that
                                                                  r       s
                             capital share of national income =               :
                                                                      g
Holding r and s constant, if there is a decline in the growth rate of the economy, g, then capital
share of national income will increase. In particular, if the growth rate is halved, then capital’s
share of national income should double.
   Let us start with the steady-state equilibrium of a standard Solow growth model, where
there is a constant saving rate, s, and depreciation of capital at the rate . Then in this
steady-state equilibrium, we have
                                                K    s
                                                  =    :                                      (A7)
                                                Y   g+
To see this, simply note that, assuming a constant saving rate, aggregate saving is

                                         sY = I = K_ + K;

so that
                                                Y   K_
                                            s     =    + :
                                                K   K
                      _
                      K
If we also have g =   K,   then (A7) follows.
   Piketty’s version is the special case of this well-known relationship when       = 0— or when
things are speci…ed in “net” units, so that what we have is not national income, but national
income net of depreciation, and the saving rate is interpreted as the saving rate above the
amount necessary for replenishing depreciated capital. Krusell and Smith (2014) provide a more
detailed critique of Piketty’s second fundamental law formulated in this way. In particular, as
we noted in the text, Piketty’s second fundamental law has untenable implications, particularly
in the cases where the growth rate of the economy becomes low (and it is these cases on which
Piketty bases his conclusions about the implications of low growth on the capital share of
national income).
   We should also note that the second fundamental law applies when the capital-GDP ratio
                             _
                             K
is constant, and thus g =    K   as just noted. Out of steady state (or balance growth path), it is
not exactly true. Nevertheless, the relevant conclusion— that there will be an increase in the

                                                   39
capital-GDP ratio following a decline in g provided that r and s remain constant— still holds.
This follows from the fact that the new steady state following a lower growth rate, say g 0 < g,
will involve a higher capital-GDP ratio of
                                         K0      s
                                           0
                                             = 0   ;
                                         Y    g +
and convergence to this new steady state in the baseline Solow model is monotone, so over
time the capital-GDP ratio will monotonically increase (though with a small saving rate, the
transition can take a long time).
   Observe also that because of the depreciation rate, , in the denominator, the impact of
changes in the growth rate are less than the very large e¤ects Piketty’s second fundamental
law of capitalism implies (see again Krusell and Smith, 2014).
   However, even though we have shown how a version of Piketty’s second fundamental law
of capitalism follows from the Solow growth model, this does not justify the conclusion that a
slowdown in economic growth will automatically increase the capital-GDP ratio or the capital
share of national income because, as already noted, almost any change that will reduce the
rate of economic growth will also impact the interest rate and the saving rate.

Additional References for the Online Appendix

   Aoki, Shuhei and Makoto Nirei (2013) “Pareto Distribution and the Evolution of Top
Incomes in the US” University Library of Munich, Paper 47967.
   Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, Shenghao Zhu (2011) “The Distribution of Wealth
and Fiscal Policy in Economies with Finitely Lived Agents” Econometrica, 79(1), 123-157.
   Gabaix, Xavier (1999) “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 114(3), 79-767.
   Homburg, Stefan (2014) “Critical Remarks on Piketty’s ‘Capital in the Twenty-…rst
Century’”, Discussion Paper No. 530 (Institute of Public Economics, Leibniz University of
Hannover, Germany) and ISSN 0949-9962.
   Jones, Charles I. (2014) “The Macroeconomics of Piketty” forthcoming Journal of
Economic Perspectives.
   Jones, Charles I. and Jihee Kim (2014) “A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income
Inequality” Stanford mimeo.
   Kaldor, Nicholas (1955) “Alternative Theories of Distribution” Review of Economic
Studies, 23(2), 83-100.
   Kesten, Harry (1973) “Random Di¤erence Equations and Renewal Theory for Product
to Random Matrices” Acta Mathematica, 131, 207-248.
   Nirei, Makoto (2009) “Pareto Distributions in Economic Growth Models”Hitotsubashi
University, mimeo.

                                              40
                                        Inequality in South Africa and Sweeden
               30        25
  Share of national income
   10     15   5 20




                              1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                              Year
                                            Top 1 percent share in Sweeden
                                            Top 1 percent share in South Africa, married adults
                                            Top 1 percent share in South Africa, all adults

Figure 1: Top 1 percent share of national income in Sweden and South Africa. The figure
plots the top 1 percent share of national income for South Africa and Sweden. The series for
South Africa is from Alvaredo and Atkinson (2010). The series for Sweden is from Roine and
Waldenström (2009).
                                             Inequality in South Africa
               40




                                                                                              20
                                                                                              Between−group inequality
  Share of national income
                    30




                                                                                                             15
       20




                                                                                                   10
               10




                                                                                              5
                             1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                           year
                                        Top 1 percent share
                                        Top 5 percent share
                                        Ratio between whites’ and blacks’ wages in mining
                                        Ratio between whites’ and blacks’ income per capita

Figure 2: Top income shares and between-group inequality in South Africa. The figure plots the
top 1 and 5 percent shares of national income for South Africa in the left axis, obtained from
Alvaredo and Atkinson (2010). The right axis plots the ratio between whites’ and blacks’ wages
in mining (obtained from Wilson, 1972), and the ratio between whites’ and blacks’ income per
capita (obtained from Leibbrandt et al., 2010).
                                                  Inequality in Sweden
             20




                                                                                                      35
  Share of national income
                    15




                                                                                                      Gini coefficient
                                                                                                                   30
        10




                                                                                                      25
             5




                                                                                                      20
                             1965   1970   1975   1980   1985     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010
                                                                year
                                      Top 1 percent share
                                      Top 5 percent share
                                      Gini coefficient for household disposable income (LIS)
                                      Gini coefficient for household disposable income (Statistics Sweeden)

Figure 3: Top income shares and overall inequality in Sweden. The figure plots the top 1 and 5
percent shares of national income for Sweden in the left vertical axis, obtained from Roine and
Waldenström (2009). The right axis plots the Gini coefficient for household disposable income,
from the Luxembourg Income Study (see Milanovic, 2013), and from Statistics Sweden (SCB).
Table 1: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g. The dependent variable is the top 1 percent share of national income.

                                                                  No cross-country variation in r           OECD data on interest rates                      r = MPK − δ
                                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                                                                       Panel A: Estimates using annual panel
 Estimate of r − g at t                                          -0.006     -0.018∗         -0.018∗     -0.066∗∗    -0.038∗∗      -0.040∗     0.029            -0.004          -0.011
                                                                (0.012)     (0.010)         (0.011)     (0.027)     (0.017)       (0.021)    (0.033)          (0.009)         (0.008)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 1                                                                   0.001                                -0.003                                      0.005
                                                                                            (0.009)                               (0.015)                                     (0.014)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 2                                                                   0.005                                 0.010                                      -0.012
                                                                                            (0.008)                               (0.019)                                     (0.008)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 3                                                                  -0.002                                -0.012                                      0.014∗
                                                                                            (0.008)                               (0.024)                                     (0.008)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 4                                                                  -0.005                                -0.005                                      0.006
                                                                                            (0.007)                               (0.013)                                     (0.010)
 Joint significance of lags [p-value]                                                     4.55 [ 0.47]                          7.47 [ 0.19]                                12.40 [ 0.03]
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                    -0.16 [ 0.13] -0.18 [ 0.15]            -0.39 [ 0.29] -0.47 [ 0.34]                -0.04 [ 0.68]   0.03 [ 0.89]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                 0.89 [ 0.00] 0.89 [ 0.00]               0.90 [ 0.31] 0.89 [ 0.30]                  0.90 [ 0.11]   0.92 [ 0.18]
 Observations                                                    1646          1233           1226        627         520            470      1162               905            860
 Countries                                                        27             27             27         19          18             18        28                26             26
                                                                                        Panel B: Estimates using 10-year and 20-year panels (columns       3,6,9)
 Average r − g                                                   0.055        -0.036         -0.252      -0.114      -0.121        -0.110     0.069             0.148          0.238
                                                                (0.110)      (0.118)        (0.269)     (0.138)     (0.132)       (0.320)    (0.118)           (0.100)        (0.164)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                    -0.05 [ 0.76]                          -0.25 [ 0.44]                               0.29 [ 0.22]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                 0.32 [ 0.00]                            0.52 [ 0.02]                               0.48 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                                     213           181            106         82          80             43       135               124             61
 Countries                                                         27            25             24         18          18             17        27                25             22
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the top 1 percent share of national income. The dependent variable is available from 1871 onwards for the
countries covered in the World Top Incomes Database. We use different proxies of r − g: Columns 1 to 3 use growth rates from Madisson, and assume no variation in real interest
rates across countries. These data are available from 1870 onwards. Columns 4 to 6 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal yields on long-term
government bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are only available since 1955 for OECD countries. Columns 7 to 9 use r = M P K − δ, constructed as
explained in the text using data from the Penn World Tables, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are available for 1950 onwards. Panel A uses an unbalanced
yearly panel. Columns 2,5 and 8 add five lags of the dependent variable and report the estimated persistence of the top 1 percent share of national income and the estimated long
run effect of r − g on the dependent variable. Columns 3,6 and 9 add four lags of r − g on the right-hand side, and also report the long-run effect of a permanent increase of 1% in
r − g and a test for the joint significance of these lags (with its corresponding χ2 statistic and p-value). Panel B uses an unbalanced panel with observations every 10 years or 20 years
(columns 3,6,9). Columns 1,2,4,5,7 and 8 present estimates from a regression of the top 1 percent share of national income at the end of each decade in the sample (that is, 1880,
1890, . . . , 2010, depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the decade. Columns 2,5, and 8 add one lag of the dependent variable on the right-hand side. Finally,
columns 3,6 and 9, present estimates from a regression of the top 1 percent share of national income at the end of each 20-year period in the sample (that is, 1890, 1910, . . . , 2010,
depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the period. All specifications include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Standard errors allowing for arbitrary
heteroscedasticity and serial correlation of residuals at the country level are computed using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008)
and are reported in parentheses.
Table A1: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g. The dependent variable is the top 1 percent share of national income.
Traditional standard errors assuming homoscedasticity and no serial correlation.

                                                                  No cross-country variation in r            OECD data on interest rates                      r = MPK − δ
                                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                                                                      Panel A: Estimates using annual panel
 Estimate of r − g at t                                          -0.006     -0.018∗∗∗     -0.018∗∗∗    -0.066∗∗∗    -0.038∗∗∗      -0.040∗∗   0.029∗      -0.004               -0.011
                                                                (0.011)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.022)      (0.013)       (0.017)    (0.016)    (0.008)              (0.010)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 1                                                                  0.001                                  -0.003                                      0.005
                                                                                           (0.006)                                 (0.019)                                    (0.010)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 2                                                                  0.005                                   0.010                                     -0.012
                                                                                           (0.006)                                 (0.019)                                    (0.010)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 3                                                                 -0.002                                  -0.012                                      0.014
                                                                                           (0.006)                                 (0.019)                                    (0.010)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 4                                                                 -0.005                                  -0.005                                      0.006
                                                                                           (0.006)                                 (0.017)                                    (0.009)
 Joint significance of lags [p-value]                                                    2.65 [ 0.02]                            1.53 [ 0.18]                               1.01 [ 0.41]
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                    -0.16 [ 0.00] -0.18 [ 0.05]             -0.39 [ 0.03] -0.47 [ 0.06]         -0.04 [ 0.67]         0.03 [ 0.89]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                  0.89 [ 0.00] 0.89 [ 0.00]              0.90 [ 0.00] 0.89 [ 0.00]           0.90 [ 0.00]          0.92 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                                    1646          1233          1226         627          520            470      1162        905                   860
 Countries                                                        27            27             27          19           18             18        28         26                    26
 Years per country                                               61.0          45.7          45.4         33.0         28.9          26.1       41.5       34.8                 33.1
                                                                                       Panel B: Estimates using 10-year and 20-year panels (columns 3,6,9)
 Average r − g                                                   0.055        -0.036        -0.252       -0.114       -0.121        -0.110     0.069     0.148∗                0.238
                                                                (0.095)      (0.098)       (0.228)      (0.132)      (0.118)       (0.247)    (0.091)    (0.088)              (0.172)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                    -0.05 [ 0.72]                           -0.25 [ 0.32]                       0.29 [ 0.11]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                 0.32 [ 0.00]                            0.52 [ 0.00]                        0.48 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                                     213          181            106          82           80             43       135        124                   61
 Countries                                                         27           25             24          18           18             17        27         25                   22
 Years per country                                                7.9           7.2           4.4          4.6          4.4           2.5        5.0        5.0                  2.8
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the top 1 percent share of national income. The dependent variable is available from 1871 onwards for the countries
covered in the World Top Incomes Database. We use different proxies of r − g: Columns 1 to 3 use growth rates from Madisson, and assume no variation in real interest rates across
countries. These data are available from 1870 onwards. Columns 4 to 6 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal yields on long-term government
bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are only available since 1955 for OECD countries. Columns 7 to 9 use r = M P K − δ, constructed as explained
in the text using data from the Penn World Tables, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are available for 1950 onwards. Panel A uses an unbalanced yearly
panel. Columns 2,5 and 8 add five lags of the dependent variable and report the estimated persistence of the top 1 percent share of national income and the estimated long run effect
of r − g on the dependent variable. Columns 3,6 and 9 add four lags of r − g on the right-hand side, and also report the long-run effect of a permanent increase of 1% in r − g and a
test for the joint significance of these lags (with its corresponding χ2 statistic and p-value). Panel B uses an unbalanced panel with observations every 10 years or 20 years (columns
3,6,9). Columns 1,2,4,5,7 and 8 present estimates from a regression of the top 1 percent share of national income at the end of each decade in the sample (that is, 1880, 1890, . . . ,
2010, depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the decade. Columns 2,5, and 8 add one lag of the dependent variable on the right-hand side. Finally, columns 3,6
and 9, present estimates from a regression of the top 1 percent share of national income at the end of each 20-year period in the sample (that is, 1890, 1910, . . . , 2010, depending on
data availability) on the average r − g during the period. All specifications include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Traditional standard errors, imposing homoscedasticity
and no residual auto correlation, are reported in parentheses.
Table A2: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g controlling for GDP per capita,
population growth and country trends.

                                                                 No variation in r      OECD interest rates         r = MPK − δ
                                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                                          Panel A: Baseline
 Estimate of r − g at t                                        -0.006      -0.018∗     -0.066∗∗      -0.038∗∗    0.029         -0.004
                                                              (0.012)      (0.010)      (0.027)      (0.017)    (0.033)       (0.009)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                  -0.16 [ 0.13]             -0.39 [ 0.29]            -0.04 [ 0.68]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]               0.89 [ 0.00]               0.90 [ 0.31]             0.90 [ 0.11]
 Observations                                                   1646        1233          627           520      1162           905
 Countries                                                       27           27           19            18        28            26
                                                                                   Panel B: log of GDP per capita
 Estimate of r − g at t                                        -0.006      -0.018∗       -0.035      -0.039∗∗    0.032         -0.006
                                                              (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.028)      (0.017)    (0.031)       (0.009)
 log GDP per capita at t                                       -0.169       0.022        3.270         -0.096    0.145         -0.199
                                                              (0.767)      (0.166)      (2.149)      (0.809)    (1.152)       (0.281)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                  -0.16 [ 0.14]             -0.41 [ 0.36]            -0.06 [ 0.55]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]               0.89 [ 0.00]               0.91 [ 0.35]             0.90 [ 0.14]
 Observations                                                   1646        1233          620           514      1151           898
 Countries                                                       27           27           19            18        28            26
                                                                                    Panel C: Population growth
 Estimate of r − g at t                                        0.004       -0.017∗       -0.039       -0.034∗    0.030         -0.006
                                                              (0.013)      (0.009)      (0.027)      (0.018)    (0.031)       (0.008)
 Population growth at t                                        0.255        0.033        0.544         0.117     0.140         -0.055
                                                              (0.225)      (0.060)      (0.464)      (0.139)    (0.310)       (0.067)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                  -0.15 [ 0.11]             -0.37 [ 0.34]            -0.05 [ 0.51]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]               0.89 [ 0.00]               0.91 [ 0.30]             0.90 [ 0.10]
 Observations                                                   1646        1233          608           503      1134           885
 Countries                                                       27           27           19            18        27            26
                                                                                      Panel D: Country trends
 Estimate of r − g at t                                        -0.002      -0.018∗       -0.022        -0.024    0.015         -0.006
                                                              (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.015)      (0.017)    (0.016)       (0.009)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                  -0.10 [ 0.15]             -0.06 [ 0.07]            -0.02 [ 0.52]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                0.82 [ 0.00]              0.62 [ 0.00]             0.70 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                                   1646        1233          627           520      1162           905
 Countries                                                       27           27           19            18        28            26
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the top 1 percent share of national income. The dependent
variable is available from 1871 onwards for the countries covered in the World Top Incomes Database. We use different proxies of
r − g: Columns 1 and 2 use growth rates from Madisson, and assume no variation in real interest rates across countries. These data
are available from 1870 onwards. Columns 3 and 4 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal
yields on long-term government bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are only available since 1955 for
OECD countries. Columns 5 and 6 use r = M P K − δ, constructed as explained in the text using data from the Penn World Tables,
and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are available for 1950 onwards. Columns 2,4 and 6 add five lags of the
dependent variable and report the estimated persistence of the top 1 percent share of national income and the estimated long run
effect of r − g on the dependent variable. Panel A presents the baseline estimates. Panel B adds the log of GDP per capita as a
control. Panel C adds population growth as a control. Finally, Panel D adds country-specific trends as controls. All specifications
include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Standard errors allowing for arbitrary heteroscedasticity and serial correlation of
residuals at the country level are computed using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller
(2008) and are reported in parentheses.
Table A3: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g. The dependent variable is the top 5 percent share of national income.

                                                                   No cross-country variation in r           OECD data on interest rates                      r = MPK − δ
                                                                   (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)            (9)
                                                                                                      Panel A: Estimates using annual panel
 Estimate of r − g at t                                          -0.002       0.010           0.007     -0.109∗∗      -0.039        -0.046     0.056     0.006                 -0.006
                                                                (0.034)      (0.022)        (0.022)     (0.049)      (0.028)       (0.033)    (0.068)   (0.022)               (0.027)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 1                                                                  -0.001                                  0.008                                      0.005
                                                                                            (0.018)                                (0.021)                                    (0.021)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 2                                                                0.035∗∗∗                                  0.007                                     -0.007
                                                                                            (0.013)                                (0.025)                                    (0.016)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 3                                                                  -0.006                                  0.010                                      0.020
                                                                                            (0.013)                                (0.034)                                    (0.012)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 4                                                                  -0.008                                 -0.001                                      0.011
                                                                                            (0.013)                                (0.019)                                    (0.015)
 Joint significance of lags [p-value]                                                    14.81 [ 0.01]                           3.63 [ 0.60]                               4.63 [ 0.46]
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                      0.12 [ 0.67] 0.34 [ 0.37]             -0.48 [ 0.30] -0.25 [ 0.66]         0.08 [ 0.80]          0.34 [ 0.41]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                   0.92 [ 0.01] 0.92 [ 0.01]              0.92 [ 0.28] 0.91 [ 0.27]          0.93 [ 0.12]          0.93 [ 0.13]
 Observations                                                     1307          988            988        590          489            440       985       786                    749
 Countries                                                         24            21             21         18           17             17        24        20                     20
                                                                                       Panel B: Estimates using 10-year and 20-year panels (columns 3,6,9)
 Average r − g                                                   -0.019        -0.147        -0.602      -0.151       -0.075        -0.043     0.102    0.252∗∗                0.323
                                                                (0.207)       (0.207)       (0.514)     (0.224)      (0.217)       (0.500)    (0.199)   (0.128)               (0.256)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                     -0.24 [ 0.49]                          -0.19 [ 0.73]                       0.50 [ 0.14]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                  0.39 [ 0.00]                           0.60 [ 0.12]                        0.50 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                                     171           143            86          78           76             41       114       105                    55
 Countries                                                         22            21             20         17           17             16        22        21                    20
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the top 5 percent share of national income. The dependent variable is available from 1871 onwards for the
countries covered in the World Top Incomes Database. We use different proxies of r − g: Columns 1 to 3 use growth rates from Madisson, and assume no variation in real interest
rates across countries. These data are available from 1870 onwards. Columns 4 to 6 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal yields on long-term
government bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are only available since 1955 for OECD countries. Columns 7 to 9 use r = M P K − δ, constructed as
explained in the text using data from the Penn World Tables, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are available for 1950 onwards. Panel A uses an unbalanced
yearly panel. Columns 2,5 and 8 add five lags of the dependent variable and report the estimated persistence of the top 5 percent share of national income and the estimated long
run effect of r − g on the dependent variable. Columns 3,6 and 9 add four lags of r − g on the right-hand side, and also report the long-run effect of a permanent increase of 1% in
r − g and a test for the joint significance of these lags (with its corresponding χ2 statistic and p-value). Panel B uses an unbalanced panel with observations every 10 years or 20 years
(columns 3,6,9). Columns 1,2,4,5,7 and 8 present estimates from a regression of the top 5 percent share of national income at the end of each decade in the sample (that is, 1880,
1890, . . . , 2010, depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the decade. Columns 2,5, and 8 add one lag of the dependent variable on the right-hand side. Finally,
columns 3,6 and 9, present estimates from a regression of the top 5 percent share of national income at the end of each 20-year period in the sample (that is, 1890, 1910, . . . , 2010,
depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the period. All specifications include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Standard errors allowing for arbitrary
heteroscedasticity and serial correlation of residuals at the country level are computed using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008)
and are reported in parentheses.
Table A4: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g. The dependent variable is the top 1 percent share of national income.
Sample restricted to OECD countries since 1950.

                                                                   No cross-country variation in r            OECD data on interest rates                      r = MPK − δ
                                                                   (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)            (9)
                                                                                                        Panel A: Estimates using annual panel
 Estimate of r − g at t                                         -0.127∗∗∗    -0.057∗∗∗       -0.057∗∗     -0.066∗∗    -0.038∗∗       -0.040∗     0.074      -0.020               -0.020
                                                                 (0.046)      (0.022)        (0.023)      (0.027)      (0.017)       (0.021)    (0.080)    (0.015)              (0.020)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 1                                                                    -0.001                                 -0.003                                     -0.001
                                                                                             (0.030)                                 (0.015)                                    (0.039)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 2                                                                    -0.014                                 0.010                                      -0.009
                                                                                             (0.020)                                 (0.019)                                    (0.022)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 3                                                                    -0.014                                 -0.012                                     0.008
                                                                                             (0.023)                                 (0.024)                                    (0.019)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 4                                                                    -0.025                                 -0.005                                     -0.020
                                                                                             (0.021)                                 (0.013)                                    (0.030)
 Joint significance of lags [p-value]                                                     13.47 [ 0.02]                            7.47 [ 0.19]                               3.34 [ 0.65]
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                      -0.61 [ 0.31] -1.02 [ 0.32]             -0.39 [ 0.29] -0.47 [ 0.34]         -0.24 [ 0.53]        -0.47 [ 0.63]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                   0.91 [ 0.34] 0.89 [ 0.33]               0.90 [ 0.31] 0.89 [ 0.30]            0.91 [ 0.39]         0.91 [ 0.44]
 Observations                                                      627           520            470         627          520           470        627        520                  470
 Countries                                                          19            18             18          19           18            18         19         18                   18
                                                                                        Panel B: Estimates using 10-year and 20-year panels (columns 3,6,9)
 Average r − g                                                  -0.671∗∗∗     -0.631∗∗∗       -1.146∗      -0.114       -0.121        -0.110     0.052      0.017                0.132
                                                                 (0.256)       (0.208)       (0.599)      (0.138)      (0.132)       (0.320)    (0.208)    (0.157)              (0.279)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                                      -1.30 [ 0.11]                           -0.25 [ 0.44]                        0.04 [ 0.92]
 Persistence of top 1 percent share [p-value estimate< 1]                   0.51 [ 0.02]                            0.52 [ 0.02]                         0.53 [ 0.03]
 Observations                                                      82             80             43          82           80            43         82         80                   43
 Countries                                                         18             18             17          18           18            17         18         18                   17
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the top 1 percent share of national income. We restrict our sample to OECD countries for which interest rates
data is available from 1955 onwards. The countries in our sample include Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States. We use different proxies of r − g: Columns 1 to 3 use growth rates from the Penn
World Tables, and assume no variation in real interest rates across countries. Columns 4 to 6 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal yields
on long-term government bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. Columns 7 to 9 use r = M P K − δ, constructed as explained in the text using data from the Penn
World Tables, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. Panel A uses an unbalanced yearly panel. Columns 2,5 and 8 add five lags of the dependent variable and report the
estimated persistence of the top 1 percent share of national income and the estimated long run effect of r − g on the dependent variable. Columns 3,6 and 9 add four lags of r − g on
the right-hand side, and also report the long-run effect of a permanent increase of 1% in r − g and a test for the joint significance of these lags (with its corresponding χ2 statistic
and p-value). Panel B uses an unbalanced panel with observations every 10 years or 20 years (columns 3,6,9). Columns 1,2,4,5,7 and 8 present estimates from a regression of the top
1 percent share of national income at the end of each decade in the sample (that is, 1880, 1890, . . . , 2010, depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the decade.
Columns 2,5, and 8 add one lag of the dependent variable on the right-hand side. Finally, columns 3,6 and 9, present estimates from a regression of the top 1 percent share of national
income at the end of each 20-year period in the sample (that is, 1970, 1990, . . . , 2010) on the average r − g during the period. All specifications include a full set of country and year
fixed effects. Standard errors allowing for arbitrary heteroscedasticity and serial correlation of residuals at the country level are computed using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure
proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) and are reported in parentheses.
   Table A5: Regression coefficients of different proxies of r − g. The dependent variable is the capital share of national income.
                                                              Dep. var: capital share from Penn World Tables                   Dep. var: capital share from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2013)
                                                    No cross-country variation in r         OECD data on interest rates      No cross-country variation in r      OECD data on interest rates
                                                    (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)       (11)         (12)
                                                                                                       Panel A: Estimates using annual panel
 Estimate of r − g at t                            -0.045     -0.009         -0.008      -0.240∗∗∗-0.053∗∗     -0.072∗∗∗   -0.203∗∗∗   -0.052∗∗     -0.075∗∗∗    -0.100     -0.007        -0.033
                                                  (0.033)    (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.088) (0.026)        (0.025)    (0.057)     (0.025)       (0.025)   (0.093)    (0.031)       (0.029)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 1                                                  -0.004                              0.046∗                              0.088∗∗∗                            0.059∗
                                                                            (0.011)                              (0.025)                              (0.021)                            (0.033)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 2                                                  -0.005                              0.063∗                                0.023                             0.062∗∗
                                                                            (0.007)                              (0.036)                              (0.025)                            (0.025)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 3                                                  -0.006                               -0.002                               -0.018                             -0.013
                                                                            (0.007)                              (0.033)                              (0.022)                            (0.031)
 Estimate of r − g at t − 4                                                  -0.006                              0.048∗                                0.014                               0.031
                                                                            (0.007)                              (0.026)                              (0.019)                            (0.023)
 Joint significance of lags [p-value]                                      . [ 0.81]                            . [ 0.00]                            . [ 0.00]                          . [ 0.00]
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                      -0.05 [ 0.41]-0.15 [ 0.19]         -0.28 [ 0.03] 0.46 [ 0.13]            -0.20 [ 0.02] 0.14 [ 0.51]         -0.03 [ 0.82] 0.45 [ 0.06]
 Persistence of capital share [p-value estimate< 1]         0.81 [ 0.00] 0.81 [ 0.00]          0.81 [ 0.00] 0.82 [ 0.00]             0.74 [ 0.00] 0.77 [ 0.00]           0.76 [ 0.00] 0.76 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                         2687       2619         2611     412          412            397        1735        1239          1239      495        430            406
 Countries                                             123        123          123      19           19             19         99          92            92        19         19             19
                                                                                     Panel B: Estimates using 10-year and 20-year panels (columns 3,6,9,12)
 Average r − g                                       -0.137     -0.136     -0.258     0.207        0.187         0.560∗      -0.026      -0.534        -0.269    0.254      0.086         -0.046
                                                    (0.124)    (0.122)    (0.307)    (0.185)      (0.196)        (0.331)    (0.156)     (0.339)       (0.742)   (0.275)    (0.385)       (0.374)
 Long-run effect [p-value estimate> 0]                      -0.16 [ 0.27]                       0.18 [ 0.36]                         -0.53 [ 0.13]                       0.06 [ 0.83]
 Persistence of capital share [p-value estimate< 1]          0.13 [ 0.00]                      -0.06 [ 0.00]                         -0.01 [ 0.00]                      -0.37 [ 0.00]
 Observations                                          350        350       208         55           55             34         151         59            40        56         39             26
 Countries                                             123        123       104         19           19             17         57          22            20        18         14             13
Notes-: The table presents estimates of different proxies of r − g on the capital share of national income. The dependent variable is the capital share of national income. In columns
1 to 6, we use data from the Penn World Tables to compute the capital share for 1990 onwards. In columns 7 to 12, we use the capital share data from Karabarbounis and Neiman
(2013). We use different proxies of r − g: Columns 1 to 3 and 7 to 9 use growth rates from Madisson, and assume no variation in real interest rates across countries. These data are
available from 1870 onwards for most of the countries in the sample. Columns 4 to 6 and 10 to 12 use real interest rates computed by subtracting realized inflation from nominal
yields on long-term government bonds, and growth rates from the Penn World Tables. These data are only available since 1955 for OECD countries. Panel A uses an unbalanced
yearly panel. Columns 2,5,8 and 11 add five lags of the dependent variable and report the estimated persistence of the capital share of national income and the estimated long run
effect of r − g on the dependent variable. Columns 3,6,9 and 12 add four lags of r − g on the right-hand side, and also report the long-run effect of a permanent increase of 1% in r − g
and a test for the joint significance of these lags (with its corresponding χ2 statistic and p-value). Panel B uses an unbalanced panel with observations every 10 years or 20 years
(columns 3,6,9,12). Columns 1,2,4,5,7,8,10 and 11 present estimates from a regression of the capital share of national income at the end of each decade in the sample (that is, 1980,
1990, . . . , 2010, depending on data availability) on the average r − g during the decade. Columns 2,5,8 and 11 add one lag of the dependent variable on the right-hand side. Finally,
columns 3,6,9 and 12, present estimates from a regression of the capital share of national income at the end of each 20-year period in the sample (that is, 1990 and 2010) on the
average r − g during the period. All specifications include a full set of country and year fixed effects. Standard errors allowing for arbitrary heteroscedasticity and serial correlation
of residuals at the country level are computed using the pairs-cluster bootstrap procedure proposed by Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) and are reported in parentheses.
