                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WOMEN HELPING WOMEN? EVIDENCE FROM PRIVATE SECTOR DATA ON
                     WORKPLACE HIERARCHIES

                                           Astrid Kunze
                                          Amalia R. Miller

                                        Working Paper 20761
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20761


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2014




We are grateful to Francine Blau, Albrecht Glitz, David Matsa, Øivind Anti Nilsen, Carmit Segal,
Geoffrey Warner and various seminar and conference participants for helpful comments and discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Astrid Kunze and Amalia R. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Women Helping Women? Evidence from Private Sector Data on Workplace Hierarchies
Astrid Kunze and Amalia R. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 20761
December 2014
JEL No. J13,J31,J62,J7,K31,M14,M51

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies gender spillovers in career advancement using 11 years of employer-employee matched
data on the population of white-collar workers at over 4,000 private-sector establishments in Norway.
Our data include unusually detailed job information for each worker, which enables us to define seven
hierarchical ranks that are consistent across establishments and over time in order to measure promotions
(defined as year-to-year rank increases) even for individuals who change employers. We first find
that women have significantly lower promotion rates than men across all ranks of the corporate hierarchy,
even after controlling for a range of individual characteristics (age, education, tenure, experience)
and including fixed effects for current rank, year, industry, and even work establishment. In measuring
the effects of female coworkers, we find positive gender spillovers across ranks (flowing from higher-
ranking to lower-ranking women) but negative spillovers within ranks. The finding that greater female
representation at higher ranks narrows the gender gap in promotion rates at lower ranks suggests that
policies that increase female representation in corporate leadership can have spillover benefits to women
in lowers ranks.


Astrid Kunze
Norwegian School of Economics
Department of Economics
Helleveien 30
N-5045 Bergen
Norway
Astrid.Kunze@nhh.no

Amalia R. Miller
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P. O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904
and NBER
armiller@virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20761
1. Introduction

Although women comprise about 45 percent of the labor force across OECD countries, they

continue to earn less than men on average and remain under-represented among business

leaders.1 The OECD average gender wage gap (defined as the difference between median male

and female wages, divided by the median male wage) among full-time workers was 15 percent.

While 7.7 percent of employed men in OECD countries had managerial responsibilities, only 4.4

percent of employed women did. The highest levels of business leadership are even more male

dominated. In June 2014, women held only 4.8 percent of CEO positions in Fortune 500

companies and 5.0 percent of those positions in Fortune 1000 companies.2 The gender gap in

leadership is even present in Nordic countries. Only 3 percent of CEOs at the 145 largest

companies in the Nordic countries are female (Zander, 2014). Across all public limited

companies in Norway, women are 6.4 percent of general managers (Statistics Norway, 2014).

       In this paper, we use data from Norway to examine a potential mechanism that generates

these gender gaps in pay and leadership: gender differences in career progression. We use

comprehensive data on a sample of over half a million white-collar worker-year observations

across over 4,000 work establishments for the time period 1987-1997 and measure career

advancement using promotions to higher organizational ranks. We first quantify gender

differences in promotion rates, controlling for a range of factors that might explain women’s

slower progress up the ranks of corporate hierarchies, including gender differences in education,

experience, and tenure, as well as selection into workplaces and childcare obligations. We next

examine the role of path dependence from previous male dominance of workplaces. We assess

1
  OECD Statistics are from the Online OECD Employment Database, accessed at <http://stats.oecd.org/>
on June 12, 2014.
2
  See Catalyst at <http://www.catalyst.org/knowledge/women-ceos-fortune-1000> for the full list of
female CEOs in these groups; accessed June 20, 2014.


                                                 1
its importance by measuring the spillover effects of increasing female representation on gender

differences in promotion rates.

        This analysis is possible because we exploit an unusual dataset that has several

advantages over the datasets that have previously been used to study gender differences in

promotions. These enable us to advance the literature and reconcile some of the previous

conflicting findings.3 First, our data contain detailed job information that enables us to assign

workers to one of seven hierarchical levels that are defined consistently across firms and over

time. Hence, our sample includes a wide range of employers, unlike many studies of gender gaps

in promotions that focus on a single firm (Yap and Konrad, 2009; Ransom and Oaxaca, 2005;

Giuliano et al., 2005; Petersen and Saporta, 2004; Jones and Makepeace, 1996; Hersch and

Viscusi, 1996; Gerhart and Milkovich, 1989).

        Second, for each employer in our sample, we observe the population of workers. We are

also able to track workers over time and across establishments in the sample. These features are

not typically available in samples based on household or firm surveys that include multiple

firms,4 and they allow us to control for unobservable differences in promotion rates between

workplaces and initial ranks using a wide range of fixed effects. Data on coworkers is what

enables our analysis of gender spillovers.


3
  Although most studies find gender gaps that favor men, there are several examples of studies that find
higher promotion rates for women in the public sector, such as Barnett et al. (2000) on public sector
workers in California, Hersch and Viscusi (1996) on workers at a public utility, and Powell and
Butterfield (1994) on promotions to senior executive positions in the federal government. Gerhart and
Milkovich (1989) finds higher promotion rates for women between 1980 and 1986 in a sample of lower-
level workers (who remained at the company for both years) at a single private company. That company
was operating under an affirmative action plan at the time, though the plan did not directly apply to the
sample. Booth et al. (2003) find similar promotion rates between men and women after controlling for
observable factors, but find that women receive lower wage increases from promotions.
4
  Olson and Becker’s (1983) sample consists of two waves of a survey of workers; Blau and DeVaro
(2007)’s sample has information on the most recent hires at a cross-section of firms; and Winter-Ebmer
and Zweimuller (1997) study white-collar workers from a 1% cross-sectional sample of the Austrian
population, defining past promotions implicitly using current rank and education.


                                                   2
       We also have detailed information on worker characteristics beyond gender, including

age, experience, occupation, tenure at the firm, tenure in the current rank, occupation, part-time

status, and children that we can use to examine the role of sex differences in observable

characteristics in explaining any gender differences in promotions. Although these controls are

valuable in accounting for differences in preferences or abilities that affect human capital

investments, it is worth noting they are not able to isolate supply-side explanations entirely. This

is because differences in experience, occupation and tenure are all equilibrium outcomes that can

be affected by labor demand and opportunities. Also, although finding a persistent gap with these

controls can rule out some of the major supply-side explanations for gender differences, it is still

possible that unmeasured supply factors, reflecting productivity or preferences, contribute to the

remaining “unexplained” gender gap in promotion rates.

       The fourth advantage of our data is that it includes individuals who change workplaces;

we can track those changes and define promotion outcomes for those workers as well. This

allows us to separately study “internal promotions” that depend upon continued employment at

the same establishment and “any promotions” that also include promotions involving a change of

employer. This distinction may be important, for example, if men are more likely to change jobs

if they are not promoted quickly and women are more likely to wait for internal promotions

(possibly because they are less geographically mobile).

       The main weakness of our data source relative to sources used in some previous studies

(such as Blau and DeVaro, 2007, and several of the single-firm analyses) is that we do not

observe performance reviews or evaluations for workers. Although it is possible that these (often

subjective) evaluations themselves reflect (possibly unconscious) gender bias on the part of




                                                 3
evaluators,5 having this information would enable us to distinguish between promotion gaps

driven by differences in evaluation scores and those caused by women needing to meet higher

performance benchmarks to advance. This latter situation can arise when the positive signal from

a high evaluation is perceived as less precise when applied to women: risk averse supervisors

may then prefer to promote men over equally qualified women (Aigner and Cain, 1977).6

Without this information, the gender differences in promotions we measure potentially include

both of these effects.

        Our first finding is that women in our sample experience a significantly lower annual

likelihood of advancing a rank than do their male counterparts. We observe lower promotion

rates for women in the raw data and in regression models with increasing sets of controls for

individual characteristics and workplace fixed effects. We also observe a significant promotion

gap from each of the six lower ranks in our data. The promotion gaps are present both when

promotion is defined exclusively for advances within the same work establishment and for more

general advances that also include moves to new work establishments.

        In the second part of our analysis, we study gender spillovers in promotion rates by

measuring how the female share of the workforce at the same establishment affects the gender

gap in promotion. This allows us to focus on workplace, rather than individual, factors that may

be related to the demand for female leaders. Rather than focusing exclusively on how the


5
  Ibarra et al. (2010) discuss gender bias in evaluations the corporate setting and Goldin and Rouse
(2000) find evidence of bias against female candidates for orchestral positions. Bagues and Esteve-Volart
(2010) also find evidence of gender bias, but in their setting, evaluators are harsher on candidates of their
same sex. Evaluations for promotions into management positions may be further influenced by
stereotypical associations between masculinity and leadership (Koenig et al., 2011).
6
  These concerns, for example, are reflected in a recent McKinsey & Company report that lists
“institutional feeling that promoting a woman would be ‘too risky’” as an institutional “mindset” that is a
barrier to women’s advancement (Barsh and Yee, 2011). Bjerk (2008) also considers the possibility that
women have fewer chances to signal their skill level before entering the labor market or early in their
careers.


                                                     4
highest-ranking women (managers, top executives or board members) affect lower ranking

workers, our study considers the entire organizational hierarchy of white collar workers and

considers changes in the female share of two groups of coworkers: “peers” at the same rank and

“bosses” at a higher rank.7

        There are several reasons why gender spillovers from bosses might be positive, and in

fact, positive gender spillovers are a common assumption underlying public policy interventions

to promote women in business leadership. However, it is important to note that the spillovers

from bosses could also be negative if women who progress block other women from following in

their footsteps. Gender spillovers among peers can also be positive or negative in theory.8

        Our empirical analysis finds significant gender spillover effects from both bosses and

peers, but in opposite directions. We find that higher female shares among bosses in the next

highest rank are related to increased promotion rates for women relative to men, but that higher

female shares among same-ranked coworkers are related to lower rates. These results are

consistent across a range of models with different sets of control variables and are robust to

alternative definitions of female leadership shares.

        Previous studies have measured gender spillovers in hierarchical organizations, but this

paper is the first to measure effects of both types of coworkers on promotion rates using private

sector data. The only other study we are aware of that also measures effects of demographic

interactions from both peers and superiors on promotion rates is Karaca-Mandic et al.’s (2013)

study of racial and gender spillovers among the lowest-ranking enlisted members of the US

Army. Although that setting is quite different from the white-collar workforce in Norway, it is


7
  Because these variables are highly correlated with one another, estimated effects of female leadership
using observational data without controls for the female shares among peers are likely to suffer from
omitted variable bias.
8
  Section 4 discusses theories that would generate positive and negative spillovers from peers or bosses.


                                                   5
interesting that the pattern of gender spillovers observed in that study is the same: positive

effects of female superiors but negative effects of female peers.9

        Papers that have focused exclusively on “downward” flowing gender spillovers on

promotion rates at lower ranks tend not to find significant effects. Blau and DeVaro (2007) use

cross-sectional survey data on recent hires in U.S. firms. They find female workers have lower

promotion rates and the sex of the worker’s immediate supervisor does not interact significantly

with the worker’s own sex in affecting promotion probability. Giuliano et al. (2005) also find no

differential effects of supervisor sex on promotion rates for female employees (though they do

find a slight reduction in quit rates); they argue this may be because their sample is “relatively

youthful and predominantly female” (p. 3). Using data on Danish companies, Smith et al. (2013)

find lower rates of promotion from VP to CEO positions for women (including both internal and

external hires); female leadership at the hiring company does not mediate this effect.

        In contrast with these results focused on promotions for individual workers, studies that

estimate effects of female leaders on the representation of women at lower ranks in their

organizations do tend to find positive spillovers. These include Cohen et al.’s (1998) analysis of

333 savings and loan banks in California and Kurtulus and Tomaskovic-Devey’s (2012) study of

the more comprehensive data on the demographic composition of workforces reported by private

sector employers to the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). Matsa and

Miller (2011) and Bell (2005) find evidence of women helping women at the highest levels of

major US corporations: increases in female board representation are followed in later years by

greater female representation at the CEO and top executive level and smaller gender pay gaps

among top executives. However, because the spillover effects found in these papers are not based


9
 Ciliberto et al.’s (2013) study of peer effects in fertility decisions also finds evidence of heterogeneous
effects, with negative spillovers dominating within some types and positive spillovers across types.


                                                     6
on longitudinal data on individual workers, the estimates are not able to separately identify

increases in promotion rates from changes in hiring pattern. Indeed, Cohen et al. (1998) argue

that a possible source of the spillovers they find is that female leaders are better able to identify

and recruit talented female workers to work at their companies.

         By studying the effects of female representation across the organizational hierarchy on

promotion rates, this paper also contributes to a broader literature on the effects of female

business leaders on lower-ranking workers in their organizations. Recent papers have considered

compensation levels and gender pay gaps (Flabbi et al., 2014; Tate and Yang, 2013; Cardoso and

Winter-Ebmer, 2010) as well as employment and downsizing rates (Matsa and Miller 2013,

2014).

         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the

empirical relevance of gender differences in promotions. Section 3 presents our approach to

estimating promotion regressions and the results from our examination of gender differences in

promotion rates. Section 4 presents our approach to measure gender spillovers and results from

that analysis. Section 5 concludes.

2. Data and Descriptive Statistics

This paper uses longitudinal linked employer-employee data on private sector workers in

Norway based on register data from Statistics Norway and data on job types from an

establishment-level survey compiled by Statistics Norway and the Confederation of Norwegian

Enterprise (NHO, Næringslivets Hovedorganisasjon), the primary employer association in

Norway. The goal of the data collection was to obtain an overview of earnings among white-

collar workers; response rates among surveyed establishments (with at least 5 such workers)

were very high because employers were legally bound to collect and report their data. Our



                                                 7
sample covers the time period 1987 to 1997, which is the longest time period for which all of our

key variables are available, and includes workers born between 1936 and 1969.10

        Because we rely on the NHO survey, our estimation sample is limited to workers at firms

that are NHO members. Hence, the sample over-represents manufacturing and under-represents

finance and public services. See Table 1A in the Appendix for the distribution of workers across

industry groups in our sample of establishments and in the full working population of Norway in

1997. Establishments in the NHO sample also tend to be larger and older than average and their

employees tend to be more educated and to earn higher wages. Nevertheless, the sample has

broad coverage. In 1997, NHO employees represented 37 percent of all male workers and 27

percent of all female workers in Norway (Appendix Table 1A).

        We also restrict our data to white-collar workers to ensure a relatively comparable set of

jobs with substantial presence of both male and female workers. Women comprise 28 percent of

our sample that includes all ranks and 30 percent of the sample of workers below the top rank,

who have a chance of promotion. Like any employment-based sample, our sample is limited to

current workers and excludes people who are unemployed or out of the labor market. Workers on

temporary leave from a job, such as disability or parental leave, however, are included in the

data.

        The rest of this section describes the key outcome measures and explanatory variables

used in the analysis.




10
  Before 1987, only limited register information is available from Statistics Norway. After 1997, the
NHO ceased collecting the data. For more details, see the yearly publication Lønnsstatistikk for
funksjonærer. The birth cohorts 1936 to 1969 are those who can potentially be followed during the 10
year observation window.


                                                 8
2.1 Data on Promotions

Jobs in the NHO data are categorized into intersecting occupational groups and hierarchical

ranks. The occupational groups are: (A) technical; (B) production supervision; (C)

administrative, including clerical, accounting, and shipping; (D) sales; (E) storage; and (F) other.

Within each occupational group, up to seven “task levels” are distinguished, ranging from

unskilled and routine tasks in the lower levels up to high-skill and leadership tasks in the higher

levels. (Appendix Table 2A contains sample job titles and occupations within each level.) These

task levels and job descriptions are used to construct our seven hierarchical ranks. We define

promotions as year-to-year changes in job category that entail an increase in hierarchical rank.

Increases in rank can occur within an occupational group or can involve an occupational

transition. Promotion rates may differ depending on starting occupational group, which implies

that sex-based occupational segregation (Blau et al., 2012) can potentially be a source of

differential promotion rates. In the analysis that follows, we eliminate this channel out by

controlling for occupational group fixed effects.

        Because not all establishments have positions in all seven ranks and many workers stay at

their same establishment from one year to the next, a promotion across multiple ranks may have

different meanings in different establishments.11 We therefore focus on binary measures of

progress instead of comparing the size of the rank change. Because these ranks are defined

consistently across all establishments in the sample and over time, we are able to track career

progress for individuals who change jobs within the sample. Our primary measure exploits this


11
  For example, rank 5 is far less commonly observed than rank 4 or 6. Smaller establishments that offer
no jobs at this rank will have a “standard” promotion of two ranks for workers going from rank 4. In
general, workers at establishments with deeper hierarchies will have more promotion opportunities for
internal promotion. In addition to defining promotions as binary rank increases, we also address this issue
in our analysis by including promotions that involve job changes in our outcome variable and by
controlling for establishment fixed effects.


                                                    9
information and includes all promotions, but for completeness, we also study internal (within

establishment) promotions and rates of staying at the same establishment.

       Table 1 summarizes the distribution of workers across ranks in our sample, overall and

separately by sex. Figure 1 plots the female share of workers in each rank. Women are vastly

over-represented in the lowest rank, which is over 80 percent female. The next two ranks are

closer to representative (women comprise 25 percent of rank 2 and 36 percent of rank 3; both

comparable to their overall share of 28 percent of the sample). Rank 4 has even lower female

presence (17 percent), and men dominate the three highest ranks, comprising over 90 percent of

each. We also report a summary of different plant-year level measures of female representation

in Appendix Table 3A. Across all years in our data, women are never more than 6 percent of the

top three ranks, on average, even as their overall share of the average workplace increases from

25 to 33 percent.

       Table 1 also reports mean values of our annual promotion rates in the sample (7.1

percent) and separately for men (7.3 percent) and women (6.6 percent). The vast majority of men

and women (87 percent) stay in the same rank from year to year. But promotion rates vary

dramatically across ranks, as shown in Table 2, dropping from 13 to 1.7 percent from ranks 1 to

6. This means that the overall gender difference in Table 1 understates the difference in

promotion opportunities for similarly situated men and women. This variation is illustrated

graphically in Figure 1, which plots the ratio of female to male promotion rates separately by

rank. With the exception of the small fifth rank, this ratio is always substantially less than 1,

ranging from 0.53 to 0.69.

       The raw gender gap in internal promotions in Table 1 is substantially smaller than the gap

for any promotions, suggesting that differential mobility may be part of the promotion gap, but




                                               10
the sex ratios for internal promotion rates in Figure 1 fall into a similar range from 0.56 to 0.71

for ranks other than 5. The average shares of men and women staying at the same work

establishment (conditional on remaining in the sample) are identical at 74 percent across all

ranks (Table 1), though the shares staying tend to be somewhat higher for men, conditional on

rank, and a large gap emerges at the highest rank (Table 2 and Figure 1). Women’s greater

likelihood of leaving their firm (or, as discussed in Section 2.3, of departing the sample entirely)

from this most elevated rank leads to even lower rates of female representation in leadership than

would be predicted from gender differences in promotions alone.

2.2 Explanatory Variables

The summary statistics in Table 2 demonstrate the importance of controlling for starting rank in

attempting to measure gender differences in promotion opportunities. But starting rank is not the

only observable dimension over which men and women in our sample differ. The summary

statistics in Table 1 show gender differences in age, formal schooling, work experience, tenure at

the current workplace, rank-specific tenure (time since initial entry or since the last promotion,

whichever is more recent), with men having a higher average value for each of these variables.

We also define a part-time status variable as having usual weekly work hours of less than 37

over the year. This variable is defined based on contracted hours, which means that leave taking

does not reduce workers’ average weekly hours. Nevertheless, women are significantly more

likely to be working part-time (26 percent do so) than men (only 7.8 percent) in our sample.

       Each of these variables may be related to worker productivity and may therefore affect

promotion rates, so we use them as controls in our empirical analyses. Because we are concerned

that the variables related to recent labor supply decisions such as experience, tenure and part-

time status may themselves be endogenous, and affected by expectations about promotion




                                                11
opportunities, we also present baseline models that exclude these variables. We include all of

these controls in our main specification to provide a stronger test for how much of the gender

gap in promotions is “unexplained” by observable work-related differences. We also estimate

expanded versions of the model in Section 3 that add controls for family status. Specifically, we

use birth register data to create indicator variables for whether or not the worker has any children

under the age of 17 and under the age of 7.

       In Section 4, we analyze how the female share at a workplace affects its promotion rates

by adding explanatory variables that measure coworker demographics. The first is the female

share among peers – defined here as workers at the same rank, work establishment and year. This

variable has a mean of 30 percent for all workers, with a mean of 18 percent for men and 58

percent for women (Table 1), consistent with some sex segregation across workplaces and ranks.

The second coworker variable is the female share among “bosses” working at the next highest

rank at the same work establishment and year. This variable has a lower mean of 17 percent,

reflecting women’s under-representation at higher ranks. The gender gap in this variable is

smaller than for the peer variable; the mean values are 14 percent for men and 25 percent for

women (Table 1). Across all observations in our sample, over 25 percent of workers have zero

female bosses and only 1 percent of workers have all female bosses.

       Two features of our measure of female bosses are worth noting. First, the measure is

based only on establishment level rates; we are not able to identify workers’ immediate

supervisors (as in Karaca-Mandic et al., 2013, and in Blau and DeVaro, 2007). If the effects of

female bosses run exclusively within the chain of authority, then our estimates, based on a noisy

measure, will tend to understate the importance of female bosses. To the extent that promotion

decisions involve multiple decision-makers and that mentoring and role model effects occur




                                                12
outside of the immediate chain of command, our approach will capture meaningful spillover

effects. Second, our main measure of female bosses is rank-specific, and focuses on female

representation at the next higher rank. This approach has the advantage of measuring effects of

female leadership deeper within organizational hierarchies. In our robustness analysis of Section

4.3, we also explore the possibility that female shares two ranks higher or among the

establishment’s top leadership, defined based on rank, earnings or leadership job tasks, affect

gender gaps in promotion rates.

2.3 Empirical Relevance of Gender Gaps in Promotion

Before turning to the econometric analysis of gender gaps in promotion, this section examines

the empirical relevance of promotions, defined in this paper as increases in rank, in affecting two

other gender gaps of interest: the gender gap in business leadership and the gap in pay. The first

step of this examination is to quantify the contribution of sex differences in promotion rates into

the outcome of sex differences in the distribution of workers across the hierarchical ranks. The

second step is to show that these gendered distributions across ranks contribute substantially to

gender pay differences in our sample.

       In quantifying the role of promotions in gendered rank distributions, we use a simple

framework to relate the three major factors that contribute to unequal distributions of workers

across ranks by sex. The simple framework relates the distribution of workers across ranks in

period t (the vector vt) to the basic inputs: the transition rates between ranks (M; where element

Mij is the year-to-year probability of going to rank i from rank j), the exit flow from each rank

(e), and the flow of new entrants into the ranks (u). The exit flows can be used to construct a

matrix R that reflects that probability of staying in the sample into the next period, conditional on




                                                 13
current rank. The matrix R has zeros in the off-diagonal elements, and values of (1-ei) for the

diagonal elements Rii.

       The input flows can be combined with the current period’s rank distribution to generate

next period’s rank distribution according to this equation:

       (1)     vt+1 = (R M) vt + u

Assuming that the three inputs are stable over time, the steady state distribution of workers

across ranks will be:

       (2)     v∞ = (1 – R M)-1 u

In this exercise, we use data from our sample on each of the inputs to predict the steady state

distribution of workers across ranks. We can then examine the potential importance of each input

– promotion rates, entry ranks, and rank-specific exit rates – by using the model to predict how

eliminating gender differences in that input affects the steady state distribution of men and

women across ranks.

       There are various reasons why this model will not apply exactly on our sample: 1) the

inputs are not stable over time, as female labor force participation is increasing over the period;

and, therefore, 2) our data may not reflect a steady state. Also, we introduce noise in this exercise

by not using the full transition matrix observed in our data but instead focusing on promotions

alone and treating all promotions as increases of a single rank. Indeed, the steady state model

(using average entry, exit and promotion rates for men and women observed over the entire

period) predicts higher levels of female leadership than those in our data. The share of female

workers in the top three ranks is 6.3 percent in the sample; the steady state predicted value is

14.4 percent, which suggests that our time period is one of transition toward greater gender

equality (consistent with trends in Appendix Table 3A). Similarly, the ratio of the female share




                                                 14
in the top three ranks to the female share in the bottom three ranks is 0.16 in the data while the

predicted steady state ratio is 0.33.

        Varying each of the inputs in turn to equalize promotion, entry and exit rates between the

sexes produces higher steady state predictions for female leadership shares. The female share in

the top three ranks increases a similar amount under each change, going to 20 percent under

equal promotion rates for men and women, to 21 percent under equal entry ranks, and to 18

percent under equal rank-specific exit rates. These changes also increase the predicted ratio of

female shares in top and bottom ranks, but the effects differ by input. Equalizing entry ranks has

the largest effect, driving the ratio to 0.67. Equalizing promotions increases the ratio to 0.48, but

equalizing exits increases it to only 0.39 (this is because the change also lowers the chance that

women in lower ranks exit the sample).

        Although these values are unlikely to be accurate predictions of the exact impact of

reducing the gender gap in promotions, they do support the quantitative importance of gender

gaps in promotions in generating the observed gender gaps in leadership.

        The second step of this examination is to measure the importance of gendered rank

distributions in producing gender gaps in pay. This step fits with previous evidence that much of

the gender pay gap is driven by women and men working in different jobs (e.g., Lazear and

Rosen, 1990). For this step, we construct an hourly wage variable by taking the ratio of monthly

earnings to normal hours of work.12 Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for this variable,

overall and by sex. The summary statistics in Table 2 (and the wage ratio curve in Figure 1)

show initial evidence that rank is an important factor in predicting wages and creating gender



12
  The variable for normal work hours is a based on contracted hours and excludes overtime hours.
Earnings are from work and benefit claims that exclude overtime payments. Together, these allow us to
measure hourly earnings from regular work.


                                                 15
wage gaps. The ratio of female average pay to male average pay across all ranks is 0.76. The

ratios within each rank are closer to equality, ranging from 0.88 to 0.98.

       We formalize this step by regressing the natural log of hourly pay on a Female indictor

variable and four sets of control variables (described in Section 2.2) to measure the

“unexplained” gender pay gap. For each set of controls, we estimate versions of the model with

and without fixed effects for our 7 hierarchical ranks. The results of these regressions, reported

in Figure 2, show that ranks play a substantial role in producing gender pay gaps. In the first

column, with no other controls, the raw gap decreases by 59 percent (from 0.27 to 0.11) with the

inclusion of rank effects. This pattern is repeated across the other models, in which the gender

pay gaps are reduced by 55 to 57 percent with the rank controls.

       The results in this section provide empirical support for the relevance of our primary

outcome of interest. In particular, studying promotion rates can help researchers learn about a

key mechanism that generates gender differences in leadership and pay.

3. Gender Differences in Promotion Rates

This section presents our empirical analysis of sex differences in promotions up the hierarchical

ranks of the workplaces in our sample. As discussed in Francesconi (2001) and elsewhere, there

are several theories of promotions. Internal promotion schemes can be viewed as a way to reward

performance and thereby induce effort among lower-ranking workers. Internal promotions can

also reflect workers accumulating human capital (some of it firm-specific) in lower tasks that

increases their productivity at higher tasks or firms learning over time about the quality of their

matches with individual workers. External promotions are more like hiring decisions and initial

task assignments, but outside offers can also be affected by wages and promotion chances at the

current employer.



                                                16
          Because, as discussed in the previous sections, men and women differ in many

observable characteristics that may affect promotion rates under the various theories, we estimate

regression models of promotion outcomes using various sets of controls and fixed effects and

focus on measuring the unexplained or residual systematic variation in promotion rates related to

gender.

          Although some of this residual variation may be attributable to discrimination on the part

of employers or higher ranking coworkers (based on discriminatory tastes, as in Arrow, 1973, or

statistical beliefs about future commitment to the workplace as in Lazear and Rosen, 1990), our

approach is not able to rule out supply-side differences in preferences and behavior between

male and female workers.13 In fact, the notion of a sharp distinction between supply-side and

demand-side explanations for gender differences may be misleading because it ignores the

interactions between the two sides of the market. For example, if women tend to specialize in

childcare and home production and invest less in their careers than men, profit-maximizing

employers may react by offering them fewer employment and advancement opportunities and

lower salaries. At the same time, if women face worse labor market opportunities than men, on

average, that can justify and perpetuate a division of labor within households that has women

specializing in home production. It is also worth noting that the extent to which fertility and

household responsibilities affect workplace productivity also depends in part on the structure of

jobs and workplaces.

3.1 Overall Gender Gaps in Promotions

Our basic estimation equation takes the following form:

          (3)    Promotionijt = βFFemalei + βXXijt + εijt
13
  Examples of preference differences include tastes for risk (Eckel and Grossman 2008), competition
(Niederle and Vesterlund 2007) or valuing money and career over relationships (Fortin 2008). For recent
surveys, see Bertrand (2010) and Croson and Gneezy (2009).


                                                  17
The unit of observation is an individual i observed in year t working at establishment j. Where

Promotionijt is an indicator for that person being observed at higher rank in year t+1 than in year

t, Femalei is an indicator for the worker being female, Xijt is the set of covariates, and εijt is a

random error term. We estimate all models using OLS and account for potential correlations in

promotion rates among peers by clustering standard errors at the level of the plant-rank-year

group.14 In this first phase of estimation, the Xijt vectors in different models include different sets

of individual characteristics and fixed effects. Because our outcome variable is defined based on

changes in rank, this specification has the same spirit as a first-differences specification for rank,

which accounts for unobservable differences that affect starting rank. One difference is that our

outcome variable focuses exclusively on rank increases and ignores their magnitude. Another

difference is that, in our model, the controls for unchanging factors (gender, education) and for

those that identically increment by one for all of the workers in our sample (age, experience,

tenure) account for how those factors affect the rate of change of an individual’s rank rather than

how they affect its current level. The level effects of these factors are impossible to estimate in a

first-difference model because the variable for their year-to-year changes would have the same

value for all observations (zero for the fixed and one for the incrementing factors).

        In the basic version of the model, we control for year, industry, occupation, age,

schooling and rank fixed effects. In this specification, female workers have a 3.5 percentage

point lower chance of promotion, as reported in Column 1 of the top panel in Table 3. The




14
  The marginal effects from Probit models corresponding to the specification in Column (2) of Table 3
are very similar to the OLS estimates: −0.027 (s.e. of 0.001) for all promotions, −0.020 (s.e. of 0.001) for
internal promotions, and −0.0002 (s.e. of 0.002) for staying at the plant. In separate estimation, we also
confirmed that the gender gaps in promotions (all and internal) remain statistically significant at the 1
percent level when errors are clustered at the plant-year or plant level. These alternative schemes account
for possible correlations in promotion rates within establishments at a point in time or over time.


                                                    18
promotion outcome in this panel exploits the fact that we can track workers across

establishments and includes any promotions, even those that include a workplace transition.

       This 3.5 percentage point gender gap represents a 52 percent reduction relative to the

average promotion rate for male workers. This is larger than the raw sex difference in promotion

rates in Table 1, in large part because women are far more likely to be working in the lowest rank

where promotion rates are highest (Table 2). The importance of controlling for current level may

explain some of the discrepancies across other studies of sex differences in promotion rates:

studies without such controls that compare men at higher starting ranks than women may not

find significant gender differences even if they are present conditional on the same starting rank.

       Across the four models in Table 3, we find consistent statistically and economically

significant gender differences in promotion rates. Adding quadratic controls for experience and

tenure, a linear control for rank-specific tenure, and an indicator for part-time status (defined as

having usual weekly work hours below 37) in Column 2 reduces the Female coefficient to 2.9

percentage points, a 40 percent reduction from the male rate. Effects of age, schooling and

civilian work experience are separately identified in our sample because of variation in time out

of the labor market and time in military service. The full set of estimates for the control

variables, other than fixed effects, are reported in Appendix Table 4A. The large and significant

negative effect of part-time status on promotions explains much of the decline in the gender gap

between Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3. Although it is illegal for employers in Norway to

discriminate against part-time workers, it appears that their career progress is still slower.




                                                 19
        The next column adds plant-level fixed effects and contains our preferred model. This

change increases the size of the Female coefficient to −0.033.15 This increase suggests that the

lower promotion rates for women are not explained by women sorting into workplaces, possibly

those with family friendly policies, that offer fewer promotion opportunities for all of their

workers. Instead, it suggests that women tend to work at plants with higher promotion rates.

        Finally, in the fourth column, we add controls for family status using two indicator

variables: one for having any children under the age of 17 and another for any children under the

age of 7. We also interact these variables with the Female indicator to allow children to have

different effects on career progress for men and women. For men, fatherhood is associated with a

greater chance of promotion, and there is no significant difference in the effects of younger

children (estimates are in Column 5 of Appendix Table 4A). For women, children have a

negative effect on promotion rates and that effect is even more negative if they are younger. This

result is consistent with studies of wage growth that find flattening of wage profiles after

motherhood (e.g., Miller, 2011; Ejrnæs and Kunze, 2013).16 The Female coefficient in Column 4

of Table 3 should be interpreted as the gender difference in promotions for workers with no

children. It is smaller than the overall estimate of −0.033 in the previous column, but still

economically and statistically significant (−0.025).




15
   Using firm fixed effects instead produces nearly identical results; see Appendix Table 4A, Columns 2
and 3. This suggests that average promotion rates are similar across establishments at multi-establishment
firms.
16
   In a separate regression model, we also account for changes in Norwegian parental leave policy that
extended the total leave period (from 165 to 294 days at 100 percent salary replacement, or from 210 to
364 days at 80 percent, subject to a salary cap) and that introduced paternity leave (reserving 4 weeks to
the father). In the regression we add interaction terms between a Post-1992 indictor (after the policy
change) and the two indicators for having young children. These interactions are statistically significant
(and the policy is associated with a small decline in promotions for fathers of young children and an
increase in promotions for mothers of young children), but they leave the other coefficient estimates
unchanged.


                                                   20
       In addition to these main specifications, we also estimated an exploratory model with an

additional indicator for earning a high wage (in the top 30 percent) for one’s rank, establishment

and year. This variable is meant to proxy for the productivity of the worker relative to other

contenders for promotion;17 it is a strong predictor of promotion within the next year (coefficient

of 0.074, Column 7 of Appendix Table 4A). The mean value of this variable is substantially

higher for men than for women (Table 1), which suggests that it might explain part of the gender

gap in promotions. Indeed, including the variable reduces the Female coefficient somewhat (to

−0.023), but it remains highly significant. We omit this variable from our preferred models,

however, because it combines true productivity with evaluation and compensation decisions by

employers that may themselves contain gender biases. Including it as a control therefore runs the

risk of over-controlling for differences in how men and women are treated in the workplace.

       In the second panel of Table 3, we repeat the analysis for promotion outcomes within the

same establishment. Individuals who leave the establishment are assigned a zero value for this

variable, so the sample size is unchanged between the two panels of the table. For internal

promotions, we again find negative and significant Female coefficients across the different

specifications, though the magnitudes are smaller, ranging from −0.028 to −0.020. These values

represent 34 to 47 percent lower internal promotion rates for women relative to the mean rate for

men of 0.058 (Table 1). The estimates are similar for the two measures of promotions, but the

higher estimates for the main measure suggests that part of the gender gap is from men being

more likely to change workplaces in order to obtain a promotion.

       We explored overall sex differences in turnover rates in the bottom panel of Table 3

using the same sample as the previous panels. The outcome variable is an indicator for staying at


17
 Because our rank levels are broad enough to include multiple job titles and sub-ranks, high wages
might also indicate having achieved a higher sub-rank within the rank.


                                                21
the same plant in the next year. We find no significant gender differences in this outcome across

the specifications in Table 3.18 The lack of overall differences in workplace transitions within the

sample does not preclude a role for differential mobility in generating gender gaps in

promotions. First, our sample is limited to individuals who are in our sample of private sector

workers in two adjacent years, so we ignore differences in exit rates from the population of

interest. Second, average transition rates may be the same for men and women, but the reasons

for job changes may still differ systematically (for example, if men leave for better pay and

higher status and women leave for greater workplace flexibility). Finally, if men who receive

competing job offers are more likely to receive attractive counter-offers from their current

employers, the sexes could end up with similar job change rates as men become more likely to be

promoted internally.

3.2 Gender Gaps in Promotions by Rank

A key question about the average differences in promotion rates is if the differences are present

across all ranks or if they are mainly concentrated at the lowest ranks, corresponding to a “sticky

floor” story, or at the highest ranks, because of a “glass ceiling” beyond which promotions

become more difficult or impossible for women.19 Different papers have found evidence of

gender gaps in promotion at different points in organizational hierarchies: Smith et al. (2013),

find gaps at the highest level for promotions from VP to CEO but not for promotions to VP, and

single-firm studies such as Yap and Konrad (2009), Jones and Makepeace (1996), and Petersen



18
   This also holds for the additional specifications shown in Appendix Table 6A, with one exception. In
the model with firm fixed effects in Column 3, the Female coefficient is positive and significant. This
difference is not robust to including plant fixed effects.
19
   Bjerk (2008) and Yap and Konrad (2009) discuss the different career stages are which gender
differences may emerge. In addition to the “glass ceiling” and “sticky floor”, there can also be a “mid-
level bottleneck). This concept of a sticky floor differs somewhat from that Booth et al. (2003), which
instead relates to wages within ranks.


                                                  22
and Saporta (2004), find gender gaps at the lower and middle ranks. This paper is the first multi-

firm analysis that measures promotion gaps separately at all hierarchical levels.

       The results in Table 4 are from an expanded version of Equation 3 that includes a full set

of interaction terms between Female and the 6 rank indicators (for each of the levels from which

promotion is possible). We report estimates from our preferred specification in the previous table

(Table 3, Column 3) with controls for industry, occupation, rank, year, age, schooling,

experience, tenure, and part-time status, as well as establishment fixed effects. Across all starting

ranks, we find that women are less likely than men to be promoted to a higher rank by the next

year. This is true for either measure of promotions (Columns 1 and 2). This finding indicates that

the sex differences in promotion rates at the highest ranks found in Smith et al. (2013) and for

entry-level workers in the single-firm studies are present across all hierarchical ranks.

       The outcome in the final column is staying at the same plant. There are no significant

gender differences in the lower ranks, but a significant (at the 10 percent level) gap emerges at

the sixth rank.

4. Gender Spillovers in Promotion Rates

Having documented substantial and significant gender gaps in promotion rates in Section 3, this

section turns to the second phase of our analysis and asks if the gender mix of coworkers at

workplaces affects these gaps. Specifically, we ask if increases in the shares of female bosses

and female peers affect gender differences in promotion rates.

       The prior literature suggests several reasons why gender spillovers from bosses might be

positive. Positive spillovers will occur if higher-ranking women serve as mentors, role models,




                                                 23
and advocates for their lower-ranking coworkers (Athey et al., 2000).20 Spillovers from bosses

will also be positive if taste-based discrimination (against people of the opposite sex) or

statistical discrimination (for example, if people are better at evaluating the work performance of

others who are more similar to them, as in Aigner and Cain, 1977) is important for promotions.

Increasing female representation at higher ranks may also improve promotion rates for lower-

ranking women by weakening the associations of leadership with masculinity (Koenig et al.,

2011) and providing reassurance to decision-makers that women are capable of performing well

at higher ranks.21 Finding positive gender spillovers from female bosses, under any of these

theories, would suggest that men’s historical dominance of business leadership can be self-

perpetuating in equilibrium, but may potentially be disrupted by increasing female shares at

higher ranks.

        Although policymakers and advocates for increasing female business leadership often

assume that gender spillovers from bosses are positive, it is worth noting that this need not be the

case. The spillovers from female bosses can be negative if the “queen bee” phenomenon is

common. This happens when a woman who achieves career success in a male-dominated field

blocks other women from advancing (Staines et al., 1974). Although women are often expected

to be more favorable judges of other women’s work, 22 there is evidence of the opposite pattern

in some male-dominated fields, which could also lead to negative spillovers, as in Bagues and

20
   An effective mentor can improve a worker’s performance by providing useful information and
guidance, and can increase their chances of promotion with or without improved performance. Ibarra et
al. (2010) distinguish between “mentors” and “sponsors”: the former provide advice and emotional
support and can be at any rank, while the latter are relatively senior and act as advocates. They suggest
that one reason that women with mentors report lower promotion rates than men with mentors is that
women’s mentors tend to be less powerful in their organizations and less likely to act as sponsors.
21
   It is also possible that sexual harassment against female workers is less frequent in settings with more
female bosses.
22
   There is also experimental evidence from cognitive psychology that unconscious biases against women
in performance ratings are less severe when women comprise a larger share of the team (summarized in
Valian, 1998, pp. 139-44).


                                                    24
Esteve-Volart (2010). The authors hypothesize this occurs because female evaluators have a

“self-enhancement” motive to identify with the male majority.

       Gender spillovers among peers can also be positive or negative. For example, women

may be more willing to compete with other women (as in Gneezy et al., 2003), which could lead

to higher overall female performance and higher promotion rates. However, unlike the laboratory

setting with individual tasks, the workplace often involves both individual and cooperative tasks.

While it is possible that women collaborate more with other women, it is also possible that

women feel that their closest competitors for promotion are other women. This could happen, for

example, in response to tokenism at workplaces or informal limits on the numbers of women in

higher ranks (Kanter, 1977). In that case, women might be less cooperative with one another than

with men and even engage in sabotage (Lazear, 1999), which could lower their relative

promotion rates. This form of gender discrimination in promotions, through which female

workers are competing most intensively with their female peers to be promoted into positions

occupied by female bosses, would imply negative gender spillovers within ranks but positive

spillovers from higher-ranking to lower-ranking women. Without this type of competition, there

is no reason to expect a mechanical relationship between female shares at the current or higher

rank and the likelihood that any individual woman is promoted. Another reason for negative

spillovers from same-sex peers could be that more within-gender group socializing leads to more

shirking from work; in contrast with the previous mechanism, this would imply positive (or zero)

gender spillovers across ranks.

4.1 Empirical Approach and Identification

Motivated by the theoretical ambiguity of these effects, we measure gender spillovers on

promotion rates by adding variables and interaction terms to our empirical model as follows:




                                               25
       (4)     Promotionijt = βFFemalei + βXXijt + βPFemaleSharePeersijt +

               βPFFemaleSharePeersijt*Femalei + βPFemaleShareBossesijt +

               βPFFemaleShareBossesijt*Femalei + εijt

Because the measures of female shares among peers and bosses are correlated with one another,

it is important to include them together in the regression models.

       Adding these spillover variables to the model potentially introduces new identification

challenges related to the estimation of social interactions or peer effects (e.g., Manski, 1993).

These variables are direct measures of “contextual effects” (related to peer characteristics rather

than the “endogenous effects” of peer behavior). It is important to be clear that their estimated

effects will incorporate both the direct effect of the characteristics as well as any effects that are

caused by the behavior of these peers that is related to their gender. In that sense, we are not

aiming to isolate the purely contextual effects in our estimates.

       The two other identification challenges related to estimating spillover effects derive from

the possibility of common shocks (unobservable to researchers) affecting all coworkers and

endogenous group formation.23 It is not obvious what direction we should expect these biases to

have. For the estimated effects of peers at the same rank, we might expect positive bias in the

FemaleSharePeers*Female interaction if women are drawn to establishments where they face

higher chances of promotion; those workplaces would have higher shares of female peers and

higher promotion rates for women. By contrast, if female bosses attract more female workers at

lower levels, that would not bias the estimated effects of female bosses on promotion rates unless

the female bosses were able to attract higher quality (along unmeasured dimensions) female

candidates. In that case, there would be a positive correlation between female bosses and female

23
 Because we are not including endogenous peer effects (promotions and retention) as covariates in our
model, our estimates will not suffer from the “reflection problem”; only common shocks and systematic
worker sorting that are correlated with the peer demographics and other controls will introduce bias.


                                                 26
promotion rates that is based in part on “selection” into the workplace rather than events after the

worker joins the establishment. This type of selection could still be interpreted as a form of

gender spillover, but it would differ from the channels related to human capital investments,

productivity or discrimination.

       In the next section, we can address the major concerns about omitted variable biases,

potentially related to non-random sorting of workers to workplaces, by including different sets of

control variables and fixed effects in our regression models. Our main models in Section 4.2

include a full set of establishment, rank and year fixed effects and Section 4.3 shows the

robustness of the estimates to including additional controls and interaction terms. 24

4.2 Main Results for Gender Spillovers

Our main estimates of gender spillovers from the model in Equation 4 are reported in Table 5. As

in Table 3, the top panel presents results for any promotions, the middle panel is for internal

promotions, and the bottom panel is for staying at the same plant. The three columns include the

same controls and fixed effects as Columns 2 to 4 of Table 3: the first has controls for industry,

occupation, rank, year, age, schooling, experience, tenure and part-time status; the second adds

plant fixed effects; and the third adds the two indicators for having children (under the ages of 17

and 7) and their interactions with the Female indicator.

       We find significant gender spillovers from peers and bosses that act in opposite

directions. Having more female workers in the next highest rank tends to reduce the gender gap

in promotion rates by raising women’s relative promotion chances, but having more female


24
   Given our empirical setting, we are clearly not able to exploit experimental variation in female
representation for identification. An approach that is sometimes used in the peer effects literature to
generate quasi-random variation in peer groups using observational data is to focus on individuals who
stay in a group, but whose peer characteristics are changed by others who enter or leave the group.
Unfortunately, given the endogenous nature of the decisions to leave a workplace and which new
workplace to enter, this strategy is not appealing in our setting.


                                                  27
coworkers        in   the    same     rank    tends    to   increase     it.   The   coefficient     on   the

Female*FemalePeerShare interaction ranges from −0.060 to −0.062, and is substantially larger

than the Female*FemaleBossShare interaction of 0.018 to 0.020.

           Adding plant fixed effects has only minor effects on the estimates, which provides

empirical evidence against non-random selection into workplaces being an important source of

bias for our estimated spillover effects.25 The coefficient of 0.019 from our main specification in

Column 2 implies that a standard deviation increase in the female boss share (an increase of

0.24) would decrease the gender gap in promotions by 13.8 percent (from a base of 0.033; see

Table 8). The model in Column 2 also implies that increasing the female share among peers by a

standard deviation (or 0.29) would increase the gender gap in promotions by 52.7 percent. These

patterns are repeated in the middle panel of the table for internal promotions.

           The positive interaction effect from female bosses is consistent with women helping

women below them in the hierarchy through mentoring or taste-based discrimination by

supervisors. The finding provides further support for the theory that demand-side factors play a

role in creating the observed gender gaps in promotion rates. It suggests that one reason for

women’s slow progress to the top of corporate hierarchies is the historical male domination of

those ranks. In that sense, it provides empirical support for the presence of a key mechanism

underlying public policies aimed at promoting women in business leadership positions – that

female leaders tend to help lower-ranking women in their organizations.

           However, the finding of negative gender interactions among women at the same rank

complicates this story of women helping women. Because many of the theories of positive

gender spillovers (mentoring, sponsorship, role models, access to powerful networks) are more

important for bosses than for peers, the absence of positive spillovers may not be surprising. As
25
     We report estimates from models with additional sets of fixed effects in the next subsection.


                                                       28
discussed above, the negative effects of female peers may come from greater competition (and

less cooperation) among peers of the same sex (which would also generate the positive effect on

male peers) or from women in lower ranks facing greater competition for scarce sex-specific

resources such as mentors and sponsors. Interestingly, Karaca-Mandic et al. (2013) also find

negative gender spillovers among peers in the lower ranks of the US Army.

       Although female bosses are associated with higher promotion rates for female workers,

they appear to have no significant effects on promotion rates for males. This gender difference

provides further evidence against the presence of an omitted variable that is related to promotion

rates overall (such as corporate growth and expansion) and to female boss shares (for example, if

growing firms are able to increase diversity at higher ranks more rapidly). The gender

differences are larger for the effects of female peers, where the estimates show positive and

significant effects on male promotion rates across the models. These positive effects for men

suggest that the negative effects on women are not driven by an omitted variable that is related to

the female share in a rank and overall lower promotion opportunities, which would be the case if

women tended to sort into “dead-end” job groups identifiable by their work establishment and

hierarchical rank combination. Furthermore, the fact that we find opposite effects of female peers

and bosses also rules out stories of sorting or workplace-specific omitted variables (such as

female-friendliness) that create spurious correlations between female representation at all levels,

including bosses and peers, and promotion outcomes for women.

       Finally, the results in the bottom panel of Table 5 show no significant gender spillovers in

the probability of staying at the same workplace, after plant fixed effects are included in the

model (Columns 2 and 3). The significant spillover coefficients in Column 1 seem to suggest that

there is some sorting out of workplaces based on gender compositions of peers and bosses.




                                                29
However, their dramatic reduction in size and significance in the latter two columns indicates

that this sorting is captured with establishment fixed effects. As discussed above, these same

fixed effects leave the spillover effects on promotions unchanged.

        Finally, in an unreported regression model, we explored the interactions between plant

mobility and gender spillovers in promotion rates. Using the main promotion outcome, we added

a control variable to capture changing plants during the time period and interactions between this

variable and the Female, FemaleBossShare, FemalePeerShare, Female*FemaleBossShare, and

Female*FemalePeerShare variables. The last two interaction terms show that the positive gender

spillovers from female bosses are indistinguishable between workers who stay at the same plant

and those who change plants (the point estimates is 0.002, with a standard error of 0.007, relative

to a boss spillover of 0.018, standard error of 0.006), but the negative gender spillovers from

female peers are about 50% larger for workers who change plants (the point estimate on the

interaction is −0.023, with a standard error of 0.008, relative to a peer spillover of −0.053,

standard error of 0.006, for those who stay at the same plant). This suggests that, while female

peers do not affect the relative mobility rates of male and female workers, they may affect the

reasons or circumstances associated with changing plants.

4.3 Robustness Checks for Gender Spillover Results

This subsection examines the robustness of the main gender spillover results for the main

promotion outcome in Section 4.2.26 Table 6 expands the main model in Column 2 of Table 5

with plant fixed effects but without fertility controls by adding various sets of additional controls




26
  Results for the other outcomes are similarly robust. As in Section 3.1 above, the OLS estimates in
Section 4.2 (Table 1, Column 1) are nearly identical to the average marginal effects from corresponding
Probit models. The main relationships are also statistically significant under alterative clustering schemes
(at the establishment-year or establishment level).


                                                    30
and fixed effects. The goal of this exercise is to further explore the potential role of selection into

workplaces and omitted variables on the main spillover effects from bosses and peers.

       The first column addresses the concern that female dominated ranks may differ in size

from male dominated ranks and that these size differences may affect promotion rates. Although

there promotions are not zero-sum in the sense that only one person can advance up from a

particular rank at each establishment in a given year, there may be restrictions on the number of

available slots at the higher ranks. When those limits are more binding, competition among peers

may be more intense. We are not able to observe the number of candidates eligible for promotion

or the number of available slots, but we proxy for each using the size of the current rank (at the

establishment and year) and the next highest rank (at the same establishment and year). Adding

these controls leaves the main results unchanged: it reduces the estimated gender spillover from

bosses by 0.003 to 0.016 and the estimated gender spillover from peers by 0.004 to −0.056.

       Column 2 adds a full set of interactions between the Female and rank indicators. This is

to address the concern that differences in the female shares of peers and bosses may be related to

workers’ ranks, which would mean that the estimated interactions between the coworker

variables and the Female indicator reflect in part the cross-rank differences in gender gaps in

promotion found in Table 4. Column 3 addresses the concern that within-establishment variation

across ranks may be related to both female shares and promotion changes by adding a full set of

establishment-by-rank fixed effects. In both cases, the estimated gender spillovers remain

statistically significant and qualitatively unchanged.

       We next consider the possibility that our results are driven by sorting within ranks and

establishments that leaves women disproportionately working in occupational groups with

limited promotion opportunities at their workplaces. We assess the importance of this




                                                  31
explanation by adding a control to our model for the share of workers in the next higher rank in

the organization from the worker’s current occupational group (recall that these groups span

multiple ranks). Including this variable does not alter the estimated gender gap in promotion

rates overall or (as shown in Column 4) the estimated gender spillovers in promotions from peers

or bosses. Controlling for the female share in the rank below (unreported) also leaves the

estimates unchanged; the female share in the lower rank does not affect promotion rates for men

or gender differences in promotion rates.

       The last two columns of Table 6 are motivated by concerns about time-varying omitted

variables that are not addressed by the establishment and rank fixed effects. The first is that

selection into establishments is based on the current reputation of the establishment (which is

related to current promotion rates) and that this variable (unobserved by researchers) varies over

time. The second is that the relationship between ranks and promotion rates is changing over

time. These time-varying factors can introduce bias in our models because female representation

in the sample, and in the higher ranks, are both increasing over the period (Appendix Table 3A).

We address the first point in Column 5 with the inclusion of establishment-by-year fixed effects

and the second point in Column 6 with rank-by-year fixed effects. Estimates with these

additional controls confirm the results from Table 5.

       The second set of robustness checks, in Table 7, explores how the estimated effect of

female bosses on the gender gap in promotions varies under three alternative measures of the

female boss share. In Columns 1 and 2, we use a measure based on the female share of workers

two ranks higher than the worker’s current rank. This incorporates the possibility that individuals

in the higher rank are involved in deciding on promotions to the rank below them. This type of

gender spillover, if present, also has the appealing feature of potentially generating a cascade of




                                                32
effects down the hierarchy. Such effects are not implied if gender spillovers are limited to effects

from the immediate rank above onto promotions into that rank. These spillovers appear to be

positive and substantial in our data (larger than the estimates from our primary measure) and

they are present even after controlling for our primary measure (Column 2).

       Column 3 uses an establishment-wide measure of female leadership based on the female

share in the top three ranks (averaging about 4 to 5 percent; Appendix Table 3A) and uses a

sample limited to workers in ranks 1 to 4. Column 4 identifies leaders based on the top earners in

the establishment and year (using a top 20 percent cutoff). Column 5 defines bosses to include all

workers whose detailed job descriptions contain leadership tasks. The female boss share is

lowest under this definition (Appendix Table 3A). Across each of these three alternative

measures, the estimated effect of female bosses on the promotion rates of women relative to men

are positive, substantial, and statistically significant. These results confirm the robustness of the

overall finding of positive gender spillovers from female bosses to female workers and suggest

that various types of female bosses can each contribute to the career progression of female

employees.

       Table 8 provides some perspective on the magnitude of the estimated effects of female

coworkers relative to sample variation in those measures and to the overall gender gap in

promotions in our data. The first row reports the coefficients from our preferred estimation

models for each measure of female shares, the second notes the location (table and column

number) of the estimate earlier in the paper, and the third reports the sample standard deviation

of the female share measure. Finally, the last row reports the predicted effect of a standard

deviation increase in the female share of peers or bosses (for each of the alternative measures) on

the gender gap in promotions. The negative gender spillovers from peers are largest, accounting




                                                 33
for a 52.7 percent increase in the gap. The positive gender spillovers from bosses are smaller, but

still substantial, with a standard deviation increase in female leadership narrowing the gap by

11.6 to 21.1 percent for the first four measures and by a more modest 4.1 percent for the final

and most stringent measure (with the lowest levels of female representation, as shown in

Appendix Table 3A). This pattern confirms the quantitative importance of female leadership

within organizations, and not just at the highest levels, to ensure female progress up the ranks.

5. Conclusion

This paper uses an 11-year employer-employee matched panel on white-collar workers at over

4,000 workplaces in Norway to study gender differences in promotion rates across seven

hierarchical ranks. We find that women are significantly less likely than men to be promoted to a

higher rank in the organizational hierarchy, conditional on a wide range of individual

characteristics and workplace, time and rank fixed effects. This gender gap in promotions is

present whether we include or exclude promotions that involve a change in workplace. It is also

present across all six of the lower ranks from which workers can be promoted, which indicates

that both “sticky floors” and “glass ceilings” are contributing to women’s severe under-

representation at the highest levels of corporate hierarchies.

       Using data on the gender composition of workplaces, we next show how the promotion

gap is affected by the presence of female bosses and female peers. Several theories predict the

increasing female leadership can improve outcomes for lower-ranking women: lower-ranking

women may gain access to better mentors and role modeling and to powerful professional

networks. Consistent with this prediction, we find that higher shares of female workers at the

next highest rank are associated with significantly smaller gender gaps in promotion. This

finding is not coming from higher relative promotion rates for women overall at firms that hire



                                                 34
more women in all ranks (because they are more “female friendly” in general). In fact, we find

that having a greater share of female coworkers at the same establishment and rank actually

depresses promotion rates for women, relative to men. This negative effect may be caused by

greater competition within gender (either between men or women) among peers, either for

promotions or for gender-specific mentoring and support.

       The finding that greater female representation at higher ranks narrows the gender gap in

promotion rates at lower ranks supports the theory that men’s dominance in corporate leadership

continues to present barriers to women’s advancement in corporate hierarchies. It also suggests

that policies that promote greater female representation in corporate leadership will have

spillover benefits to women in lower ranks. There are, however, reasons to believe that our

estimates may understate the true importance of gender spillovers from female leaders to other

female workers. Specifically, because our empirical setup is focused on measuring spillovers

within organizations, our estimates will fail to capture any spillover benefits from female leaders

to women in other firms or establishments. These can be important if mentoring occurs across

these boundaries (possibly through professional or social groups outside of the workplace) or one

of the ways in which women help other women progress in their careers is by hiring them

through external recruitment from other organizations.

References

Aigner, Dennis J., and Glen G. Cain (1977). “Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor
       Markets.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30 (2): 175–87.
Arrow, Kenneth (1973). “The Theory of Discrimination,” in Discrimination in Labor Markets,
       eds. Orley A. Ashenfelter and Albert Rees. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Athey, Susan, Christopher Avery, and Peter Zemsky (2000). “Mentoring and Diversity.”
       American Economic Review, 90 (4): 765-786.
Bagues, Manuel F. and Berta Esteve-Volart (2010). “Can Gender Parity Break the Glass Ceiling?
       Evidence from a Repeated Randomized Experiment.” Review of Economic Studies 77(4):
       1301–1328.



                                                35
Barnett, William P., James N. Baron, and Toby E. Stuart (2000). “Avenues of Attainment:
        Occupational Demography and Organizational Careers in the California Civil Service.”
        American Journal of Sociology 106(1): 88–144.
Barsh, Joanna and Lareina Lee (2011). Unlocking the Full Potential of Women in the US
        Economy. McKinsey & Company Report.
Bell, Linda A. (2005). “Women-Led Firms and the Gender Gap in Top Executive Jobs.” IZA
        Working Paper.
Bertrand, Marianne (2010). “New Perspectives on Gender.” in Orley Ashenfelter and David
        Card eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B. Elsevier.
Bjerk, David (2008). “Glass Ceiling or Sticky Floors? Statistical Discrimination in a Dynamic
        Model of Hiring and Promotion.” Economic Journal 118(530): 961–82.
Blau, Francine D., Peter Brummund, and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu (2012). “Trends in Occupational
        Segregation by Gender 1970-2009: Adjusting for the Impact of Changes in the
        Occupational Coding System.” NBER Working Paper No. 17993.
Blau, Francine D. and Jed L. DeVaro (2007). “New Evidence on Gender Differences in
        Promotion Rates: An Empirical Analysis of a Sample of New Hires.” Industrial Relations
        46(3): 511-50.
Booth, Alison L., Marco Francesconi, and Jeff Frank (2003). “A Sticky Floors Model of
        Promotion, Pay, and Gender.” European Economic Review 47(2): 295-322.
Cardoso, Ana and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer (2010). “Mentoring and Segregation: Female-Led Firms
        and Gender Wage Policies.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64(1):143-163.
Ciliberto, Federico, Amalia Miller, Helena Skyt Nielsen and Marianne Simonsen (2013).
        “Playing the Fertility Game at Work: An Equilibrium Model of Peer Effects.” Working
        Paper.
Cohen, Lisa E., Joseph P. Broschak, and Heather A. Haveman (1998). “And Then There Were
        More? The Effect of Organizational Sex Composition on the Hiring and Promotion of
        Managers.” American Sociological Review 63: 711-727.
Croson, Rachel and Uri Gneezy (2009). “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
        Economic Literature, 47(2): 1-27.
Eckel, Catherine C., and Philip J. Grossmann (2008). “Men, Women and Risk Aversion:
        Experimental Evidence.” in Plott, C. and V. Smith (eds.), Handbook of Experimental
        Results.
Ejrnæs, M. and A. Kunze (2013): “Work and Wage Dynamics around Childbirth.” Scandinavian
        Journal of Economics 115(3): 856-877.
Flabbi, Luca, Mario Macis, Andrea Moro, and Fabiano Schivardi (2014). “Do Female
        Executives Make a Difference? The Impact of Female Leadership on Gender Gaps and
        Firm Performance.” IZA DP No. 8602.
Fortin, Nicole M. (2008). “The Gender Wage Gap among Young Adults in the United States The
        Importance of Money versus People.” Journal of Human Resources 43(4): 884-918.
Francesconi, Marco (2001). “Determinants and Consequences of Promotions in Britain.” Oxford
        Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 63(3): 279-310.
Gerhart, Barry A., and George T. Milkovich (1989). “Salaries, Salary Growth, and Promotions of
        Men and Women in a Large, Private Firm.” In Pay Equity: Empirical Inquiries, eds.
        Robert T. Michael, Heidi I. Hartmann, and Brigid O’Farrell, pp. 23–43. Washington, DC:
        National Academy Press.




                                             36
Giuliano, Laura, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard. 2005. “Do Race, Gender, and Age
        Differences Affect Manager-Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and
        Promotions at a Large Retail Firm.” Paper 18. Center for Responsible Business,
        University of California, Berkeley.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M. and Rustichini, A. (2003). “Performance in Competitive Environments:
        Gender Differences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (3): 1049–1074.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse (2000). “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of ‘Blind’
        Auditions on Female Musicians.” American Economic Review 90(4): 715–742.
Hersch, Joni, and W. Viscusi (1996). “Gender Differences in Promotions and Wages.” Industrial
        Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 35(4): 461-472.
Hunnes, Arngrim, Jarle Møen, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2009). “Wage Structure and Labor
        Mobility in Norway, 1980-97,” in The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison,
        Edward P. Lazear and Katherine Shaw, eds., NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Ibarra, Herminia, Nancy M. Carter, and Christine Silva (September, 2010). “Why Men Still Get
        More Promotions Than Women.” Harvard Business Review.
Jones, David R., and Gerald H. Makepeace (1996). “Equal Worth, Equal Opportunities: Pay and
        Promotion in an Internal Labour Market.” Economic Journal: 401-409.
Kanter, Rosabeth. M. (1977). Men and Women of the Corporation. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Karaca-Mandic, Pinar, David Powell, and Nicole Maestas (2013). “Peer Groups and
        Employment Outcomes: Evidence Based on Conditional Random Assignment in the
        United States Army.” Working Paper.
Koenig, Anne M., Alice H. Eagly, Abigail A. Mitchell, and Tiina Ristikari (2011). “Are Leader
        Stereotypes Masculine? A Meta-Analysis of Three Research Paradigms.” Psychological
        Bulletin 137(4): 616–642.
Kurtulus, Fidan Ana, and Donald Tomaskovic-Devey (2012). “Do Female Top Managers Help
        Women to Advance? A Panel Study using EEO-1 Records.” Annals of the American
        Academy of Political and Social Science 639: 173-197.
Lønnsstatistikk for funksjonærer (1997). utarbeidet av Næringslivets Hovedorganisasjon område
        for arbeidsmarked og Statistikk. ISSN 0333-2608. Available annually.
Lazear, Edward P. (1989). “Pay Equality and Industrial Politics.” Journal of Political Economy
        97(3): 561-580.
Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen (1990). “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Job
        Ladders.” Journal of Labor Economics: S106-S123.
Manski, Charles F. (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
        Problem.” Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 531-542.
Matsa, David A. and Amalia R. Miller (2011). “Chipping Away at the Glass Ceiling: Gender
        Spillovers in Corporate Leadership.” American Economic Review, 101(3): 635–39.
Matsa, David A. and Amalia R. Miller (2013). “A Female Style in Corporate Leadership?
        Evidence from Quotas.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(3):136–169.
Matsa, David A. and Amalia R. Miller (2014). “Workforce Reductions at Women-Owned
        Businesses in the United States.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 67(2): 422–452.
Miller, Amalia R. (2011). “The Effects of Motherhood Timing on Career Path.” Journal of
        Population Economics 24(3): 1071-1100.
Olson, Craig A. and Brian E. Becker (1983). “Sex Discrimination in the Promotion Process.”
        Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36(4): 624–41.




                                              37
Petersen, Trond and Ishak Saporta (2004). “The Opportunity Structure for Discrimination.”
       American Journal of Sociology 109(4): 852-901.
Powell, Gary N. and D. Anthony Butterfield (1994). “Investigating the ‘Glass Ceiling’
       Phenomenon: An Empirical Study of Actual Promotions to Top Management.” Academy
       of Management Journal, 37(1): 68–86.
Ransom, Michael, and Ronald L. Oaxaca (2005). “Intrafirm Mobility and Sex Differences in
       Pay.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 58(2): 219–37.
Smith, Nina, Valdemar Smith, and Mette Verner (2013). “Why Are So Few Females Promoted
       into CEO and Vice-President Positions? Danish Empirical Evidence 1997-2007.”
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 66(2): Article 4.
Staines, Graham L., Carol Tavris, and Toby E. Jayarante (1974). “The Queen Bee Syndrome.”
       Psychology Today 7:55-60.
Tate, Geoffrey, and Liu Yang (2013). “Female Leadership and Gender Equity: Evidence from
       Plant Closure.” forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics.
Valian, Virginia (1998). Why So Slow? The Advancement of Women. Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press.
Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf and Josef Zweimuller (1997). “Unequal Assignment and Unequal
       Promotion in Job Ladders.” Journal of Labor Economics 15(1): 43–71.
Yap, Margaret, and Alison M. Konrad (2009). “Gender and Racial Differentials in Promotions:
       Is There a Sticky Floor, a Mid-Level Bottleneck, or a Glass Ceiling?” Relations
       Industrielles/Industrial Relations 64(4): 593-619.
Zander, Christina (May 21, 2014). “Even Scandinavia Has a CEO Gender Gap.” The Wall Street
       Journal.




                                            38
Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                 Male          Female         Total          Total          Total
                                 Mean           Mean          Mean         Std. Dev.        Obs.
Promotion                        0.073          0.066         0.071                        597,552
Internal Promotion               0.059          0.056         0.058                        597,552
Stay at Plant                    0.74           0.74          0.74                         597,552
Stay at Rank                     0.87           0.87          0.87                         597,552
Female                             0              1            0.3                         597,552
Female Boss Share                0.14           0.25          0.17            0.24         597,552
Female Peer Share                0.18           0.58           0.3            0.29         597,552
Age                              40.2           37.1          39.3            9.04         597,552
Years Schooling                  12.6            11.7         12.3            2.62         597,552
Years Work Experience            18.4           14.5          17.3            7.33         597,552
Years Tenure                     7.41           6.52          7.15            5.28         597,552
Rank Specific Tenure             4.29           4.04          4.22            2.76         597,552
Working Part-Time                0.076          0.26          0.13                         597,552
Any Children                      0.7           0.56          0.66                         597,552
Children under 7                 0.33           0.27          0.31                         597,552
High Wage for Rank               0.27           0.13          0.23                         597,552
Rank = 1                         0.024          0.27          0.094                        744,531
Rank = 2                         0.18           0.15          0.17                         744,531
Rank = 3                         0.28            0.4          0.31                         744,531
Rank = 4                         0.29           0.14          0.25                         744,531
Rank = 5                         0.079          0.012         0.06                         744,531
Rank = 6                         0.13           0.025          0.1                         744,531
Rank = 7                         0.015         0.0011         0.011                        744,531
Hourly Wage (NOK)                127.7          96.6          118.9           36.5         744,531

Notes: Data from NHO (1987-1997) and Statistics Norway. Sample includes workers in ranks 1 to 6
for all variables except rank indicators and average wage, which also include rank 7. Hourly wages are
the ratio of earnings (measured in real Norwegian Kroner, NOK) and hours worked. Female boss share
is defined for workers 1 rank higher.




                                                        39
Table 2. Promotion, Mobility and Wages by Rank and Sex

                                              All            Male          Female
                              Rank           Mean            Mean           Mean
Promotion                        1           0.13            0.18            0.11
                                 2           0.084           0.091          0.063
                                 3           0.064           0.077          0.041
                                 4           0.054           0.057          0.039
                                 5           0.069           0.069          0.072
                                 6           0.017           0.017          0.01
                                 7             0               0               0
                              Total          0.066           0.067          0.063
Internal Promotion               1            0.11           0.15           0.098
                                 2           0.068           0.073          0.052
                                 3           0.052           0.062          0.035
                                 4           0.043           0.045          0.032
                                 5           0.057           0.056          0.061
                                 6           0.013           0.013         0.0077
                                 7             0               0               0
                              Total          0.053           0.053          0.054
Stay at Plant                    1           0.73            0.75           0.72
                                 2           0.69             0.7           0.67
                                 3           0.74            0.74           0.74
                                 4           0.73            0.73           0.72
                                 5           0.74            0.75           0.72
                                 6           0.72            0.73           0.69
                                 7           0.66            0.66            0.5
                              Total          0.73            0.73           0.72
Hourly Wage                      1           82.6            89.5             81
                                 2           98.3            100.9          90.4
                                 3           102.4           106.9          94.5
                                 4           129.9           131.7          120.7
                                 5           163.6           163.7          161.2
                                 6           173.5           174.4          162.1
                                 7           221.7           221.9          214.7
                              Total          118.9           127.7          96.6

Notes: Data from NHO (1987-1997) and Statistics Norway. Sample includes workers in all
ranks. Hourly wages are the ratio of earnings (measured in real Norwegian Kroner, NOK) and
hours worked.




                                                     40
Table 3. Gender Differences in Promotions and Mobility

                                                         (1)            (2)          (3)              (4)
                                                                           Promotion
Female                                               -0.035***      -0.029***    -0.033***        -0.025***
                                                      [0.0012]       [0.0012]     [0.0013]         [0.0015]
N                                                     597,552        597,552      597,552          597,552
R2                                                     0.046          0.049        0.072            0.072

                                                                       Internal Promotion
Female                                               -0.028***      -0.022***      -0.026***      -0.020***
                                                      [0.0011]       [0.0012]       [0.0012]       [0.0014]
N                                                     597,552        597,552        597,552        597,552
R2                                                     0.038           0.04          0.061          0.061

                                                                          Stay at Plant
Female                                                 0.0020        0.00013         0.0020         0.0030
                                                      [0.0020]       [0.0020]       [0.0017]       [0.0020]
N                                                     597,552        597,552        597,552        597,552
R2                                                      0.32           0.32           0.44           0.44

Fixed Effects for Industry, Occupation, Rank,
Year, Age, Schooling                                     Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Controls for Experience, Tenure, Part-Time Status        No            Yes            Yes            Yes
Plant Fixed Effects                                      No            No             Yes            Yes
Children Fixed Effects                                   No            No             No             Yes

Notes: OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the plant-rank-year level. Experience and overall
Tenure controls are quadratic; Rank specific tenure is linear; Part-time status is <37 hours per week.
Children effects are indicators for any children under age 17, any children under age 7, and interactions of
each with the Female indicator. Controls are defined in period t for promotion and mobility outcomes between
periods t and t+1. Occupation groups are listed in Appendix Table 1A.
   *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
    ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
     * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                        41
Table 4. Gender Differences in Promotions and Mobility by Rank

                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)

                                     Promotion     Internal Promotion     Stay at Plant

Female and Rank = 1                  -0.048***          -0.038***            0.0045
                                      [0.0071]           [0.0064]            [0.010]
Female and Rank = 2                  -0.016***          -0.012***           0.00038
                                      [0.0026]           [0.0024]           [0.0038]
Female and Rank = 3                  -0.044***          -0.035***            0.0012
                                      [0.0018]           [0.0017]           [0.0025]
Female and Rank = 4                  -0.024***          -0.019***            0.0014
                                      [0.0024]           [0.0022]           [0.0035]
Female and Rank = 5                  -0.020***           -0.015**            0.0086
                                      [0.0065]           [0.0062]           [0.0081]
Female and Rank = 6                 -0.0086***          -0.0061**            0.013*
                                      [0.0028]           [0.0024]           [0.0066]
N                                     597,552            597,552            597,552
R2                                     0.072               0.061              0.44

Notes: Estimates from OLS models with standard errors clustered at the plant-rank-year
level. Controls as in Table 3, Column (3).
        *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
         ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
         * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                      42
Table 5. Gender Spillovers in Promotions and Mobility
                                              (1)                        (2)                  (3)
                                                                     Promotion
Female * Female Boss Share                      0.020***             0.019***              0.018***
                                                 [0.0044]             [0.0047]              [0.0047]
Female * Female Peer Share                      -0.060***            -0.060***             -0.062***
                                                 [0.0054]             [0.0057]              [0.0057]
Female Boss Share                                 0.0048              -0.0058               -0.0054
                                                 [0.0037]             [0.0049]              [0.0049]
Female Peer Share                               0.050***             0.036***              0.037***
                                                 [0.0048]             [0.0059]              [0.0059]
N                                                597,552              597,552               597,552
R2                                                 0.05                0.073                 0.073
                                                                 Internal Promotion
Female * Female Boss Share                      0.022***              0.019***             0.019***
                                                 [0.0040]              [0.0043]             [0.0043]
Female * Female Peer Share                      -0.055***             -0.052***            -0.053***
                                                 [0.0051]              [0.0053]             [0.0053]
Female Boss Share                                 0.0019               -0.0068              -0.0065
                                                 [0.0033]              [0.0044]             [0.0044]
Female Peer Share                               0.045***              0.031***             0.031***
                                                 [0.0045]              [0.0056]             [0.0056]
N                                                597,552               597,552              597,552
R2                                                 0.041                 0.061                0.061
                                                                    Stay at Plant
Female * Female Boss Share                        0.015*               0.0044               0.0046
                                                 [0.0080]             [0.0068]             [0.0068]
Female * Female Peer Share                      -0.045***               0.012                0.013
                                                  [0.010]             [0.0086]             [0.0086]
Female Boss Share                                -0.016**              0.0016               0.0017
                                                 [0.0082]             [0.0080]             [0.0080]
Female Peer Share                               0.031***              -0.0032              -0.0038
                                                 [0.0093]             [0.0098]             [0.0098]
N                                                597,552              597,552              597,552
R2                                                 0.32                 0.44                 0.44
Plant FE                                            No                   Yes                  Yes
Children                                            No                   No                   Yes

Notes: OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the plant-rank-year level. Basic controls in all
columns are as in Table 3, Column (2). Female Boss Share is the female share of workers in the next
highest rank at the same plant-year. Peer share is for workers at the same rank in the same plant-year.
               *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
                ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
                 * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                         43
Table 6. Robustness Checks for Gender Spillovers in Promotions

                                              (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                                                    Promotion

Female * Female Boss Share                 0.016***        0.010**         0.014***         0.025**       0.020***       0.020***
                                            [0.0047]       [0.0053]         [0.0047]        [0.0102]       [0.0045]       [0.0046]
Female * Female Peer Share                 -0.056***      -0.048***        -0.061***       -0.079***      -0.068***      -0.060***
                                            [0.0057]       [0.0065]         [0.0063]        [0.0094]       [0.0055]       [0.0057]
Female Boss Share                           -0.0056        -0.0026        -0.0188***        -0.0103        0.00094        -0.0054
                                            [0.0048]       [0.0049]         [0.0048]        [0.0109]       [0.0048]       [0.0048]
Female Peer Share                          0.026***       0.029***         -0.026***       0.047***       0.055***       0.038***
                                            [0.0058]       [0.0063]         [0.0078]        [0.0106]       [0.0058]       [0.0059]
Size of Ranks (current and next higher)        Yes            No               No              No             No             No
Rank-Sex FE                                    No             Yes              No              No             No             No
Rank-Plant FE                                  No             No               Yes             No             No             No
Occupation Group Share in Next Rank            No             No               No              Yes            No             No
Plant-Year FE                                  No             No               No              No             Yes            No
Rank-Year FE                                   No             No               No              No             No             Yes
N                                           597,463        597,552          597,552         318,760        597,552        597,552
R2                                           0.074          0.073            0.083           0.075           0.15          0.075

Notes: OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the plant-rank-year level. Basic controls in all columns are as in Table 5,
Column (2).

          *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
           ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
           * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                             44
Table 7. Gender Spillovers in Promotions with Alternative Definitions of Female Boss Share

                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                                              Promotion

Female * Female Boss (+2) Share                 0.041***       0.033***
                                                [0.0079]       [0.0082]
Female * Female Boss (+1) Share                                0.021***
                                                               [0.0064]
Female * Female Boss (Top 3) Share                                            0.051***
                                                                               [0.010]
Female * Female Boss (Top Earners) Share                                                     0.069***
                                                                                             [0.0071]
Female * Female Boss (Leaders) Share                                                                         0.021**
                                                                                                              [0.010]
Female * Female Peer Share                      -0.073***      -0.076***      -0.061***      -0.064***      -0.085***
                                                 [0.0071]       [0.0073]       [0.0064]       [0.0057]       [0.0085]
N                                                453,924        453,924        471,561        583,859        325,320
R2                                                0.078          0.078          0.074           0.07           0.07

Notes: OLS estimates with standard errors clustered at the plant-rank-year level. Controls are as in Column (3) of Table
3. Female Boss (+2) is the share 2 ranks higher; Female Boss (Top 3) is the share in ranks 5-7; Top earners are
in the top fifth for their establishment-year; Female Boss (Leader) applies to higher ranks with leadership tasks.
     *** Significant at the 1 percent level.
      ** Significant at the 5 percent level.
       * Significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                            45
Table 8: Predicted Effects of Increasing Female Peer and Boss Shares on Women's Relative Promotion Rates

                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                Peers         Bosses         Bosses         Bosses         Bosses         Bosses
                  Female share measure:       Same Rank       Rank +1        Rank +2       Rank 5-7       Top Earn        Leader

Estimated coefficient for female share           -0.060         0.019           0.041        0.051          0.069         0.021
Standard deviation across individuals            0.290          0.240           0.170        0.075          0.090         0.064
Predicted change in the gender promotion
gap from a standard deviation increase in
female representation                            52.7%         -13.8%           -21.1%      -11.6%         -18.8%         -4.1%

Notes: The coefficient estimates for the female share in Columns 1 and 2 are from Table 5, Column 2. The remaing coefficients are
from Table 7. Column 3 here is from Column 1; Column 4 is from Column 3; Column 5 is from Column 4 and Column 6 is from
Column 5.




                                                                           46
       1.2

        1

       0.8

       0.6

       0.4

       0.2

        0
             1            2           3           4              5            6      7

                 Internal Promotion       Promotion                  Stay at Plant
                 Wage                     Share Female in Rank
                                                                                           	  
	  
Figure 1: Sex Differences by Rank. The lines for internal promotion, promotion, stay at
plant, and wage each plot the female to male ratio of the mean values of the outcome
within each rank. The line for female share in rank plots the female share of workers in
that rank. The female share of the entire sample is 28 percent.




	                                             47
          0


       -0.05


        -0.1


       -0.15


        -0.2


       -0.25


        -0.3
                                                                                  Full      Full
                  No         No        Basic      Basic      Full       Full    Controls Controls
                Controls   Controls   Controls   Controls   Controls   Controls and Plant and Plant
                                                                                   FE        FE
                No Rank               No Rank               No Rank             No Rank
                        Rank FE               Rank FE               Rank FE             Rank FE
                  FE                    FE                    FE                  FE
       Female    -0.27      -0.11      -0.19      -0.082     -0.18     -0.081     -0.18     -0.077
                                                                                                      	  
	  
Figure 2: Gender Pay Gap Estimates with and without Rank Fixed Effects. Each bar
is a point estimate for the Female coefficient from an OLS regression of the log of wage
rate (computed by dividing average monthly earnings by normal hours) on Female
without (dark bars) and with (light bars) rank fixed effects. The first pair of lines has no
additional controls. The second pair includes fixed effects for industry, occupation, year,
age and schooling. The third pair also includes controls for tenure (overall and rank-
specific), experience and part-time status. The last pair has plant fixed effects. All
reported coefficients are sigificant at the 1 percent level.
	  




	                                                 48
